INTRODUCTION
\0xECThe SDGs are a reflection  of our values and ambitions.  They are the contemporary  manifestation of the \0xEBfair goi.
Senator the Hon Concetta Fierravanti-Wells,  Minister for International Development and  the Pacific at the 2nd Australian Sustainable  Development Goals Summit, 13 March 2018

Australia is committed to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a universal, global approach to reduce poverty, promote sustainable development and ensure the peace and prosperity of people across the world. The SDGs reflect things that Australians value highly and seek to protect, like a clean and safe environment, access to opportunity and services, human rights, strong and accessible institutions, inclusive economies, diverse and supportive communities and our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and heritage. Our support for political, economic, social and religious freedoms is underpinned by our commitment to promote liberal democracy, the rule of law and the rulesbased international order. 
Australia is one of the most culturally diverse, yet socially cohesive, nations on earth. Almost half of our population was either born overseas or has at least one parent born overseas, and we are home to people from over 300 ancestries. Diverse as we are, we share common values. Equality, inclusion, tolerance and mutual respect are pillars of our strong, fair and cohesive society. 
Achieving the SDGs is in Australiais interests: it will contribute to lasting regional and global prosperity, productivity and stability. The SDGs are consistent with Australian Government priorities and long-standing efforts across a range of sectors such as health, education, agriculture, water, the environment, the economy, and gender equality. Likewise, the Addis Ababa Action Agendais emphasis on issues like domestic resource mobilisation, trade as an engine for growth, and the importance of investment in infrastructure and public services are in line with Australiais approach to driving growth and prosperity at home and abroad. 
While Australia is a prosperous country, people remain at risk of being left behind due to lingering barriers to their participation in the work force and difficulties in accessing services. These groups include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, those from culturally or linguistically-diverse backgrounds, women and girls, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons, youth, the elderly, people with disability and those living in remote and rural locations. Disadvantage can be compounded, exacerbated or prolonged by a combination of factors including the range of environmental, social and economic aspects encompassed in the SDGs, for example, a lack of access to quality education, health care or employment. Disadvantage can increase vulnerability to financial or other shocks, such as natural disasters, highlighting the importance of resilience and inclusion.
Central to the Australian understanding of the 2030 Agenda is the Australian value of a \0xEBfair goi, the idea that everyone should have a reasonable chance of opportunity and that they will be treated fairly and equally. Like \0xEBleaving no one behindi, it is a call to action for fairness, justice and equality of opportunity. 
Australiais Voluntary National Review (the Review) takes a narrative approach, addressing each of the SDGs. A data chapter following SDG17 covers Australiais approach to data and how we will report against the SDG Indicators. An annex lists existing national policy frameworks that are relevant to the achievement of the SDGs. However, extensive further measures are underway at the state, territory and municipal levels of government. While it was impossible 
to include all of the material received through consultations for the Review, in cooperation with civil society partners, Australia will develop an online national platform to recognise these efforts and inspire future partnerships and activity. A national SDGs data platform will report against the SDG Indicators.

A \0xEBWHOLE OF AUSTRALIAi ENDEAVOUR
Both Government and civil society in Australia were active in shaping the SDGs. We strongly supported the establishment of new standalone goals for economic growth (SDG8), peace and good governance (SDG16) and oceans (SDG14), as well as keeping gender equality as a central contributor through its own goal (SDG5).
Since the SDGs were formally adopted, the Australian Government has convened an interdepartmental group of senior officials with portfolio responsibilities that link to one or more of the SDGs and separate cross-government groups on specific aspects such as data or communications. The senior officials group, cochaired by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&C) and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), provides coordination on how to best give effect to the 2030 Agenda, domestically and internationally, including for the drafting of this Review. Through this mechanism, the Government is collaborating with domestic stakeholders to promote and monitor Australiais progress. The Government has engaged with state, territory and local governments on the SDGs through existing committees and representative organisations.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

The rich history of Australiais First Peoples stretches back at least 65,000 years and is celebrated as one of the longest living civilisations on earth. This endurance of human life and caring for country is both profound and inspiring. The Australian Government is committed to recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in our constitution. While there is no SDG specific to indigenous peoples, all 17 SDGs are significant for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander concept of \0xECcaring for country incorporates not just environmental and landscape management, but also the sociopolitical, cultural, economic, and physical and emotional well-being of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.1  

The 2030 Agenda is not just for and about government initiatives and activity; it involves many national stakeholders including the business sector, civil society, the education sector, communities, families and individuals. The many Australians engaged in the care economy, in volunteer work, and through their everyday activity including their paid work are contributing to achievement of the SDGs. Through partnership with all sectors of Australian society and across borders, we are working together to implement the SDGs. Importantly, and as guided by the Addis Agenda, this requires both public and private funding.

Youth-led initiatives are motivating and mobilising young people across Australia to deliver on the SDGs at home and overseas. Examples 

people to volunteer in countries in Asia as part of \0xECYouth for Global Goals and the Australian Medical Studentsi Associationis gender equity project focusing on SDG5. Youth organisations throughout Australia have come together to identify broad approaches to raising awareness about the SDGs and forming partnerships for action. Youth representatives are strong advocates and champions for the SDGs in engaging with governments, local authorities and institutions, as well as with peers and colleagues. 

The private sector is essential to create the economic opportunity, jobs and economic growth that underpin a stable country and region, and happier, healthier lives. Australian businesses are already contributing to the SDGs at home and abroad. Leading Australian businesses engaged with the Agenda early, mapping their impacts and initiatives against the SDGs, and communicating this alignment in sustainability reports and on websites. 
Chief Executive Officers of major Australian companies have demonstrated their public and collective support through a signed commitment. They are contributing to SDG outcomes including through responsible business practices, core business opportunities, new business models and community investment. Businesses recognise the benefit of partnerships with other businesses, civil society, government and others in driving sustainable development outcomes. They are increasingly looking to the SDGs 
2018 Australian SDG Summit, Melbourne: Panel Chair Sam Mostyn, Jason McDonald (Chief Adviser, PM&C), Senator the Hon Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, John Thwaites (Chair, Monash Sustainable Development Institute), Mark Purcell 
(CEO, ACFID), Catherine Hunter (KPMG and Chair, GCNA), 
Cassandra Goldie (CEO, ACOSS) as a framework for identifying and catalysing collaborative opportunities that take companies beyond \0xECbusiness as usual. For example, major company Wesfarmers has identified a sub-set of eight SDGs where it can maximise its impact on a global scale. Australian engineering company WorleyParsons supports projects across the range of SDGs through its corporate responsibility commitment, such as deploying its technology to help find deeper wells in Bangladesh to provide clean water resources to refugee camps. 
Volunteers for the SDGs

Australians are generous and engaged in the community. In 2016, Australians volunteered 932 million hours and donated $12.5 billion to charity.2 Many Australian companies and business-people are involved in philanthropic work and support worthwhile causes and initiatives, many of which align with the SDGs. Australian volunteers make cross-cutting contributions to all the SDGs at home and abroad, building community resilience and capacities. At home, the most common focus for volunteering is education, sports, religion, health, social services and emergency relief, with volunteer efforts making an estimated annual economic and social contribution of $290 billion. 
Volunteering is a way to engage communities and promote inclusion and wellbeing. Successful and innovative efforts in Australia have included the Aboriginal Volunteer Program, enabling small groups of supported young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander volunteers to work collaboratively with people in the remote South Australian community of Oodnadatta to undertake locallyidentified community development projects. 
Over 13,000 Australian volunteers have worked overseas in developing countries since the 1950s through community and government-supported programs. In 2016-17, Australian Volunteers for International Development3 had 1,212 Australians volunteering with 754 host organisations in 25 countries in the Indo-Pacific in support of the SDGs. Eighteen per cent of volunteers focused on working with people with a disability. The Australian Volunteers program matches skilled Australians with organisations in developing countries to assist these organisations in delivering their development objectives.  The program is part of the Australian 
Governmentis people-to-people program portfolio, connecting Australians to Australiais aid program and the region. All departing volunteers receive a briefing on the SDGs and their 
ongoing engagement in development activities is supported by a Returned Australian Volunteers Network.

Increasing public awareness of the SDGs requires leadership and engagement from all sectors of the Australian community. The Australian public responds well to initiatives that provide guidance on what actions they can take as individuals and communities, and some Australian-led initiatives have been adopted world-wide, such as Earth Hour and Clean Up the World (modelled on the successful Clean-up Australia campaign). 
Many Australians are familiar with the concept of sustainable development, but may not be aware of the SDGs and their universal nature. Some national and local institutions and organisations have adopted the SDG framework and integrated them into their policies and budgets. For example, the Australian Library and Information Association has integrated the SDGs into its Constitution. Its members have adopted the role of helping to communicate the 2030 Agenda to the general population, with an estimated 12.9 million users of the library system. Many of the librariesi activities engage the community directly in aspects of the SDGs such as access to information, use of technology and support for literacy. Questacon, the national science and technology centre in Canberra, is also promoting awareness of the SDGs within the Australian community and among its 430,000 annual visitors. 
A growing number of local councils and statutory authorities are measuring their progress against the SDGs, and a number of civil society organisations, including the Australian Council for International Development (ACFID), the Australian Council of Social Services (ACOSS), the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) Australia/Pacific, the Global Compact 
Network Australia (GCNA) and the United Nations Association of Australia (UNAA) have developed active programs to promote the SDGs. SDSN Australia/Pacific has coordinated a nationwide university commitment to the SDGs and published a guide Getting started with the SDGs in Universities. A number of Australian universities are including the SDGs in their strategic plans and curricula.
Our national challenge is to harness the SDGs framework to raise awareness and empower people to take action in their own communities and as individual consumers, investors, business owners, employers, volunteers and users of government services. Some organisations are already leading the way: Australiais national postal service and eCommerce provider, Australia Post, is using the SDGs as a framework to provide and present information about sustainability to small businesses. The Australian water industry has raised awareness of SDG6 and all the SDGs in its outreach to customers, businesses and among political leaders. 
Human Rights at the Core of the SDGs

Australia takes a human rights-based approach to sustainable development, emphasising the need for countries to respect, protect and promote human rights, in line with international human rights law, in the implementation of all SDGs. This will support the international rules-based order and help ensure the most disadvantaged benefit from development. This means ensuring human rights are respected and protected not only where it is obvious but when it is not n whether we are working to alleviate poverty and inequality, tackling environmental problems or designing cities and infrastructure. If global development is not based on human rights, it will not be sustainable.
Australia is party to the seven core United Nations human rights treaties, and takes its obligations under these treaties seriously. Australia promotes and protects human rights through legislation, policy and programs at federal, state and territory levels. Within each of these jurisdictions there is a framework of laws and institutions that implement Australiais human rights obligations. There are protections in place under anti-discrimination law at the federal, state and territory levels. In addition, human rights are considered as part of the policy and legislative development process. For example, all Bills and disallowable legislative instruments introduced to the federal Parliament must be accompanied by a Statement of Compatibility assessing the compatibility of the legislation with the rights and freedoms recognised in the seven core international human rights treaties which Australia has ratified.
As a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council (2018-20), Australia has pledged to promote equal human rights for all individuals around the world. We are committed to promoting the rights of women and girls, people with disability and indigenous peoples in Australia and beyond. Our membership of the Human Rights Council is built around the pillars of gender equality, good governance, and freedom of expression, the rights of indigenous peoples and strong national human rights institutions and capacity building. Our term on the Council will also be guided by other core objectives: the abolition of the death penalty; promoting equal human rights for LGBTI persons; and protection of the freedom of religion or belief; and ensuring civil society is enabled to protect and promote human rights through participation in the UN human rights system. As the first country from the Pacific region to serve on the Council, Australia has the opportunity to amplify the voices of our neighbours and bring a unique Indo-Pacific perspective to the Council.
Australia has long been a leading supporter of national human rights institutions globally. 
Established in 1986, the Australian Human Rights Commission is Australiais \0xEBA statusi national human rights institution, operating in compliance with the Paris Principles. The Commissionis functions include promoting awareness of human rights, inquiring into and attempting to conciliate complaints of discrimination, and conducting educational activities on human rights in Australia. It has mapped its work program against the SDGs and participates in human rights technical assistance within the Asia-Pacific region to build capacity on human rights.
The Commission assisted with over 1,000 conciliation processes in 2016-17. There are seven commissioners, responsible for representation, advocacy and awareness for specialist areas including social justice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, Age Discrimination, Children, Disability Discrimination, Human Rights, Race and Sex Discrimination. Recent inquiries include the National Inquiry into Employment Discrimination Against Older Australians and Australians with Disability. One of the outcomes of this inquiry was the development of a Good Practice Guide for Employers which provides practical, realistic and evidence-based solutions for employers who wish to do more to employ people with disabilities and older Australians.

A GLOBAL COMMITMENT
The imperative to leave no one behind extends beyond Australian borders. The Australian 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper recognises the responsibility of Australia, as a prosperous country, to contribute to global efforts to reduce poverty, alleviate suffering and promote sustainable development. It notes the opportunity the SDGs provide for Australia to share our experience at home with partners around the world. Increasingly, Australiais development assistance is being aligned to the achievement of the SDGs.
Our development assistance supports efforts to build a stable and prosperous world, with a focus on infrastructure, trade facilitation and international competitiveness; agriculture, fisheries and water; effective governance; education and health; building resilience; and gender equality. Australiais development assistance is focused on our immediate region, the Indo-Pacific, where we can make the most difference. 
Sustainable Development  for the Indo-Pacific region

Our regional partners in the Indo-Pacific face very specific and often acute challenges and our work together spans all the SDGs. Many of our IndoPacific neighbours are small island developing states, with particular characteristics that affect their development capacity, access to finance and markets, and susceptibility to threats like natural disasters and climate change. 
The Indo-Pacific region includes some 743 million living in extreme poverty, with millions more barely above the extreme poverty line. Ten of Australiais top 15 recipients of aid are considered fragile or conflict-affected. Over 90 per cent of Australiais official development assistance (ODA) goes to improving the lives of the most vulnerable in the Indo-Pacific region. Our investments reflect the needs of our partners to build inclusive workforces, economies and institutions while managing challenges such as distance from markets, natural hazards and health threats. One of Australiais flagship initiatives in the region responds to the global recognition that the world needs to better prepare and respond to health emergencies. Our Health Security Initiative for the Indo-Pacific will support efforts to prevent and contain emerging and re-emerging disease outbreaks in the Indo-Pacific that have the potential to cause social and economic impacts on a national, regional or global scale. This Australian initiative complements our investments in the work of global health partners focused on improving health security, including in this region. 

Australia is a responsible member of the global community and supporter of the international rules-based order. We consistently demonstrate this commitment, including, for example, through our service in 2013-14 as a non-permanent member on the UN Security Council for the fifth time, our current 2018-20 term on the UN Human Rights Council, our 2017-21 reelection to the World Heritage Committee, our support for the Group on Earth Observation, and our participation in other global and regional multilateral bodies. 

AUSTRALIAiS APPROACH TO THE SDGS
The SDGs, Targets and Indicators provide us a complex, ambitious and holistic global framework for sustainable development. Many of the SDGs are integrated with issues that cut across multiple aspects of sustainability, such as economic vitality, gender equality, human rights, disability, climate change and disaster risk reduction. This requires a broad system-based approach, while also advocating a targeted approach to leave no one behind. 
Where appropriate, and in partnership with others, the Government takes practical and system-based approaches to address these issues. For example, Indigenous procurement policies, implemented both by public and private sector entities, are helping support and grow Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses around the country and promote economic inclusion and resilience in disadvantaged communities. The publishing contract for this Review was awarded under the Governmentis 
Indigenous Procurement Policy. Indigenous Business Australia is looking at how it can align its activities and reporting to the SDGs, and plays a key role in promoting and supporting the economic independence of Australiais Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. 
While governments cannot achieve the SDGs alone, coordinating action in a federated structure can add complexity and contestability, with multiple levels of governance and overlapping 
or separate competencies. For Australia, many targets in the SDGs are in the purview of subnational levels of government. This enables empowered action by those entities, and in some cases can spur action through competition and bench-marking, but can also lead to fragmentation that undermines the benefits of a system-based approach. This Review has provided an opportunity to showcase some of the work of sub-national levels of government and to encourage engagement with the SDGs. A number of local governments, for example, the Perth Eastern Metropolitan Regional Council and Melbourne City Council, are leading the way through the incorporation of the SDGs into their planning processes.
The Australian Government has adopted an approach to the SDGs that is appropriate for our national circumstances, with government policy responsibilities and priorities devolved to the relevant agency and level. Other sectors, including Australiais universities, businesses and civil society, are making substantial efforts to raise awareness, form partnerships and address the risks and opportunities inherent in the Agenda, going beyond \0xECbusiness as usual  to make a real impact.  
Across the SDGs, Australia has a number of strengths, which will help us and our partners to make real progress: Australians are innovators, contributing scientific discovery and technologies that change the world and improve lives, such as WiFi or the bionic ear. We are keen to share our knowledge and approaches in areas such as water management, trade, sustainability in mining, disaster risk preparedness, renewable energy and energy efficiency, and public financial management. We have a highly-educated, vibrant and engaged population, shaped by world-class academic institutions and vocational training. 
Australia has taken an active role in supporting the Inter-Agency Expert Group on the SDGs to develop and refine the global indicator framework. Australia has contributed its scientific expertise to the development and improvement of the methodology that sits behind some of the SDG Indicators. We are pursuing innovative methods to collect data relevant to the indicators, including through our use of geospatial technology, and are keen to share this with others.

Australiais SDG stamp pack, released June 2018.  Credit: Australia Post

FACING CHALLENGES TOGETHER
The outcomes we are driving for in the SDGs are not new. Many involve long-standing, complex policy challenges with no simple solutions. Others invoke new or evolving challenges for the 21st century such as climate change, rapid urbanisation, threats to democracy and the rulesbased order or the rise of trade protectionism. 
Australia has long recognised that ecologicallysustainable development is essential to ensure the ongoing well-being of the country and its people. Our geographic isolation and unique environment has fed our resilience and ingenuity, and driven our participation in international systems and networks. There is a large body of legislation, regulation and policy at national and sub-national level that drives us towards many of the outcomes enshrined in the SDGs. This is an ongoing and dynamic process. As approaches and circumstances evolve, the SDGs provide a framework through which governments, businesses, organisations and individuals can conceive of a problem or objective and devise action to drive progress.
Australiais economic success, underpinned by 26 years of uninterrupted economic growth, is a product of broad-scale economic, industrial and trade-related reforms. But we continue to grapple with difficult long-standing policy challenges, such as improving health, economic and wellbeing outcomes for Australiais Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. And we will need to address ongoing or evolving ones, such as assisting workers through transitions related to technological and industrial change.
Peopleis experiences of disadvantage, inclusion, well-being and adversity can be very different in different settings and can present a challenge for policy-makers and service providers. Addressing a problem in different settings can require different solutions and different people to solve them, requiring a more holistic, localised approach, rather than a problem-driven approach. For example, in Victoria, the Vision Initiative, managed by Vision 2020 Australia, took a new localised approach to delivering eye health to at-risk areas and populations, contributing to an improved rate of testing. The approach included translation of materials into target community languages, culturally-appropriate resources for Aboriginal communities and building the capacity of primary healthcare providers.

PREPARING THE VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW


As identified in the following chapters and above, many institutions, organisations and businesses throughout Australia have already integrated sustainability principles and, in some cases, the SDG framework, into their activities and planning. Australiais production of the Review has provided some added impetus and motivation, facilitating additional partnerships and networks and raising awareness of the 2030 Agenda across the board. 
For some, the SDGs present a new lens through which organisations can approach their strategic planning, projects, programs and a recognisable global platform to guide collaboration with others. For example, the Australian National Womenis Alliances are working with the Gender Agency to map linkages between domestic priorities, the SDGs and other international human rights frameworks. Others have identified the real potential and need for better coordination, collation and analysis of data and metrics to identify problems and solutions. Australiais support for work on the Individual Deprivation Measure, covered in the data chapter, is one example of our contribution.
This Review was coordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, using the wholeof-government inter-departmental committee on the SDGs. Agencies were designated to lead or support on various SDG chapters that best fit with their portfolios and conducted stakeholder outreach across sectors and jurisdictions. 
The Review draws on a range of contributions from across different sectors in Australia, demonstrating the role everyone has to play: government (local, state and federal), civil society, the private sector, academia, communities and individuals. These inputs were sought during consultations led not just by government but in partnership with civil society and business bodies, science agencies and universities, including:
\0xEF Australian SDGs Summit 2018, co-convened by ACFID, ACOSS, GCNA, SDSN Australia/ Pacific and the UNAA
\0xEF Youth consultations, led by SDSN Youth
\0xEF Business consultations, led by GCNA
\0xEF Academic consultations, led by SDSN and the Research for Development Impact Network
\0xEF International development-related civil society consultations, led by ACFID
\0xEF Environment-related multi-sector consultations, led by Department of Environment and Energy with the Australian Committee for the 
International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(ACIUCN)
\0xEF Social-sector consultations, led by Department  of Social Services
\0xEF Voluntary National Review draft consultations, including with ACFID, ACIUCN, ACOSS, GCNA, SDSN, UNAA, People with Disability Australia, 
National Congress of Australiais First People, 
Council of Small Business of Australia,  
Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
An indicative list of consulted or contributing organisations is provided as an annex.
INTERLINKAGES
The strength of the SDG  framework lies in the interlinkages between the SDGs. Systems change approaches to the SDGs recognise the interconnections and trade-offs within systems and seek to address challenges within a holistic approach. These approaches can help drive us towards transformational change.  

The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), a governmentfunded research agency, has been at the forefront of work in Australia, and internationally, taking a systems change approach to the SDGs and in particular emphasising the interactions among the SDGs, the Targets and Indicators. 
CSIROis work has shown that taking such an approach, identifying both positive and negative interactions, could help us achieve global outcomes at a significantly lower cost through thoughtful coordination of otherwise fragmented action. Likewise, identifying trade-offs ahead of time could enable conflicts among objectives to be managed before they become institutionalised. Australia has contributed to analysis of these interactions led by the International Council for Science.3 CSIRO has applied this approach to its Australian National Outlook report4, which outlines a number of scenarios for Australiais future, looking at the relationships between energy, water and food in the Australian economy.
A lot of organisations are seeing the power of  the SDGs as a holistic framework and approach to environmental health, human wellbeing, economic sustainability and long-term profitability. The SDGs provide a tool for organisations to identify and mitigate risk and opportunity, including in areas they might previously not  have seen as linked to core business.
Governments are applying a holistic analysis to identify problems and solutions in policy. For example, the South Australian Governmentis Health in All Policies initiative takes a \0xEBjoined-upi policy development approach to achieve better public policy outcomes and simultaneously improve population health and wellbeing. Such an approach is based on the understanding that health is not just the product of health care activities, but is influenced by a wide range of social, economic, political, cultural and environmental determinants of health. Similarly, the Australian Government Department of Health is part of a whole-of-government approach to address the social and cultural determinants of health to accelerate progress in addressing the gap between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health indicators.
Leaving No One Behind: Australiais National Disability Strategy 

Australians living with disability or chronic health conditions are less likely to be employed, more likely to be dependent on income support and more likely to live in poverty5, as are those caring for them. Poverty can also be both a determinant and a consequence of poor mental health.
The National Disability Strategy 2010-2020 provides a 10-year national policy framework for all levels of government to improve the lives of people with disability. The Strategy seeks to drive a more inclusive approach to the design of policies, programs and infrastructure so that people with disability can participate in all areas of Australian life. It aims to ensure that policy settings touching on a number of SDGs n including health, education, employment, income support systems and infrastructure n are inclusive of people with disability. The Strategy is also an important mechanism to ensure the principles underpinning the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities are incorporated into policies and programs affecting people with disability, their families and carers.

Education and research institutions are increasingly seeing the benefits to a crossdisciplinary approach. A number of Australian universities have established leading faculties and institutes in the field, with clear links to the SDG agenda: for example, this includes the University of Sydneyis Planetary Health Platform, University of Queenslandis Global Change Institute, Monash Universityis Sustainable Development 
Institute, University of Technology Sydneyis 
Institute for Sustainable Futures, Australian National Universityis Climate Change Institute, the University of Melbourneis Sustainable Society Institute, Curtin Universityis Sustainability Policy Institute and Murdoch Universityis Centre for Responsible Citizenship and Sustainability.
Civil society in Australia is also seeking to adopt a systems-based approach to its work and to the SDGs in particular. For example, ACFID, Australiais peak body for non-government organisations involved in international development and humanitarian action, worked with its own Development Practice Committee, Collaboration for Impact and CSIRO to develop its Toolkit6 for implementing the SDGs. The Toolkit, which is free to all and accessible via ACFIDis website, allows users from diverse organisations and roles to develop the necessary skills to more effectively address complex problems that span multiple SDGs and require transformational change.
Australiais development assistance program, administered by DFAT, has a cross-sectoral approach that integrates aspects of \0xEBleave no one behindi through disability-inclusive development and gender equality targets. For example, the Vanuatu Skills Partnership is a long-standing partnership established between the Australian Government and the Vanuatu Ministry of Training and Education. The Partnership has a locally-led approach that recognises the contribution of skills not only to economic outcomes, but to social and environmental outcomes, consistent with the SDGs and Vanuatuis own national plan. The Partnership has a particular focus on improving skills and economic engagement by women, youth and people with disabilities in areas including tourism, handicrafts and agribusiness.
Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development

Australiais flagship gender equality investment in the Pacific, supporting women in 14 countries to participate fully, freely and safely in political, economic and social life. Greater gender equality, especially in leadership and decision-making, improves economic circumstances at the country, local and household level. It is a multi-stakeholder initiative, working with a range of partners from governments, civil society organisations, the private sector, regional and multilateral agencies. The focus on leadership, economic empowerment, ending violence against women and enhancing agency emphasises a number of the SDGs, while the anticipated outcomes are also evident across a range of the SDGs. In its first five years, the initiative has seen 10,605 women take on leadership roles at the community, provincial and national level; 5,964 women access financial literacy training and financial services; and more than 526,000 people participate in community awareness sessions on violence against women.


HIGH LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 2018: TRANSFORMATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AND RESILIENT SOCIETIES 


Sustainable and resilient societies and communities will be better able to support the health, wellbeing, participation and inclusion of their members, while making them less vulnerable to shocks, disasters and environmental events including those associated with climate change. This will help us to achieve a much broader range of the SDG targets. 
Important aspects to consider for sustainable and resilient societies include affordability, access to services, employment and education, a clean and healthy environment, adequate social infrastructure, gender equality and respect for human rights. The private sector has a key role to play, in partnership with governments and local communities. A localised approach needs to take the community, its circumstances and its needs into account, as well as the needs of the sectors of the community that may suffer particular disadvantage.
In Australia, governments, business, local authorities and communities are looking at how to improve the future sustainability and resilience of our cities and towns. The Australian Governmentis national approach to cities is set out in the 2016 Smart Cities Plan, which outlines a vision for productive and liveable cities by driving collaboration between all levels of government, the private sector, research organisations and the community. City Deals, a key component of the plan, bring together all levels of government to develop a shared vision to improve infrastructure and public transport, liveability and sustainability, innovation and job accessibility in a specific geographic area.
Many local communities are experimenting with approaches to improve the general well-being and liveability of their towns and cities and the resilience of their populations and infrastructure. For example, the White Gum Valley project is an infill residential development in Perth, Western Australia, which will seek to demonstrate net zero carbon as well as meeting other sustainability goals. Sustainable development features, assessed under an SDG framework, include water-sensitive design, energy efficiency, provision of social housing, retention of heritage values, and community involvement. The overall goal is to provide inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable living for residents and the broader community. The Green Building Council of Australiais Green Star certification and rating scheme is positively influencing the design and delivery of buildings, infrastructure and major urban renewal developments around the country helping support improved governance, liveability, economic prosperity, sustainability and resilience.
Merits of urban greening in Australiais growing cities 

People living in large cities can be more susceptible than non-urban dwellers to the effects of heatwaves because of the urban heat island effect. Alongside climate change impacts, the increasing intensity and frequency of heatwaves, combined with the urban heat island effect, could have serious implications for human health. Urban greening is one low-cost strategy authorities have identified that has considerable benefits for the environment, economy and the health and wellbeing of residents. This approach has been tried in Melbourneis Western Suburbs, an area that receives less rainfall than other parts of Melbourne, meaning it is drier and can experience warmer daytime temperatures. An increasing population will impact further on pollution, heat stress and the environment. A group of stakeholders with an interest in urban greening has come together to share knowledge, and promote and implement solutions through targets to increase green space and tree canopy cover. Activities under the Greening the West partnership, supported by an Australian 
In implementing Plan Melbourne 2017-2050, the Victorian Government is delivering an integrated response to cross-cutting SDGs, with a performance monitoring framework for measuring them. Central to Plan Melbourne is the creation of \0xEB20-minute neighbourhoodsi that offer accessible, safe and attractive local areas where people can meet most of their everyday needs within a 20-minute walk, cycle or local public transport trip. This shows how the SDGs can be delivered locally, making Melbourne communities healthier, more sustainable, liveable and inclusive places to live. 
Sustainability is a key feature in city planning around Australia. For example, Brisbane City Council has put sustainability at the core of its planning, with a focus on biodiversity, reducing emissions, green transport, water conservation, urban forests and parks, and waste and resource recovery. Active and engaged community groups and volunteers are all playing their part to enact this vision of a clean, green and sustainable city. The City of Fremantleis adoption of the One Planet Fremantle Strategy, and its sustainability principles, aligns with the intent of several of the 
SDGs.
Government environment program, have included tree planting, creation of additional parklands, harvesting stormwater for use on green spaces, and supporting community gardens.
A number of Australian cities are Healthy Cities, which promote and support actions to establish social, economic and physical environments conducive to good health and wellbeing.7 Healthy Cities Illawarra is a leader in our region, sitting on the Steering Committee for the Asia-Pacific Healthy Cities Alliance and working with the University of Wollongong to develop a localised regional approach to the SDGs. 
Disaster Risk Reduction:  building resilience

Sustainable development cannot be realised while disasters continue to undermine progress. Disasters destroy lives, livelihoods and infrastructure; they weaken development, create instability, increase inequality and exclusion, reverse economic growth, and take us further away from achieving the SDGs. Increasing resilience through disaster risk reduction protects lives, health, livelihoods, human rights, and assets, and enables service and business continuity when natural hazards occur. Australia, like others, is susceptible to a range of natural hazards and we have built our expertise in disaster risk management, preparedness, hazard identification and technological innovation, sharing this knowledge and capability with others.
Australia has endorsed the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, the global blueprint for reducing existing disaster risk and preventing the creation of new risks. The SDGS and the Sendai Framework are mutually reinforcing, as without appropriate action the rising costs of disasters will undermine efforts to make progress against the SDGs. The Australian Government is integrating the Sendai Framework into both international and domestic activities, in consultation with stakeholders including the private sector and local governments. Implementation of the Sendai Framework will reduce disaster risks and minimise their impact. This will result in improved preparedness, more effective response, rehabilitation and reconstruction, and more effective post-disaster recovery. This work is fundamental to achieving the SDGs by developing the policies and programs required to safeguard Australiais people, assets, environment and prosperity.
Australia also supports partner countries in the Indo-Pacific region to protect the most vulnerable communities and to build a platform for strengthening disaster resilience. Disability inclusion is a focus, and we have ensured disability inclusion has been taken into consideration when building infrastructure such as clinics and disaster shelters. Australia joined other Pacific Islands Forum members in endorsing a proposal for a Pacific Resilience Facility at the 2018 Forum Economic Ministers Meeting.
Data will be a crucial factor in understanding disaster risk worldwide and the success of different policies and approaches. Australia is working across all levels of government to collect our disaster loss data in preparation for reporting in early 2019.





01 END POVERTY  IN ALL ITS FORMS  

EVERYWHERE
\0xECEntrenched disadvantage is a wicked problem for any society. Disadvantage of one form or another will always be with us, but when disadvantage is entrenched, some Australians are not able to play their full part in our economy and society\0xD6 Addressing such entrenched disadvantage would improve the lives of many Australians and lead to a more prosperous nation as a consequence of increased workforce participation and greater social cohesion.
Committee for Economic Development of  Australia, Addressing entrenched disadvantage  in Australia
Australia strives to give all citizens equal opportunity and full access to economic, social and cultural opportunities. The Governmentis work to end poverty focuses on building individual and community resilience, providing appropriate social protection systems for vulnerable people, and implementing policy frameworks for investment and early intervention, giving people opportunities for full participation.  
9 Household highest median equivalised disposable income 
There is no official poverty measure in Australia and no single, agreed, objective indicator of poverty or financial stress. The most common poverty measures, including that used by the OECD, focus on income alone. Australia has one of the highest household disposable incomes in the world9, which means the Australian relative income poverty line is set at a high level of income relative to most other countries. 
It is important to consider a range of indicators of persistent disadvantage to understand poverty and hardship and its multidimensional nature. Different indicators point to different dimensions of poverty. A number of national longitudinal studies study financial stress and hardship across a number of factors8, such as the ability to pay housing or utility costs, to raise funds in an emergency, to provide food and seeking assistance from welfare or community groups.9  
While transient poverty is a problem, the experience of persistent poverty is of deeper concern, particularly where families experience intergenerational disadvantage and long-term welfare reliance: young people in Australia are 1.8 times more likely to need social assistance if their parents have a history of receiving social assistance themselves.10 However, analysis of longitudinal data suggests that only a small proportion of people in Australia are persistently poor. Groups more likely to experience deep and persistent disadvantage include lone parents, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, people with disability and those with low educational attainment. Many are social housing tenants and are weakly attached to the labour market. 
Ensuring people have access to good education, employment and support for their health and wellbeing is the best protection against persistent poverty. Australiais welfare system is highly targeted to those who need it most. An important feature of the welfare system is support to build peopleis capacity to participate economically and socially to the extent they are able. Income support recipients are encouraged and assisted to improve their living standards and longerterm outcomes through employment. Social security payments form an integrated package of support, together with mutual obligations, taxation concessions, productivity initiatives, employment services and labour market strategies. 
Social security and welfare account for the most significant component of Government spending, with around one third of total expenses providing support to older Australians, families with children, people with disabilities, veterans, carers and unemployed people.11 Unlike most other countries in the OECD, the payment system is funded through government revenue; it is not based on past contributions and is not capped or time limited. In addition, Australia has a universal health system, which includes Medicare and pharmaceutical subsidies. 
National Disability Insurance Scheme
The National Disability Insurance Scheme is a new way of providing support for Australians with disability, their families and carers. It will provide about 460,000 Australians under the age of 65, with a permanent and significant disability, with the reasonable and necessary supports they need to live a more independent life. It supports people with disability to build skills and capability so they can participate in the community and employment and provides supports required for daily living such as aids and equipment, prosthetics, home modifications, personal care and domestic assistance, allied health and other therapy.

Australian health, childcare, education, child protection and legal systems work together to provide the supports and services necessary for children to thrive, achieve positive outcomes and become participants in the wider community. 
Consistent with Addis Agenda priorities to mobilise finance towards SDG outcomes, governments in Australia are exploring new approaches to disadvantage. Social impact investment initiatives can supplement funds for social and environmental outcomes over the long term. Areas for possible future investment include addressing youth unemployment, early childhood education and homelessness. Further, the Australian Governmentis Try, Test and Learn fund seeks to catalyse and test new ideas to address long-term welfare dependency among priority groups identified by analysis of longitudinal data. 
The Government partners with states and territories in shared policy areas, including housing, homelessness, disability services, concessions and childrenis welfare. Civil society organisations and the private sector also deliver residential and community services to those in need. Australian governments also partner with civil society organisations to support vulnerable individuals and families experiencing financial crisis, helping them to improve their financial capability, resilience and lifetime wellbeing. Over 400 service providers are funded to provide vulnerable individuals with emergency relief, food relief, financial counselling, financial literacy education, and assistance with budgeting or access to microfinance products as an alternative to high-risk, high-interest products such as payday loans.
Thriving Communities Partnership

The Thriving Communities Partnership is a crosssector collaborative network of 149 organisations from the private sector, government and civil society. The partnership works together to find ways to ensure everybody in the community has fair access to the modern essential services they need, such as utilities (electricity, water, heat, telecommunications), financial services and transport. The partnership reflects the 2030 Agendais drive for transformative change and \0xECbeyond business as usual through its acknowledgement that \0xECthe only way to bring significant change to the root causes of vulnerability and poverty is to work together in new ways. As an example, the partnershipis \0xECinsight for early intervention project is devising ways n including through technology and shared data n to identify at-risk people sooner, in order to help them manage their finances and avoid falling into hardship.


LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
The nature and prevalence of poverty and disadvantage varies more across Australia than it does in developed countries that are more compact and homogenous. Remote communities, many of which are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, may lack reliable energy supply, telecommunications, clean water and wastewater services, and adequate road access. Low population densities in some areas result in higher per capita costs for some goods and services. 
Disadvantage also occurs in urban areas. High housing costs contribute to the rate of homelessness in Australia, with disadvantaged groups particularly affected. In consultations around the country in 2017, Australiais UN Youth Representative reported that young Australians have identified housing affordability as a particular concern for their future independence and welfare.12
There is a particular gendered aspect to homelessness in Australia, with family, domestic and sexual violence the leading cause of homelessness and housing instability. Older women continue to be particularly vulnerable to later-in-life homelessness, due to factors including a lack of retirement funds, financial dependence, and family and domestic violence.
The Government is working towards a new agreement with states and territories aimed at improving housing and homelessness outcomes for all Australians across the housing spectrum, particularly those most in need. Financing initiatives will increase housing supply and provide cheaper and longer-term finance to providers of social and affordable housing.
Leaving No One Behind 15 13

homelessness in 2016. This includes people sleeping rough, living in 'severely' crowded dwellings, 'couch surfing', living in boarding houses or supported accommodation.
 $10 BILLION 
25%
per year was provided in  housing assistance 
One quarter of clients reported  mental health issues. 
25%	One quarter of clients are of Aboriginal  and Torres Strait Islander background.

http://youthrep.unyouth.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/FINAL-AUSTRALIA-REPORT-compressed.pdf 15 https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-statistics/health-welfare-services/homelessness-services/overview 

REGIONAL AND GLOBAL ACTION
Australiais development assistance policy 
recognises inclusive economic growth as a prerequisite for poverty reduction through increasing employment opportunities and thus lifting living standards for poor and vulnerable communities. Ensuring these opportunities reach the poorest and most disadvantaged is a priority across Australiais development assistance. 
Inclusion is critical to the broader aims of sustainable, inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction. Gender equality and womenis empowerment are at the centre of Australiais foreign policy, human rights advocacy, economic diplomacy and development programs; 80 per cent of aid investments must address gender issues in their implementation. We recognise that gender equality is central to everything we do and as such aim to mainstream gender equality across all SDGs.
The rights of people with disabilities is an important focus of Australiais international advocacy on human rights. People with disabilities and their families are more likely to be persistently poor as a result of higher living costs, barriers to education, health and employment opportunities, and unpaid caring responsibilities. Australia is a leading provider of disabilityinclusive development assistance, taking a twintrack approach: supporting disability-specific  aid investments, as well as mainstreaming activities that include people with disabilities  as participants in development work across  all sectors. 
In the Pacific, Australiais development partnerships prioritise the challenges of slow growth, climate change, small and isolated markets and providing services in remote environments. Complementing bilateral programs, our regional assistance focuses on supporting economic growth, effective regional institutions, healthy and resilient communities, and empowering women and girls. 
Addressing poverty through economic partnership in Indonesia

Indonesia has reached middle-income status and achieved substantial development progress but high levels of poverty persist\0xF3at least 100 million people live on US$2 or less per day. Through an economic partnership, Australia assists the Indonesian Government target public spending more efficiently. In 2016, we helped Indonesia to improve its targeting of social protection programs, including by updating a unified database comprising 25.8 million households. For example, in 2017, Australia supported the Indonesian Governmentis reform of electricity subsidies to benefit the poorest 40 per cent of households. The reported $1.6 billion in savings from this reform is now available for construction of electricity infrastructure in poor and remote villages.





02 SECURITY AND IMPROVED  
END HUNGER, ACHIEVE FOOD  
NUTRITION AND PROMOTE  
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE

\0xECWhile agriculture has been a consistently strong performer, there are five key areas we canit ignore. They are the competitiveness race, Asiais  re-emergence, evolving consumer preferences, resource scarcity and climate variability and change. Each of the five bring both opportunities and threats, disrupting the status quo. How we respond to these challenges and opportunities will shape the future of Australian agriculture. 
Dr Steve Hatfield-Dodds, Executive Director,  
Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource  Economics and Sciences, Outlook 2018

Agriculture plays a central role in the Australian identity and is an important pillar of the Australian economy. Agriculture relies on a clean, healthy, productive environment n underpinned by a range of the SDGs n and has a particular link to Australiansi health and wellbeing, or SDG3. Australia produces enough food to feed around 60 million people annually, so Australian agriculture contributes to both domestic and global food supply, with over two-thirds of Australian agricultural produce exported. 
Australia is a strong advocate for open markets and free trade, and for the reduction of marketdistorting agricultural support. Substantial reforms in the 1980s and 1990s saw innovation and productivity growth increase across the agriculture value chain with benefits to consumers and creating economic and employment opportunities in rural Australia.
Our food system is underpinned by high levels of food safety, a reliable food supply and competitive and efficient markets. Through the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), we share our expertise with developing countries to promote more productive and sustainable agricultural systems and practices, supporting nutrition and economic growth.
Given agricultureis dependence on natural resources, the sector must adapt to the potential impacts of climate change, but can also contribute to its mitigation through emissions reduction. Australian governments support the agriculture sector to build adaptive capacity, preparedness, sustainability and risk management capability, to better enable primary producers to manage the effects of climate change. 
AUSTRALIAN ACTION
Innovation through research and development, and technology transfer and adoption has been critical in helping Australian agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries double productivity over the past 25 years. This has contributed to farm sector growth and adaptation to changing environmental and consumer demands.
Australiais 15 rural research and development corporations, co-funded by Government and industry, along with other national and state and territory research institutes and the academic sector, conduct research to improve the profitability, productivity, competitiveness and long-term sustainability of Australiais primary industries. Successful initiatives include:
\0xEF Dairy Australiais Fert$mart program to increase the efficiency and profitability of fertiliser use, and improve soil health on Australian dairy farms
\0xEF Cotton Research and Development Corporationis 40 per cent increase in water 
efficiency for Australian cotton growers since 
2000
\0xEF Geoscience Australiais Digital Earth Australia work enables the agricultural industry to use satellite data to better target farm interventions such as fertiliser application.
In addition to its role of collecting and supplying seeds, the Australian Tree Seed Centre, housed within CSIRO, is exploring uses for Australian tree species for environmental rehabilitation, such as to address soil degradation and salinity, restore biodiversity, for carbon sequestration, bioenergy production and coastal protection from cyclonic winds and tsunamis.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander traditional knowledge and genetic resources: 
Spinifex

Aboriginal peoples have collected spinifex for tens of thousands of years, using its resin for medicines and as a type of glue. The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) at the University of Queensland has worked in partnership with the IndjalandjiDhidhanu People in North-west Queensland to develop a method of extracting nanocellulose from spinifex that could be used an additive in latex products such as condoms and gloves. Work is underway to add spinifex nanofibres into other rubber compounds and plastics and AIBN is researching the benefits of adding nanofibres to bitumen to create more durable road surfaces. The spinifex commercialisation agreement recognises traditional-owner knowledge about spinifex and ensures the Indjalandji-Dhidhanu people will have ongoing equity and involvement in the commercialisation of the nanofibre technology. Commercial harvesting and extraction of spinifex nanofibres could provide for the foundation for new enterprises in remote Australia.

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Most Australians can afford to buy the food they need and can access safe and nutritious food, however, there are some challenges, particularly for remote communities and also for those experiencing poverty or other disadvantage. The community sector plays a key role in supporting those experiencing temporary food insecurity, with 15 per cent of Australians reported to have experienced food insecurity at least once in 2016-17.14 This issue links closely with SDG12, with major Australian supermarket chains, commercial and hospitality businesses partnering with food recovery organisations like OzHarvest, FareShare, and Foodbank. These services, along with other social impact enterprises and nonprofit organisations, use excess food from partner businesses to assist those experiencing food insecurity, while also reducing waste.
Improving food security in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, particularly those in remote areas, is vital to reducing the high levels of preventable diet-related chronic disease such as renal disease, heart disease and diabetes. Remote communities in Australia can find it particularly difficult to access fresh fruit and vegetables. The higher cost and lower quality of fresh food in those communities is related to the small size of the market and long supply chains. In some cases, food supply chains cover distances of over 3,000km and can be impacted by seasonal weather conditions. 
Australian governments are committed to addressing food insecurity in remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, including through support and licensing arrangements for retail and remote stores, to make a positive difference in the health, employment and economy of these communities. In addition, the Government supports school nutrition projects in the Northern Territory aimed at improving school attendance and local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander employment through the provision of healthy meals to students on school days.
REGIONAL AND GLOBAL ACTION
An open and transparent global agriculture trading system is critical not only for Australiais agricultural exporters, but it also helps strengthen global food security. Open and transparent markets allow agriculture and food to move from where it can be produced most efficiently to where there is demand and increases resilience to market shocks such as extreme weather. Australia pursues agricultural trade policy through bilateral, regional and multilateral engagement, complementing the multilateral trade system.
Australia chairs the Cairns Group of 19 agricultural exporting countries that effectively put agriculture on the multilateral trade agenda. Formed in 1986, the Group accounts for over 25 per cent of the worldis food and agricultural exports15 and is made up largely of developing countries, supporting the Addis Agendais aim to harness international trade as an engine for development. Cairns Group members are particularly reliant on trade in agriculture and food for sustainable economic growth and development. The Group has a strong reputation for technical contributions that help shape the negotiations and pursues its objectives with a strong focus on the benefits agricultural trade reform would deliver to developing countries. 
Australia is a founding member of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food Program and champions efforts on global and regional food security through international and regional bodies such as the G20, APEC and the OECD, as well as the international food standard-setting body Codex Alimentarius and the International Network of Food Safety Authorities (INFOSAN). For example, through its partnership with the World Food Program, Australia has supported emergency humanitarian and school feeding operations in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Australiais approach of providing food assistance as untied, cashbased support maximises the effectiveness and efficiency of the assistance. We are working with Nutrition International towards the Government of Indonesiais efforts to increase the consumption of iron and folic acid supplements, expected to benefit around 180,000 pregnant women and 289,000 adolescent girls.
The Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR)

Members of the Ratu Rani Womenis Agriculture Collective in Bhaluwa, Nepal. Photo credit: Conor Asheigh
As part of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Tradeis portfolio, ACIAR is Australiais specialist international agricultural research for development agency. Its research portfolio covers crops, horticulture, livestock, fisheries, forestry, natural resources, water and climate, economics, policy and social sciences. Australian agricultural science and capacity building helps countries in the Indo-Pacific region improve their food security by increasing sustainable agricultural productivity, improving inclusive market access, and developing new markets for poor smallholder farmers. Given similarities between our agricultural environments, Australia supports a number of countries in Africa with agricultural scientific expertise in areas such as dryland farming. With women and girls playing a central role in the farming, food and health systems of developing countries, ACIAR is working to increase their capability and the sustainability, productivity and profitability of agricultural systems.

LAUNCH Food: an international challenge

DFAT, together with USAID, the Jamie Oliver 
Food Foundation, University of California Davis, 
California Academy of Sciences and World Pulse, has formed a partnership with LAUNCH to work towards improving health outcomes by enabling people to make healthy food choices. LAUNCH conducted a challenge in 2017 that drew 280 applications from 74 countries. DFAT is supporting 15 solutions utilising food technology, emerging communications and behavioural economics and insights to address access to affordable, nutritious, desirable and sustainable food and promote peopleis selection and consumption of more nutritious food in the  Indo-Pacific region. 





03 ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES  AND PROMOTE WELL-BEING 

AT ALL AGES
\0xECWhile there are positive signs and progress on many fronts, it is clear that Australia is not healthy in every way, and some patterns and trends give cause for concern. Chronic diseases\0xD6 are becoming increasingly common in Australia due to a population that is increasing and ageing, as well as to social and lifestyle changes. \0xD6 Presenting a broad picture of health status can mask the fact that some groups in our community are not faring as well, including people living in rural and remote areas, the lowest socioeconomic groups, Indigenous Australians and people living with disability.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,  Australiais Health 2016
The Australian Government is committed to ensuring access to a world-class health system built on the foundation of universal health coverage, support for hospitals, a priority on preventive health and mental health, and investments in medical research. The system also enables quick and effective response to emerging threats, potential outbreaks  and disasters.
Australiais health system centres on the principle of universal health coverage, providing access to timely, high-quality health services delivered without discrimination and addressing the differing needs which people have throughout their life. The universal public health insurance scheme, Medicare, provides free access to public hospitals and subsidised access to medical services. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme supports affordable access to a wide range of medicines, with higher subsidies for frequent users and those on low incomes. For example, a new listing of the PrEP preventive drug for people at medium to high risk of HIV will put Australia in reach of being one of the first countries to end the transmission of HIV.
As a member of the World Health Organization (WHO), Australia supports the WHOis right to health objectives and respects the right of our population to achieve the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. Overall, Australiais population is relatively healthy, with among the highest life expectancy globally, however, more needs to be done to address poor health outcomes for some groups. Australian governments collaborate with civil society organisations and health providers to work towards addressing these gaps. 
AUSTRALIAN ACTION
Governments in Australia recognise the importance of healthy ecosystems and socioeconomic factors to human health, with an interlinked, holistic approach that focuses on the underlying determinants of health, consistent with linkages between SDG3 and many of the other SDGs. 
For example, the Victorian Government, particularly Parks Victoria, has worked closely with the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and its member organisations to develop an integrated approach recognising the contribution of nature and parks to overall health and wellbeing, building on a message of \0xECHealthy Parks, Healthy People. New South Wales Health is working with the NSW Office of Environment and Heritage, the University of Sydney and local health districts to consider possible effects of climate change such as hot weather and heatwaves, natural disasters and extreme weather events, air pollutants, food-borne diseases and drinking water quality.
Australia is a global leader in many areas of public health and medical research. In 2012, we were the first country to introduce plain packaging for tobacco products. A comprehensive range of measures has seen the age-standardised daily smoking prevalence drop from 22.3 per cent in 2001 to 14.7 per cent in 2014-1516, one of the lowest rates in the world. Research at the University of Queensland led to development of the Human Papillomavirus vaccine, a vital step forward in womenis health.
Innovation and technology may assist with addressing the needs of those in rural and remote areas, with a transition towards the greater integration of digital technology, including mobile health, online health records and telehealth systems. Access to primary health care will remain critical and people rely on crucial services like the Royal Flying Doctor Service, which services an area of 7.69 million square kilometres. In 2017, Australia appointed its first National Rural Health Commissioner, an independent and high profile champion for regional, rural and remote health, who will seek to address, among other issues, the unequal distribution of health professionals between innermetropolitan and rural and remote areas. 

ADDRESSING HEALTH CHALLENGES  AND LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoplesi health care

The gap in health outcomes between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is caused by a mix of social factors, risk factors and differences in access to appropriate health care. In collaboration across jurisdictions and with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations, Australia is working to improve the health of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. The Government recognises the importance of a holistic concept of health for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and consulted widely in 2017 on the social and cultural determinants of health, in order to inform the implementation of the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan.
Further, communities and researchers have developed an Australian Model of First 1000 Days17, which focuses on reducing under-nutrition for the period from conception to a childis second birthday, for application to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families. It includes improving nutrition and maternal and child health as well as an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-led holistic and ecological framework focusing on comprehensive primary health care with a case management style approach. It includes strong community governance processes and interventions that focus on the family environment.  
Obesity is a major risk factor for noncommunicable diseases, along with tobacco use, poor diet and nutrition, harmful consumption of alcohol and physical inactivity. As heart disease, cancer and mental illness account for almost half the burden of disease in Australia, the Government has committed significant funding to initiatives to support healthy lifestyles, mental health, preventive health and sport. The Australian Chronic Disease Prevention Alliance manages programs and campaigns aimed at preventing non-communicable diseases through lifestyle changes, such as improved nutrition and increased physical activity. 

Government mental health programs are complemented by broad-based community initiatives and organisations such as beyondblue and Lifeline Australia. Mental Health First Aid (MHFA) Australia has development courses training more than half a million Australians in mental health first aid. More than 25 countries have adopted the MHFA Australia program since its inception in 2001.18
LGBTIQA+ people are more likely to  experience and be diagnosed with a mental health disorder, and are more likely to attempt suicide in their lifetime, compared to the general population.19, 23 The Australian Government recognises the particular impact of mental health issues and suicide in the LGBTIQA+ community and funds a number of programs specific to the communityis needs. For example, QLife is a  peer-supported telephone and web-based counselling and referral service for LGBTI people.
REGIONAL AND GLOBAL ACTION
Australiais 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper highlights our commitment to guarding against regional and global health risks, in particular preventing and responding to the introduction and spread of infectious disease. We support countries in our region to build health systems and services that are responsive to peopleis needs, for example, partnering with the World Bank across the Indo-Pacific region to help countries strengthen and finance essential disease and immunisation programs and improve health security. 
We are a long-standing, major donor to global health funds and organisations, including the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, Gavi the Vaccine Alliance, UNAIDS and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), as well as multilateral banks that work in the health sector. Our contributions have helped mobilise financing for health interventions in our region; supported the establishment of innovative partnerships, including with the private sector to reduce the cost of essential health commodities and stimulate investment in new technologies; and supported developing countries to lower rates of infectious diseases. 
We work with international institutions to prevent, detect and respond to health emergencies and tackle antimicrobial resistance. We are members of the End Malaria Council and supported the establishment of the Asia-Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance. Through the Indo-Pacific Centre for Health Security, we are investing in research, partnerships and efforts to improve the capacity 

and resilience of health systems in the region. Australia has supported Monash Universityis World Mosquito Program to test the use of 
Wolbachia, an innovative mosquito control 

Students in Queensland use do-it-yourself \0xEBMozzie Boxesi to grow and release the World Mosquito Programis  Wolbachia-carrying mosquitos. Photo: Thom Cookes/Eliminate Dengue.

method endorsed by WHO in 2017. Australia is supporting partner governments in Fiji, Kiribati, Vanuatu and Sri Lanka test the approach, which could help to protect an estimated half a million people in the region from viruses like dengue, Zika and chikungunya over the three year test period.
Health challenges in the Pacific

Our neighbours in Pacific small island states face specific health care challenges, including high rates of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), geographic barriers, constrained health spending and health sector workforce shortages and health risks posed by climate change. Many Pacific countries have made good progress in areas such as communicable disease control and maternal and child mortality, however, rates of NCDs are increasing dramatically due to factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, physical inactivity and poor diet.
In Tonga, Australia is supporting the Ministry of Health to improve health service systems, delivery and to address NCDs. The programis focus on primary and preventive approaches includes supporting Tonga to introduce legislation and fiscal measures, strengthening primary health care, improving community health centres and expanding diabetes outreach to outer islands and remote communities. Future work will focus on strengthening the workforce, health financing and leadership to improve primary care and disabilityinclusive health services at the community level.  





04 EQUITABLE QUALITY EDUCATION 
ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND  
AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING  
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL

\0xECThere are fundamental, structural changes underway in the shape of the economy and the organisation of society. Children starting preschool in 2017 may go on to  be employed in jobs we havenit yet imagined. Our education systems are not yet adequately preparing young people for the future.
Torii, K. and OiConnell, M. Preparing Young People for the Future of Work. Mitchell Institute Policy Paper No. 01/2017. Mitchell Institute, Melbourne.

Australia recognises the role of quality education in underpinning national prosperity and economic growth by ensuring equitable access to opportunity and social wellbeing for all individuals regardless of their background.
The Australian Government works with state and territory governments, the education sector and civil society to improve access to quality education and maximise opportunity through learning. Efforts include building life-long learning opportunities and supporting workforce participation and prosperity for our population through all stages of life, ensuring nobody is  left behind. 
INCLUSIVE AND QUALITY LEARNING  IN AUSTRALIA
Australia has a comprehensive, modern, diverse and equitable education system. Early childhood education and child care (including child care and preschool) focuses on childrenis learning and development needs. There is universal access to preschool education in the year before school.  
There is universal access to primary and secondary education, with school attendance compulsory until the age of 16 and gender equity in literacy and numeracy outcomes on completion of primary school. Government funding for schools includes loadings to target student and school disadvantage, including students with disabilities. Governments work with civil society organisations to provide additional support where needed. For example, the Smith Family's Learning for Life program, funded by the Australian Government, will support approximately 56,200 disadvantaged students by 2020 to achieve improved educational and post-school outcomes. All schools in Australia have access to computers and internet and are adapted for students with disabilities.
In the vocational education and training sector, industry has a central role in designing and delivering training to ensure it meets employer and community needs. Australian governments support inclusive and equitable access through subsidies, programs and a student loan scheme. There is a broad range of community institutions, which provide and promote lifelong learning 
and adult and community education, delivering foundation skills training. For example, the South Australian Government, through its Office for Women, works with TAFE SA to offer vocational courses for women from diverse backgrounds, to gain knowledge, confidence and skills for employment and further studies. Informal learning programs are available through institutions like community libraries.
A universal, merit-based higher education system supports eligible students to pursue higher education through the Governmentis provision of loans to eligible students and the subsidisation of eligible higher education places. Deferral of fees until the graduate earns a threshold salary reduces the financial burden at a crucial time for young adults.
Many Australian schools and universities have implemented sustainability programs to teach children and young people about resource sustainability and to improve resource management within their institutions. Sustainability is one of three national crosscurriculum priorities and has been incorporated in programs like ResourceSmart Schools in Victoria. Many Australian universities are actively incorporating the SDGs into their curricula and student activities, including institutions that have signed up to the Principles for Responsible Management Education, which is working to embed the SDGs into management education.
Questacon: teaching Australians about sustainability and science

Questacon is the national science and technology centre, based in Canberra. The Shell Questacon Science Circus has inspired generations of young Australians towards careers in science through science shows and activities for teachers. The Questacon Smart Skills initiative travels to regional Australia delivering free sessions that immerse students and teachers in ideas, technology and creativity. Questacon has engaged remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities through interactive public exhibitions, school workshops, educator professional development and special programs. Working with the UN Information Centre in Canberra, Questacon is helping to promote awareness of the SDGs within the Australian community, aligning with similar efforts by the world science centre sector. Questacon is collaborating with the Australian National Universityis Crawford School of Public Policy, UNESCO and Future Earth to develop and implement a \0xEBYoung Persons Plan for the Planeti program. 

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Access to quality education opportunities 
can be more challenging in rural and remote communities, disproportionately impacting on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations. Outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples vary substantially by remoteness area. Programs to support education outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students in remote areas include provision of essential infrastructure such as computers, printers and internet access points to improve internet literacy and educational outcomes for both children and adults. 
As part of its efforts to improve education opportunities for students in rural and remote areas, the Government funds Rural and Regional Enterprise Scholarships, which support students from regional and remote areas to undertake 
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), agriculture and health courses. 
Civil society efforts include Country to Canberra, which is empowering young rural women to reach their leadership potential, including initiatives that bring them to Canberra to meet with parliamentarians and leaders. Responding to the gap in womenis participation in STEM education and careers, the Government is funding a range of organisations to increase awareness and girlsi participation in STEM and entrepreneurship education and careers.
The Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience (AIME)

AIME builds bridges between university and high school. Mentees undergo a six year program, including academic tutoring and a structured theatre of education. Since 2005, AIME has engaged over 15,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander high school students and 5,000 university student mentors. In 2017, 94 per cent of AIME students completed high school, compared to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander rate of 59 per cent. The AIME model is a cost effective, scalable, proven tool to alleviate disadvantage and is currently being introduced to South Africa and Uganda.

GLOBAL ACTION
The Australian Government recognises the importance of high quality, accessible education to reducing poverty and disadvantage, improving gender equality, strengthening national, regional and global economies, and enhancing peace and stability. Education is a priority sector for Australiais aid program, accounting for approximately 18 per cent of our total development assistance in 2016-17. Through our development assistance, we are focused on improving the quality of education. For example, in Indonesia, we are working with the Ministry of Education and Culture to investigate what does and does not work to improve literacy and numeracy at the classroom and school level.
In the Indo-Pacific region, Australia has a strong focus on leaving no one behind, with a focus on women, girls, and children with disability. Our work seeks to increase opportunities for girls to attend and stay in school, including by making schools more affordable, closer to home and supportive of girlsi needs in Laos, Bangladesh and countries across the Pacific. Where education participation rates are high, our support targets the last remaining out-of-school children, who are often hard to reach. In Fiji, we are working with the Ministry of Education and education and disability stakeholders to improve the ability of children from very poor communities, particularly those with disabilities, to access a quality school education.
Australia is an active participant in, and contributor to, a range of global education initiatives that seek to improve education systems and outcomes in developing countries. Australia is a long-standing contributor to the Global Partnership for Education, supporting partner countries to get an additional 72 million children in primary school since 2002. Australia is strongly committed to supporting the educational needs of children and youth in emergencies, contributing to the Education Cannot Wait Fund and launching an Education in Emergencies Challenge to source innovative solutions for expanding education opportunities in emergency situations, particularly for girls.
Enhancing Global Knowledge Exchange through Education 

Australia is the third-largest provider of education to international students and the Government provides opportunities to the next generation of global leaders to undertake study, research and professional development in Australia and enables Australians to do the same overseas. The New Colombo Plan, Australia Awards and the Endeavour Awards are significant investments in a global knowledge exchange that advances SDG4 and other SDGs in Australia, our region and globally. 
The Australian Governmentis Australia Awards program funds scholarships, fellowships and short courses in Australia for emerging leaders in Asia, the Pacific, Africa and the Middle East. In 2018, Australia Awards offered 4,031 new awards to recipients from over 60 eligible developing countries. The program draws on Australiais education and training expertise to build capacity in our partner countries to achieve the SDGs, targeting skills gaps and constraints to sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction.
The New Colombo Plan demonstrates Australiais commitment to learn from our neighbours and build lasting collaborative networks by providing inclusive and equitable opportunities for Australian undergraduates to study and undertake internships in the Indo-Pacific region. From 201418, the Government has supported 30,000 students to have overseas education experiences through New Colombo Plan scholarships or mobility projects in 37 host locations. The program is inclusive: more than 50 per cent of participants are female and approximately five per cent have identified as having a disability. 
The Endeavour program funds scholarships, fellowships, and mobility opportunities for Australian students to undertake study, research or professional development overseas and for overseas citizens to do the same in Australia. Since 2007, the Endeavour program has funded over 6,500 scholarships and fellowships and over 30,000 mobility opportunities in over 120 countries. This includes the Endeavour Research Fellowship for Indigenous Australians, which has been awarded 24 times.





05 ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY  AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN  

AND GIRLS
\0xECIn recent decades, women in Australia have made significant strides towards equality with men. At universities, in workplaces, in boardrooms and in government, a growing number of women have taken on leadership roles, forging pathways for other women and girls to follow. Despite this progress, women and girls continue to experience inequality and discrimination in many important parts of their lives, which can limit the choices and opportunities available to them.
Australian Human Rights Commission,  
Face the Facts: Gender Equality 2018
SDG5 presents both international and domestic opportunities to empower and inspire action to reduce gender-based inequality, mutually reinforcing and strengthening action across the SDGs. It recognises the important contribution of women and girls to the ongoing development of Australiais innovative industries, economic growth and cohesive communities into the future. 
Australia is committed to upholding the human rights of all women as articulated in international human rights law, including through the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. It also supports the United Nations Security Council Resolution on Women, Peace and Security. Federal, state and territory governments in Australia are committed to achieving gender equality and promoting the empowerment of  all women and girls.
In Australia, increasing community awareness of gender inequality, particularly its linkages with violence, has driven stronger demand for action. Social media advocacy and awareness campaigns have highlighted deeply-ingrained attitudes and stereotypes surrounding women and their role in the workplace and society, which continue to present barriers to their full participation and wellbeing. 
Boosting womenis workforce participation is an economic and social priority for the Australian Government, with the potential to contribute to significant growth in the Australian economy while strengthening womenis economic security. In April 2018, Australiais female participation was slightly above the OECD average, reporting 73.2 per cent for women, compared to 83.0 per cent for men.20 Under Australiais G20 leadership in 2014, leaders committed to the reduction of the participation gap between men and women by 25 per cent by 2025 in their respective countries. Australia remains well on track to meet the G20 goal, with the gap between working age21 labour force participation of men and women reaching 
9.8 percentage points in April 2018.22
The Towards 2025: An Australian Government 
Strategy to Boost Womenis Workforce 
Participation and its series of annual implementation plans sets out the Governmentis approach to reduce the gap between male and female participation by 25 per cent by 2025. The Strategy details actions the Australian Government is taking to address many of the drivers of pay inequity in Australia, including measures for flexible work, paid parental leave, child care and early education, and encouraging women into non-traditional areas such as STEM industries. This complements legislated entitlements and workplace policies that seek to smooth the transition for working parents such as paid parental leave, flexible work arrangements and access to childcare. These policies respond to the dip in workforce participation for women of childbearing age23 and have positive impacts to ongoing workplace stability, career trajectory and financial independence and security. The Workplace Gender Equality Agency promotes and improves gender equality in Australian workplaces through the annual gender equality data reporting framework, which enables organisations to reflect on their gender profile and by providing employers with advice, tools and education to help improve their gender performance.
The gender gap in average weekly earnings in Australia is 15.3 per cent as at November 2017, representing an improvement of 3.2 percentage points from a high of 18.5 per cent in November 2014.24 Despite anti-discrimination and employment laws that prohibit differential pay, it is estimated the pay gap will be a persistent feature of the Australian economy for at least another 50 years.25 Organisations in various sectors are seeking to address the issue. For example, companies like Mirvac Projects undertake an annual gender pay gap analysis and the South Australian Government has undertaken a gender pay gap audit as well as developing an action plan across the public sector to address unconscious bias, recruitment processes and promotion to leadership.
PROGRESS AND ONGOING CHALLENGES
Governments, local authorities, businesses and civil society have made concerted efforts to increase the number of women in leadership and decision-making positions, including through programs that reduce barriers for women over their careers and particularly at the early stages. The Governmentis target of 50 per cent women on government boards, and the Australian Institute of Company Directorsi target of 30 per cent of board members of top 300 listed companies26 are women by 2018, shows a growing ambition to leadership parity and are beginning to show positive upward trends. Programs and scholarships such as the Audrey Fagan Young Womenis Enrichment Grants and Leadership Series in the Australian Capital Territory link young women to mentorship, leadership programs, more diverse experiences and financial support. 
Pathways to leadership are supported by programs such as Boardlinks, which provides a database of board-ready women for consideration by government representatives who are seeking candidates for board positions. In 2018, the Australian Public Service reached gender parity at its most senior level, with nine women and nine men serving as Commonwealth secretaries. The Male Champions of Change coalition supports high-profile men and their organisations to pursue gender balance through mechanisms such as paid parental leave, normalising care roles for men and flexible working arrangements.   
Internationally, Australia is ranked 52nd for female political representation.27 Programs such as the Pathways to Politics Program for women, run by the University of Melbourne, seek to provide women with the skills, information and networks needed to run for political office. There have been positive trends at the sub-national level with the Australian Capital Territory returning a female majority following its 2016 elections, and the Tasmanian parliament returning a female majority in March 2018. 
Economic participation and leadership pathways may be especially difficult for particular cohorts of women, who experience additional or different barriers due to geographical distance or isolation, cultural or linguistic diversity, age, disability, indigeneity and intergenerational disadvantage. This is particularly true where women are seeking to work in non-traditional sectors, and some sectors are taking measures to address these gaps. For example, the Oothungs (Sisters) in Mining traineeship provides pathways for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women into the resources sector. 

ADDRESSING VIOLENCE, DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT
Progress towards gender equality is hampered by the continued experience of gender-based violence. Gender inequality is the root cause of violence against women. Nearly one in three women in Australia has experienced physical violence and one in five has experienced sexual violence since the age of 15.28 Some women are particularly vulnerable to violence, with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women in Australia 32 times more likely than non- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women to be hospitalised due to family violence-related assaults.29 Further, people who identify as LGBTI are just as likely as nonLGBTI women to experience domestic violence, with one in three experiencing violence in a past or present relationship.30 Women with a disability are particularly vulnerable to family violence: they were more than twice as likely to have experienced partner violence as women without a disability in 2015-2016.35
Australian governments at all levels have been working to reduce violence against women, particularly domestic and family violence, including through the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022. The national Stop it at the Start primary prevention campaign launched in 2016 targeted influencers of young people to challenge violence-supporting attitudes and generate longterm cultural change. 
Sex discrimination, sexual harassment and assault, which are prohibited by law, create barriers to womenis full participation in public life and are being explored by two of Australiais Human Rights Commissioners. Australiais Sex Discrimination Commissioner will undertake the fourth survey on sexual harassment in the workplace in 2018. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner is undertaking an extensive consultation process throughout 2018 under the Wiyi Yani U Thangani Womenis Voices \0xECSecuring Our Rights, Securing 
Our Future project, which will consult with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and girls on cultural and socio-economic rights, personal security, aspirations and perspectives on the empowerment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women to inform future safety and empowerment policies and programs.
Improving womenis safety requires organisations to work collaboratively to deliver prevention and support crisis services. For example, the Government has formed a partnership with telecommunications company Telstra and the Womenis Services Network to deliver safe phones to women experiencing technologyfacilitated abuse and domestic violence. The Government funds 1800RESPECT, a national telephone and online counselling and support service.
IMPROVING GENDER  
EQUALITY GLOBALLY
Australia is a strong advocate internationally for gender equality and womenis empowerment, with gender equality one of the pillars for our Human Rights Council membership. Australiais international Gender Equality and Womenis Empowerment Strategy reinforces gender equality as a key priority across our international engagement, focused on womenis leadership, decision-making and peace-building, economic empowerment and ending violence against women. Eighty per cent of aid investments must address gender issues in their implementation. 
One example of our engagement is a partnership between Australiais Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative and the World 
Bank. The Inclusive Development in Post-Conflict 
Bougainville project is working with the local Department of Community Development to administer a small grants scheme for womenis groups, funding water and sanitation systems, community resource centres, classrooms, arts, crafts and tailoring skills and other initiatives. The project has facilitated sharing of knowledge by women human rights defenders on gender-based violence, human rights and peace and conflict resolution. Leadership of these community initiatives by local women is also opening pathways to political leadership.
Our Ambassador for Women and Girls advocates internationally for womenis equal participation in political, economic and social affairs. The Minister for Women routinely appears at the annual Commission on the Status of Women. 
Making Women and Girls Countn Gender Disaggregated Data

Collecting gender data is a major challenge in the Indo-Pacific region that will limit countriesi ability to measure progress the SDG indicators. Australia is supporting programs to help close the gender data gap, such as the UN Women flagship program Making Every Woman and Girl Count, which aims to create an enabling environment for gender statistics and increase the production and accessibility of genderdisaggregated data. We also support UN Womenis Evidence and Data for Gender Equality (EDGE) program, which is accelerating efforts to generate comparable gender indicators on health, education, employment, asset ownership and entrepreneurship.
Australia also works in partnership with the United Nations Population Fund to support the kNOwVAWdata program, which is strengthening regional and national capacity to measure violence against women in the Asia Pacific. 





06 ENSURE AVAILABILITY AND  
SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF 
WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL

\0xECNational water use is projected to double by 2050\0xD6 driven by increased population, economic growth, and new carbon plantings. This growth in demand can be met while enhancing nonagricultural water security, without increasing pressure on waterlimited catchments, through water recycling, desalination and integrated catchment management.
Australian National Outlook 2015, CSIRO

Given the impact of Australiais climate variability on our water resources, Australia has developed internationally-renowned expertise and experience in providing high-quality and sustainable water and sanitation services to urban and remote communities and industry, particularly during long periods of drought and water scarcity.
Managing water resources on the driest inhabited continent on earth is inherently complex. The need for fair and equitable access to water for a range of uses has been recognised as a policy challenge since before federation in 1901. Australiais current key water policy framework, the National Water Initiative, provides principles of water management to identify the real value of water and promote the maximisation of this value for the wellbeing of people, the environment and the economy. Australia has developed a unique set of water governance arrangements that draws on the jurisdictional responsibilities of all levels of government to work towards common goals and seeks to balance economic, social and environmental interests. 
High demand, combined with uncertain supply, during water scarcity events will require us to continually improve outcomes through innovation, partnership, regulation and marketbased initiatives. Our high level of integrated water resource management implementation should stand us in good stead to manage these challenges on a whole-of-system basis.
Australiais Foreign Policy White Paper makes clear that Australia is committed to sharing our water management expertise to help \0xEBenhance agricultural productivity, improve health outcomes, strengthen economies and reduce poverty.i Sharing Australiais expertise in managing water scarcity has never been so critical with the world facing a projected 40 per cent freshwater shortfall by 2030.31
Australia and the Ramsar Convention

Macquarie Marshes Ramsar Site, New South Wales.  Photo credit: Lindsay White
Australia has 66 Wetlands of International Importance listed under the Ramsar Convention. These areas cover over 8.3 million hectares and form a critical part of the natural environment, providing valuable environmental services for all forms of life. Support is provided to maintain the ecological character of Ramsar wetlands through a variety of programs including the national Landcare Programs Regional Land Partnerships and the National Environmental Science Program. Australiais national environmental legislation, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, is also an important mechanism for protecting the wetlands, protecting their ecological character and establishing best practice management.

AUSTRALIAN APPROACHES
In Australia, water markets and tradeable water entitlements have helped deliver water for consumption and environmental requirements, particularly during times of water scarcity. Water markets have been a key mechanism for Australia to adapt to climate change and manage water scarcity by providing flexibility to water users, such as irrigators, to trade water and optimise their operations and the economic benefits of their water rights. 
While water trading in Australia largely assists the agricultural sector to meet its water needs from surface water sources, there are opportunities for water markets to increase use of groundwater, and other alternative sources like recycled wastewater, stormwater and desalinated water. In Victoria, for example, the Victorian South Central Market Trial is considering market rules, the role of desalination, entitlement structures, pricing, allocation policies, and storage and delivery charges. 
Australiais first full-scale groundwater 
replenishment scheme has commenced operating in Western Australia and by 2060, groundwater replenishment schemes could make up to 20 per cent of Perthis drinking water. Geoscience Australia is improving the understanding of Australiais water resources, including under-mapped groundwater resources, and information on water flows in remote locations, supporting improved water management where it is particularly important to local populations. 
Investment in infrastructure and water efficiency programs has also increased the volume of water available, through reducing losses to leaks, seepage and evaporation and has improved urban water delivery, sewerage and drainage services. These investments are also helping to improve productivity. For example, water efficiency standards and labelling have influenced customer appliance choices and water use as well as driving innovation for more efficient products.
Social impact investing for conservation is also an approach that has been applied in the water sector: the Murray-Darling Basin Balanced Water Fund, a partnership between Kilter Rural, the 
Nature Conservancy, the Murray-Darling Wetlands 
Working Group and supported by National Australia Bank, will provide water security for farmers, while also protecting culturally significant wetlands that support threatened species and ecosystems.
The Murray-Darling Basin Plan

The Murray-Darling Basin contains Australiais largest river system, extending across 14 per cent of the countryis landmass. Over 3 million people use water from the Basin. It provides 23,000 gigalitres (GL) in water storage, supports around 40 per cent of all farms in Australia, and produces around half the nationis irrigated produce, worth approximately $7.1 billion each year. 
In the past, the health of the Basin has been impacted by drought and water extraction practices that inadequately addressed environmental sustainability considerations. The 2012 Basin Plan was developed in response to this gap to embed a coordinated approach to water management across the Basinis four states (South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland) and the Australian Capital Territory. The Plan aims to rebalance Basin water use to sustainable levels and introduce new measures to use water more efficiently and effectively, integrating water management across state boundaries, and improving water security for all water users. While the Basin Plan is a long-term policy, it has already achieved important social, economic, cultural and environmental gains. In particular, as at 31 December 2017, the Planis water recovery target was on track to being achieved, with 2,106.4GL of water recovered or contracted to be recovered for the environment against a target of 2,750GL by 2019.32 This has been achieved through the purchase of water entitlements and water efficiency improvement projects. 

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
One of the challenges Australia faces as a vast country with environmental and climate variability is the spatial disconnect between the location of water and communities. Rural and remote communities in particular may not have the same level of access to water and sanitation services as urban centres. This is particularly the case for remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and can have important flow on effects to health outcomes.38
State and territory governments seek to address these issues in consultation with local communities. For example, in 2008, the New South Wales Government developed a longterm joint initiative with the New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council in recognition that the quality of water and sewerage service delivery in many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities across the state, was significantly lower than in the broader community. The initiative provides funding through local governments and private providers for 62 communities to receive maintenance, operations and repair of water supply and sewerage systems. The quality of existing infrastructure is investigated at each location and project plans developed to improve service levels to the standard expected in the wider community. 
The Water Sector adopting  the SDGs

Melbourne Water aspires to make a real and meaningful contribution to the SDGs. The three pillars of its strategic direction are closely aligned to SDG6, SDG11 and SDG15. In dealing with stakeholders and customers, Melbourne Water has used the SDGs as a common framework to deliver improved community wellbeing and a better natural environment. Water corporations in metropolitan Melbourne have used the SDGs in their development of urban water strategies with Melbourne Water. The Melbourne Water System Strategy presents a system view of water resource management across Melbourne and the surrounding region over the next 50 years, exploring two key challenges: the growing and changing region; and the changing and variable climate. The elements of the strategy include: making the most of the water supply system; using water efficiently; using diverse sources of water; and optimising the water grid and market. Activities in the Strategy link directly to the SDGs to which they will contribute. 

SHARING WATER AND SANITATION EXPERTISE INTERNATIONALLY
Australia continues to assist countries in the Indo-Pacific region by sharing our experience and expertise to address complex water and sanitation challenges. In 2015-16, the aid program increased access to safe water for approximately 1.8 million women and men and increased access to basic sanitation for approximately 1.8 million women and children. 
Through its development assistance, Australia has long supported water policy reform in our region and access to quality water, sanitation  and hygiene services for the worldis poorest.
Australiais Prime Minister was a member of the UN-World Bank High Level Panel on Water, which aimed to accelerate international implementation of SDG6. We used our membership to highlight the urgency of the worldis water challenges, promote innovation and share our water management expertise.
The Governmentis Australian Water Partnership shares Australian experience and expertise to improve sustainable water management. For example, in Myanmar, the Partnership supported the preparation of a comprehensive Ayeyarwaddy River basin assessment to help develop a plan to manage conflicting demands on this key river basin. Through the Sustainable Development Investment Portfolio, Australia supports technology transfer, knowledge sharing and institutional strengthening to increase water, food and energy security in the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra river basins, home to about 400 million people.
Australiais water and sanitation initiatives support developing countries to improve access to safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. These initiatives recognise that addressing the specific needs of women and girls is critical if we are to achieve SDG6 targets. In developing countries, girls miss up to 5 days of school every month when they menstruate. The Civil Society Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Fund has worked with civil society organisations across 29 projects in 19 countries and their actions to improve menstrual hygiene management have led to better school attendance, health, dignity and confidence of women and girls. More broadly, work under the Fund has resulted in over 2.2 million people committing to and maintaining open defecation-free communities. The Water for Women Fund that commenced in December 2017 will continue this and other critical work to improve gender equality and access to safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene.




07 ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, 
RELIABLE SUSTAINABLE AND  
MODERN ENERGY FOR ALL

"Australiais electricity system is in transition. There is no going back from the massive industrial, technological and economic changes facing our electricity system. No country is immune to the change. What distinguishes countriesi approaches to the transition is how well-prepared they are in ensuring a secure, reliable and affordable electricity system. We are at a critical turning point. Managed well, Australia will benefit from a secure and reliable energy future. Managed poorly, our energy future will be less secure, more unreliable and potentially very costly."
Independent Review into the Future of the National  Electricity Market: Blueprint for the Future

The Australian Government is committed to ensuring access to affordable, reliable power, while meeting our commitments under the Paris Agreement. Australiais electricity sector is being transformed by the rapid growth in renewable energy, shifting consumer demand and the need to deliver affordable, reliable and secure supply while meeting Australiais emissions reduction commitments. 
Australiais long-term energy policies are being informed by four key outcomes: increased security, future reliability, lowering costs for consumers and lower emissions.
In 2015, the Australian Governmentis Energy 
Council announced a National Energy Productivity Plan to improve Australiais energy productivity by 40 per cent to 2030. This Plan brings together measures that will improve Australiais energy productivity and help consumers manage their costs, reduce Australiais greenhouse gas emissions and boost Australiais competitiveness. The Plan is expected to make a significant contribution to Australiais 2030 emissions reduction target. 
The Government has announced it will work with 
Australiais states and territories to develop a National Energy Guarantee to integrate climate and energy policy, deliver a more affordable energy system and drive investment in Australiais energy sector. The proposed design of the Guarantee comprises two parts n a reliability guarantee and an emissions guarantee n that together will require energy retailers and some large users across the major east coast electricity grid to deliver reliable and lower-emissions energy generation each year. 
To contribute to meeting our emissions reduction target under the Paris Agreement, Australia is committed to reducing emissions and to increasing its share of renewable energy to around 23 per cent of Australiais electricity by 2020. Some states and territories have also set their own additional renewable energy targets.
AUSTRALIAiS ENERGY RESOURCES
Australia is fortunate to possess plentiful and diverse energy resources, providing security for domestic consumption and creating investment and job opportunities to support a growing export market. The use of renewable energy continues to rise, now providing around 16 per cent of Australiais electricity. In 2017, clean energy investment was Australiais highest on record, placing Australia 7th in the world.33 Over the past five years, more than 90 per cent of new generation has been wind and solar and the cost of power from those sources has halved. 
Australia has close to universal access to electricity (95 per cent in 2016), which is powered by five main electricity grids. The National Electricity Market (NEM), which connects the east coast of Australia, South Australia and Tasmania, comprises one of the worldis largest interconnected electricity grids, with over 40,000km of transmission infrastructure servicing over 9 million customers and providing over 80 per cent of Australiais total electricity supply.34
Australia has some of the best-known thermal and renewable energy sources in the world and plays a key role in global technological innovation in energy extraction and production. Australiais electricity production currently relies heavily on coal and gas (85 per cent), which will continue to play a role in the future. However, there are large variations in the sources of generation between states and territories n Tasmania generates nearly 90 per cent of its electricity demand from renewable sources, mainly hydro,  and South Australia generates nearly 50 per cent from wind and solar, forecasted to rise to nearly 75 per cent by 2020-21.
IMPROVING EFFICIENCY AND CLEAN ENERGY TECHNOLOGY
Australia has invested considerably in the development of clean energy technology and projects to improve energy efficiency in property, infrastructure, manufacturing, agriculture and universities. State-based programs like New South Walesi Building Sustainability Index ensure the consideration of energy and water efficiency with the planning of new dwellings. The Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) provides research, development, demonstration and deployment grants to researchers and businesses. For example, ARENA is collaborating with AGL Energy and Simply Energy on separate world-leading virtual power plants, which will each involve approximately 1,000 grid-connected households and businesses with rooftop solar and battery storage in Adelaide. 
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) promotes private sector investment in clean energy technologies via debt and equity financing and innovative financial instruments. At 31 
December 2017, the CEFC had committed more than $5.8 billion in finance to 85 clean energy projects valued at more than $16 billion  since 2013. 
through their own programs, like Victorian Energy Upgrades. In the New South Wales town of Lismore, the community has created Australiais first ever council-operated and community-funded solar farms.
Uptake by consumers and communities of more energy-efficient services and products, installation of rooftop solar and hot water, household battery storage and small-scale renewable energy projects is increasing. National energy ratings schemes, labels, and applications are in place to allow consumers to make informed choices about appliance purchases and energy consumption, while states and territories are also driving efficiency gains and emissions reductions Grid-scale battery storage

Several state and territory governments are undertaking procurements for grid-scale battery storage facilities as part of their programs to meet their renewable energy and energy security goals. In South Australia, the worldis largest lithium ion battery (100 MW/129 MWh) has been installed under an agreement between French renewable energy company Neoen, US sustainable energy company Tesla and the South Australian Government, placing Australia at the forefront  of global energy storage technology.  The battery will provide grid stability services to the South Australian network, where close to 50 per cent of energy generation is from wind and solar. The Victorian Government has funded two battery storage projects totalling  
55 MW/ 80 MWh which are under construction in western Victoria and will enhance the reliability of the grid and unlock economic growth in areas experiencing network constraints.

MANAGING AND SERVICING DEMAND
Australian energy consumption rose by  2 per cent in 2015-16 to its highest ever level, with average annual energy consumption rising by 0.6 per cent each year.35 Recent high summer temperatures have increased the risk of demand spikes and electricity shortfall, with subsequent impacts on reliability and cost. This is a symptom of the transition phase of Australiais energy supply infrastructure and governance, combined with the effects of climate change, with the latter to be addressed through the National Energy Guarantee. This is particularly important given the cascading impacts of loss of power on other sectors of the economy, such as telecommunications, electronic banking and supply chains.
Many remote communities in Australia are offgrid and lack a reliable energy supply, relying on diesel or gas-fired generators. Some state and territory governments subsidise the cost of electricity for remote communities, for example, the South Australian Remote Areas Energy Supplies scheme and associated Aboriginal 
Communities scheme service an area of 210,000 square kilometres. Governments are working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and exploring new and innovative ways to increase power generation in remote areas, particularly through increased production of renewable energy. The ARENA, the Northern Territory Government and Power and Water utility are rolling out solar power to 29 remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. In Queensland, work is underway to \0xEBdecarbonisei remote communities on the Cape York Peninsula by switching them to cleaner, more cost-effective renewable energy systems and reducing reliance on diesel generators.

THE GLOBAL CLEAN ENERGY EFFORT
Australiais international cooperation promotes 
and supports the reliable, sustainable and secure operations of energy markets and global energy security. Australia is an active participant in a range of multilateral groups on energy. Australia is also a core funding partner of the Private Finance Advisory Network (PFAN) to accelerate investment in climate and clean energy projects and funds a project under the Coalition for Energy Efficient Comminution, which helps the mineral industry improve the efficiency of processing minerals and find complementary energy and productivity improvements in mining.
Some of our efforts build on strong bilateral and science-based relationships with key partners, such as the Australia-Germany Energy Transition Research Hub, which will generate collaborative and world-leading research to help the technical, economic and social transition to new energy systems and a low-emissions economy. 
Australia tailors its development assistance in climate change and energy-related investments to meet Indo-Pacific regional or country priorities. Our work recognises the role of energy in supporting sustainable and inclusive economic growth, including through increasing trade and export opportunities. Assistance includes support for capacity building, building or improving infrastructure for renewable energy, and supporting partner governmentsi long-term energy planning. We ensure our assistance balances the need to meet energy demands, while shifting to renewable energy sources to support developing countries to reach their targets under the Paris Agreement.
Energy security is a priority goal for many Pacific Island countries, including transitioning from imported fossil fuels. In the Pacific, we are contributing to initiatives like the Variable Renewable Energy Grid Integration Program, as well as bilateral programs like the Tonga Outer Islands Renewable Energy Project. In Asia, Australia supports the Lighting Pakistan Program, which provides clean, reliable and affordable solar light to 500,000 people in disadvantaged and remote communities, with a key focus on women.
Tina River Hydropower in the Solomon Islands 

Australia is supporting the Solomon Islands Government with a major infrastructure project involving construction of a 15-megawatt hydropower facility with the potential to meet twothirds of Honiarais forecast energy demand for 2022. Other support is coming from the World 
Bank Group, Asian Development Bank and the Green Climate Fund. This project aims to reduce reliance on expensive and unreliable diesel, improving the countryis investment environment and reducing electricity costs, while significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The project will also enable the Solomon Islands Government to meet its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. 





08 INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE  
PROMOTE SUSTAINED,  
ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND 
PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT

\0xECOver the long-term, economic and income growth in [Australia] will be primarily determined by labour force growth, developments in the terms of trade and productivity growth. Population ageing and low commodity prices will limit the contribution of the first two factors... Thus, structural reforms to boost productivity will be of fundamental importance to ensure standards of living continue to improve and to make sure that [the economy is] flexible and responsive to the uncertain external environment.
Australian Treasury, Pathways to GrowthnFostering  the Conditions for a Competitive Economy
Australiais economy is strong and currently in its 27th consecutive year of growth. Australiais macroeconomic policy framework, combined with a substantial natural resource endowment, a flexible labour market and a skilled workforce, has laid the foundation for sustained economic growth and high levels of employment. The main pillars of the framework are: a flexible exchange rate, an open capital account, an inflationtargeting independent central bank and fiscal policy focused on transparency and sustainability. The framework is supported by a robust financial system, overseen by independent prudential regulators, and flexible labour and product markets.
Labour Market 36 37
THERE WERE 
 415,000 
jobs created in 2017, the majority  of which were full-time
UNEMPLOYMENT,   AT 5.5 PERCENT 
(March 2018) has been  trending down since late 2014.
AUSTRALIAiS  
 EMPLOYMENT RATE 
of 73.5 per cent is well a bove the OECD average   of 68 per cent (Q4 2017).

Australiais economy is resilient, with a sustained mining boom that provided a buffer boosting real per capita household disposable income by 13 per cent over the decade to 2013.38 The mining sector has since transitioned from the investment phase to the production phase, and the Government is supporting broader-based growth. In 2015-16, services accounted for around 75 per cent of real gross value added and around 80 per cent of employment.39 Australiais open economy is supported by a network of modern free trade agreements (FTAs), which decrease barriers to trade and investment, increase Australiais competitiveness and generate more and higher-paying jobs. 

AUSTRALIAN ACTION
Structural change is affecting traditional job paths, industry capability, and supply chains. While the Australian Government is helping displaced workers transition to new employment, a number of reforms have improved productivity by promoting investment, innovation, entrepreneurship, efficient markets and a flexible regulatory environment. Initiatives include: reforms to corporate tax; investments in innovation, science, telecommunications and transport infrastructure; streamlining of business regulatory processes; and improvements to competition laws. For example, under the National Innovation and Science Agenda, Australia is changing its laws to remove barriers to crowd-sourced equity funding, which will make it easier for innovative small businesses to raise equity to develop and market their ideas. 
In the workplace, Australia has a robust system of protections for the rights, entitlements and safety of workers, underpinned by a national minimum wage, a sound bargaining process between employers and employees and a baseline set of pay and conditions. The Fair Work Commission reviews Australiais national minimum wage each year with the participation of key stakeholders. In 2016-17, the Fair Work Ombudsman, a federal agency, recovered more than $30.6 million in unpaid wages for more than 17,000 employees.40 
 Australia supports the work of the Global Compact and the Global Reporting Initiative to develop and promote corporate sustainability reporting standards. The Australian Stock Exchange Corporate Governance Council recommendations on corporate governance practices are being adopted by ASX-listed entities, ensuring transparency on exposure to \0xECeconomic, environmental and social sustainability risks.47 Industry organisations and market regulators are also promoting the adoption of sustainability standards. For example, the Minerals Council of Australiais Water Accounting Framework for the Minerals Industry has been adopted as the basis for international water accounting and reporting standards. 
Australiais Financial Inclusion Action Plan 

In 2015, the Australian Government supported 
Good Shepherd Microfinance to develop a Financial Inclusion Action Plan, in collaboration with EY and the Centre for Social Impact and with the advice of government, the private sector and civil society. Participating organisations n including a number of major banks and other service providers n committed to a range of actions focused on enabling core aspects of financial inclusion and resilience for vulnerable groups among their own clients, staff, suppliers and community partners. Initiatives range from improved access to appropriate and affordable financial products and services; development of early warning indicators to identify vulnerability; and support to those experiencing family violence to avoid financial hardship.

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Governments work with the private sector and civil society to address gaps in workforce participation, particularly for under-represented groups. The Australian Human Rights Commission has investigated barriers to employment for people with disability and older Australians, making comprehensive recommendations to governments, business and employers. In New South Wales, a number of corporate organisations have cooperated with the state Governmentis Refugee Employment Support Program to provide employment support for refugees. The Tasmanian Safe Haven Hub provides employment and education pathway support for refugees, migrants and asylum seekers. The Australian Capital Territoryis ConnXtions program supports job readiness interventions for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander residents. 
The Australian Government is working closely with business, industry and civil society, as well as multilaterally through key international forums such as Alliance 8.7 and the Bali Process, to address all serious forms of exploitation, including in supply chains. A growing number of Australian companies are developing human rights policies and supplier codes of conduct that incorporate human rights requirements, undertaking human rights due diligence, and proactively engaging with their supply chains to tackle human rights risks and impacts. The Australian Governmentis forthcoming Modern Slavery Reporting Requirement will require large corporations and other entities operating in Australia to publish annual statements outlining their actions to address modern slavery in their operations and supply chains.
Addressing Youth Unemployment

Youth unemployment, particularly among 20-24 year olds, is a key priority for Government and a key concern of young people in Australia.41 There are significant disparities across Australia, with higher youth unemployment in some regional areas.42 A lack of jobs can see young people leaving a region for employment opportunities in the cities, with flow-on impacts to local businesses and communities. In addition to state and territory efforts, the Government funds a range of community initiatives to address youth unemployment and mental health issues, such as:
Vision AustralianBuilding Stronger Futures: developing employability skills among young people who are blind or have low vision through 
pre-employment and mental health support programmes
Queensland Youth ServicesnRecycle Your Dreams: engaging youth in a social enterprise that recycles goods for re-sale, teaching them business skills
NECA Electrical Apprenticeships: supporting young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to begin an electrical apprenticeship  and a career in the sector headspace: a national youth mental health foundation providing online services to early school leavers, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and youth in regional areas.

GROWING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
Through its international engagement, Australia is a strong advocate and supporter of inclusive and sustainable economic growth, fair and decent work, and a global rules-based system to support the role of trade and overseas capital. We support the G20 commitment towards Strong, Sustainable, Balanced and Inclusive growth. 
Australia contributes to the global setting of labour standards and the development of policies and programs to promote decent work for all women and men through its membership of the International Labour Organization (ILO). Underlying the ILOis work is the importance of cooperation between governments and employersi and workersi organisations in fostering social and economic progress. Australia supports a number of ILO programs, including the Better Work program and TRIANGLE in ASEAN. Together with Indonesia, Australia cochairs the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, bringing together governments of 45 countries and three United Nations organisations to enhance regional cooperation.
Supporting Womenis Economic Empowerment in Papua New Guinea

World Vision Australiais Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project in Bougainville is assisting local cocoa farmers to rebuild a once-thriving cocoa industry affected by a 10-year civil war. Women are taking an equal part in the cocoa farming, training and finance management, with profits and economic gains being reinvested into the community, leading to improvements in family shelter, peace, health and education. In addition, a DFAT-funded savings group program is also empowering local women with skills and knowledge to save more effectively.
Elsewhere in Papua New Guinea, DFAT is working with PanAust Limited in a public-private partnership with Frieda River Limited to improve the representation and participation of women in negotiating mining development agreements. The project primarily works with the seven mine-affected communities in Telefomin and Abunti-Dreikikir Districts, West and East Sepik Provinces, to build womenis leadership skills and competencies. It also generates family and community support for womenis inclusion and influence in negotiations about how benefits will flow to communities.

Consistent with Addis Agenda commitments, Australia supports the employment and economic engagement prospects of Pacific workers and Pacific country revenue from remittances through the Seasonal Worker Program, which, since 2012, has supported the seasonal employment of over 23,000 workers from nine Pacific Island countries (Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) and Timor-Leste in the Australian agriculture, accommodation and tourism sectors. According to the World Bank, the program has delivered approximately $144 million in net income gains to the region since 2012, with the 

average worker saving and sending  
$8,850 home after six months of employment.43 As part of Australiais step-up in engagement in the Pacific, Australia will build stronger economic partnerships with the Pacific Island countries and a new Pacific Labour Scheme will commence in July 2018. This will promote economic resilience and enable Pacific workers to take up low and semi-skilled work opportunities in rural and regional Australia. The Scheme is employerdemand driven and will focus on sectors that generally match employment projections in Australia and Pacific skill sets.
The Australian Government has an aid-fortrade target representing 20 per cent of the total aid budget by 2020. Our work supports least-developed countries through trade-related technical assistance by funding initiatives including: the Enhanced Integrated Framework; the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement Facility; and the WTO Standards and Trade Development Facility. 
Australia also contributes to the World Bank Groupis Trade Facilitation Support Program, which assists developing countries undertake at-the-border reforms, such as improving their customs procedures. 




09 PROMOTE INCLUSIVE AND  
BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE,  
SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALISATION  
AND FOSTER INNOVATION

\0xECThe Australian economy is projected to grow by 84 per cent, from $1.4 trillion in 2011 to $2.6 trillion in 2031, a growth rate of 3.1 per cent per year. This growth in our population and economy will make us richer as a country. However, it will also create unprecedented infrastructure challenges. Nationwide population increases and ongoing prosperity will be the big drivers of an increasing need for road space, public transport capacity, freight capacity and improved gateways for trade. 
Australian Infrastructure Audit: Our Infrastructure Challenges

With our population centres separated by vast distances, connectivity through quality, sustainable infrastructure is critical to sustaining Australian communities, growing our strong economy and improving our international competitiveness. The Australian Governmentis vision is for an agile economy, capitalising on our commercial and scientific strengths. The Government delivers on this vision through support for innovation, science and commercialisation, growing business investment, improving business capability and streamlining regulation. 
Innovation, science and research are key enablers and drivers of industry, economic prosperity and growth, including through their support for sustainable infrastructure and system development. Australia is investing heavily in innovation across the economy to support, enable and manage the transformation of how we live, work and communicate, and to give rise to future industry and growth engines. 
Infrastructure is fundamental to many of the SDGs and to the priorities of governments and communities in Australia including: economic productivity and efficiency, liveability and economic capacity of communities, connections between people and markets, and citizen safety. 
The main planks of infrastructure n energy, telecommunications, transport and water n are key inputs to the efficient operation of daily life and of business. 

NATION-BUILDING RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE AND INNOVATION
Good infrastructure brings communities together, makes our towns and cities more liveable, links business large and small with markets, widens the range of jobs and opportunities, makes housing more available and affordable. The Government aims to develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure that  boosts investment, employment, productivity  and inclusive economic growth. 
The Australian Government works in partnership with state, territory and local governments towards continual improvement of the nationis infrastructure. Many national projects involve upgrading existing infrastructure to make them more efficient, sustainable and environmentally sound for the future. Legislative requirements including environmental impact statements and assessments improve the sustainability of infrastructure projects. 
In the coastal zone, where most of Australiais urban infrastructure and population is located, more intense storms and rising sea levels are likely to worsen the impacts of storm surges and coastal inundation and erosion. States, territories and local governments are collaborating with communities to raise awareness, and to plan for future adaptation efforts. For example, Tasmaniais Coastal Adaptation Pathways project aimed to help communities manage the risk and reduce the impacts of inundation and erosion.
Australia is investing in key rail infrastructure to help make our cities more liveable and efficient as they grow, to reduce the burden on our roads, to provide more reliable transport networks, and support efforts to decentralise the economy and grow regional Australia. Better-connected regions will facilitate economic growth and provide people with opportunities to live and work outside our capital cities, while governments are seeking to better integrate transport and land use through integrated planning and regulation and major infrastructure initiatives like the Melbourne to Brisbane Inland Rail for freight. 
Australia has long standing arrangements to provide universal access to telephony, internet and early generation broadband. The National Broadband Network will provide all Australian premises with access to affordable, high-speed next-generation broadband by 2020, enhancing connectivity across Australia and with particular benefits for regional, rural and remote regions. In light of the Networkis rollout, the Government is developing a new universal service guarantee to provide all Australian premises, regardless of location, with access to both voice and broadband services, better reflecting consumer needs. The Mobile Black Spot program, in partnership with mobile network operators, state and territory and local governments, is working to improve mobile coverage and competition in telecommunications across Australia.
Australia is improving road safety and conditions through technological advancements and innovation in vehicle design, as well as emerging technologies like connected and automated vehicles and better data collection and analysis. For example, extensive safety upgrades to Queenslandis Bruce Highway have significantly decreased the rate of serious and fatal crashes, saving lives. States and territories are investing in new technology and considering its application: South Australia has legislated to allow on-road trials of driverless cars, while in New South Wales, the Cooperative Transport Initiative provides a 42 kilometre road corridor to enable testing of cooperative intelligent transport systems technology, which allows vehicles to communicate with each other and roadside infrastructure. 
Economic and policy reforms have encouraged competition in the water, telecommunications, transport and energy infrastructure markets, improving services and reducing costs to consumers. The Government is increasingly seeking to employ innovative financing solutions including public-private partnerships, balance sheet leveraging, and alternative revenue streams such as value capture for major projects. 
Urban Rail

There is currently an unprecedented level of growth in passenger rail in Australian urban centres. New and expanded transport networks are being developed that will service Australiais cities into the future, including airport connections. This expansion is occurring in a way that integrates land use and transport planning to maximise city-shaping outcomes. 
The Australian Government is currently developing urban rail plans to inform its future investments in urban rail projects and the future of Australiais major cities. Sydney Metro is building a standalone rapid rail network connecting Sydneyis North West to the South West through the central business district and delivering 31 metro stations and 66 kilometres of new metro rail. The project will develop new industry capacity and capability, employing people in local communities and developing a highly-skilled and transferable workforce. It will also use more environmentally-sustainable materials, recycling 100 per cent of crush rock during tunnelling and recycling 95 per cent of all construction waste. An energy management system will improve energy efficiency, source lowcarbon energy and offset carbon throughout the project. 
By 2026 there will also be a new metro line connecting to the Western Sydney Airport. This is stage one of a multi stage North-South Rail Line that will shape a new planned Western Parkland City, providing connectivity to jobs and housing, and laying the foundation for economic growth and a sustainable city.     
The Western Australian METRONET program in Perth will create an accessible and sustainable transport system, reducing congestion and improving road safety. Planned station precincts will create universally accessible and connected community centres and provide a range of housing, jobs and services to residents. The 
METRONET program also includes a link from 
Perthis city centre to Perthis international airport.


Northern Australia, crossing the states of Western 
Australia and Queensland as well as the Northern 
Territory, encompasses over 53 per cent of Australiais land mass and contributes 12 per cent of Australiais GDP, despite only accounting for 5 per cent of the Australian population. The Australian Governmentis 2015 White Paper on Northern Development creates a new environment to underpin and foster growth in the north. All northern jurisdictions are committed to work together to create new jobs and enduring prosperity across the region. 
By 2050, almost half of the worldis economic output is expected to come from the region directly to the north of Australia, leading to increased demand for goods and services like tourism, international education, healthcare, resources and food. Northern Australia is well placed to meet this demand in the future.  The $5 billion Northern Australia Infrastructure 
Facility will provide concessional finance to encourage and complement private sector investment in infrastructure. Other initiatives will support sustainable development in our near neighbours, including through collaborative research into tropical diseases and supporting business-to-business connectivity with Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste and Indonesia. Through innovation and partnership, Northern Australia will deliver real economic and social benefits to all Australians and to the broader region.

Innovation and science lay the foundations for new approaches and technologies to identify, clarify and tackle global challenges into the future. Australia is a source of cutting-edge technology and innovation across a wide range of sectors, benefiting areas that cut across all the SDGs. The National Innovation and Science Agenda is focused on science, research and innovation as a key long-term driver of economic prosperity and growth. CSIRO plays a key role in improving the economic and social performance of industry for the benefit of the community, in areas such as advanced medical technology and climate science. In addition, industries including transport, agriculture, and aviation are adopting technologies like Geoscience Australiais National Positioning Infrastructure program, and Foundation Spatial Data Framework to improve performance.

INTERNATIONAL ACTION
The Indo-Pacific region faces significant infrastructure challenges with varied population growth, increasing urbanisation, rapid economic growth, gender inequalities and susceptibility to climate change and natural disasters. Infrastructure is a key focus of Australiais aidfor-trade approach, covering transport, energy, gender equality, large-scale water and sanitation, and information and communications technology infrastructure investments. This work contributes to regional integration and economic growth, and provides improved access to basic services for some of the poorest communities in our region. 
Private investment is necessary to bridge the regionis infrastructure investment deficit. Australia is working with other donors, multilateral banks, and institutions to mobilise the necessary funds for key investments, including using public-private partnerships and blended financing, as envisaged by the Addis Agenda. We have invested in GuarantCo, part of the Private Infrastructure Development Group, which has issued guarantees facilitating over USD3.8 billion worth of private sector investment in water, road and rural electrification projects in Asia and Africa, improving access to critical infrastructure for local populations and creating local employment.
Australian support for building developing country capacity for research and innovation helps drive future economic growth and competitiveness. Australian universities and research institutes have extensive international connections, while exchanges are facilitated through programs like the Australia Awards and New Colombo Plan. 
The Governmentis Regional Collaboration 
Program, administered by the Australian Academy of Science, funds collaboration with regional and international scientists, and research and innovation partners on shared regional challenges. One example will establish an AsiaPacific research network on sustainable materials and prefabricated systems for resilient affordable housing.
In co-operation with the World Intellectual 
Property Organisation, Australiais Funds-InTrust for Intellectual Property help developing and least-developed countries to improve their intellectual property systems and enhance their capabilities to facilitate innovation, investment, and technology transfer in the Indo-Pacific.




10 REDUCE INEQUALITY  WITHIN AND AMONG  

COUNTRIES
\0xECWhile measuring and analysing the level of inequality is an important task, it will always be focused on past outcomes. How Australiais future rates of inequality evolve will be strongly influenced by the opportunities that citizens have to improve their living standards today. Ensuring that there is equality of opportunity in education and work across different locations is arguably a more productive focus for policy makers... Providing greater equality of opportunity for Australians into the future will depend on the extent to which intergenerational wealth impedes socioeconomic mobility and how future technology changes the way we live and work.
Committee for Economic Development of Australia,  How unequal? Insights on inequality
The Australian Government aims to ensure all Australians have the opportunity to enjoy the benefits of a prosperous economy and access to health, education and other essential services. Each person is entitled to the same respect, dignity, and opportunities. But individuals, communities and institutions also have a role to play in upholding, protecting and promoting those entitlements.
Federal, state and territory legislation prevents discrimination based on age, disability, race, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion and other grounds. These legal frameworks flow through to initiatives led by governments, civil society and businesses to raise awareness and encourage appropriate behaviours and values. Nonetheless, discrimination and disadvantage still exist. 
Closing the Gap: improving outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians 

Australiais relationship with its first peoples is changing. However, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples remain among Australiais most disadvantaged. The Closing the Gap framework, developed in 2008, provides for an annual snapshot of progress made against targets in health, education and employment and helps maintain a collective focus across all levels of government on improving outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The areas targeted in the framework were recognised as key drivers for success in addressing the significant disparities between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Of the seven targets, in 2018 three are on track, including one key target to halve the gap in mortality rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children under five by 2018. Another target, to close the gap in life expectancy between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians by 2031, is not on track to be met. The Closing the Gap agenda is being refreshed in 2018 in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Council of Australian Governments, Australiais peak intergovernmental forum, will agree a new Closing the Gap framework, national and state targets, performance indicators and accountabilities in 2018.

Recent data indicate that while a number of income inequality measures trended upwards in Australia in the lead up to the Global Financial Crisis, they have since stabilised. Overall, there has been little net change in income inequality between 2001 and 2015.44 Between 200708 and 2015-16, the lowest 20 per cent of households has seen growth of disposable income52 of 8 per cent compared to the average of 2 per cent across all households. Rates of both relative and absolute45 income poverty have fallen since 2000, but there remain disparities between regions and for disadvantaged groups.46 

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Australiais progressive taxation and transfer system, and public spending on education, health and employment services reduces income inequality, redistributes resources between Australians and plays a large role in ensuring equal opportunity and reducing inequalities of outcome. In 2015-16, the poorest 20 per cent of households, on average, received Government payments worth more than 25 times what they paid in income taxes.55 
Social Impact Investing for Reduced Inequalities: Newpin Social Benefit Bond

In 2013, the New South Wales Government launched the Newpin Social Benefit Bond, Australiais first social impact bond, aiming to improve the life outcomes of children in care. The Bond supports families to break cycles of neglect and abuse and provide safe, nurturing environments for children. Compared to their peers not in care, children in care have poorer educational and health outcomes, are more likely to become homeless, and are more likely to interact with the criminal justice system. A partnership between the New South Wales Government, Uniting and Social Ventures Australia, it raised $7 million in private investment to deliver and expand Unitingis Newpin program. The program helps parents build positive relationships with their children and break the destructive cycle of family relationships that lead to abuse and neglect. The Bond has delivered strong social and financial results, successfully restoring 203 children to their families and supporting another 55 families to prevent their children from entering out-of-home care. The cumulative restoration rate is 63 per cent over four years compared to 19 per cent for similar families that were not in the program. In 2017, this delivered a 13.16 per cent return to investors.

Our development policies prioritise engaging the private sector to attract investments that deliver social as well as commercial outcomes. Our development assistance has a particular focus on gender equality and womenis empowerment, the inclusion of women and girls and persons with disability, such as our work with CBM and the NORFIL Foundation in the Philippines establishing groups of parents of children with disabilities to work with local councils. 
INEQUALITY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Ensuring universal enjoyment of human rights is fundamental to reducing inequality. No society can truly prosper if elements of it are excluded or subjected to discrimination and violence. Inequality, exclusion, discrimination and violence cost states in lost GDP, in increased expenses on health and social security, and in lost human potential. This understanding is one of the underpinnings of Australiais advocacy for equal human rights protections for women and girls, people with disability, youth, the elderly, LGBTI individuals, indigenous populations, and racial, ethnic or religious minorities. For example, Australia is committed to ensuring that LGBTI people are included in the implementation of the SDGs, and since 2015 has increased its advocacy and funding to support equal human rights for LGBTI persons globally. 
Marriage Equality

On 7 December 2017, the Australian Parliament passed the Marriage Amendment (Definition and Religious Freedoms) Act 2017, providing marriage equality in Australia. The Act commenced on 9 December 2017. The right to marry in Australia is no longer determined by sex or gender and foreign same-sex marriages are legally recognised. Marriage is defined in the Marriage Act 1961 (Cth) as the \0xEBunion of two people to the exclusion of all others, voluntarily entered into for lifei. The passage of the legislation followed the conduct of the Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey, which showed Australians overwhelmingly in favour of samesex marriage. Of the 79.5 per cent of eligible voters participating, 61.6 per cent indicated their support for same-sex marriage.47

MARKETS, MOBILITY AND MIGRATION
Australia uses its participation in a range of multilateral forums to advance policies that promote open trade and investment, tax compliance and greater economic competitiveness to reduce inequalities. An open and resilient financial system, grounded in agreed international standards, is crucial to supporting sustainable growth. Australia continues to support voting power reforms to better align shareholding of the international financial institutions with member countriesi economic weights. 
Australia has a long history of migration and welcoming people from around the world to contribute to a diverse multicultural nation. Australiais national multicultural statement48 recognises that cultural diversity is one of our greatest strengths: it sparks innovation, creativity and vitality. Our economy is strengthened by the skills, knowledge, linguistic capabilities, networks and creativity of our diverse workforce. Similarly, other countries have benefited from the input of Australian skills, expertise and investment.
Many of Australiais FTAs include labour mobility clauses, supporting trade and investment outcomes, skills transfer and broader economic growth. Within our region, and consistent Addis Agenda commitments, the Seasonal Worker Program, as outlined under SDG8, improves the employment prospects of Pacific workers and Pacific country revenue from remittances. 
Australia is working with financial institutions and the G20 to reduce further the costs of outgoing remittances to Pacific Island economies. Australiais average remittance cost was 8.15 per cent in the first quarter of 2018.58 Recent efforts have included direct consultations with Australian banks and stronger regulatory measures to reduce money-laundering and terrorism financing risks. Australia and New Zealand support Send Money Pacific, which increases the transparency of remittance costs.
Australia facilitates orderly, safe, and responsible migration through sound border management, a universal visa system, and migration programs. Australiais migration policies are designed to meet our social and economic needs, protect Australia, and fulfil our international commitment to the protection of migrantsi rights. Australiais immigration and humanitarian programs are non-discriminatory and are supported by world class settlement services. A large number of stakeholders are involved in delivering services to migrants, including the three tiers of government, service providers and other civil society organisations.  

HELPING THOSE MOST IN NEED
Australia has a long and proud tradition of resettling refugees and people in humanitarian need. Since the end of World War II, we have permanently resettled over 870,000 people from around the world. Today, Australia continues to be one of the top three countries for refugee resettlement and is among a small number of countries with a permanent annual resettlement program. 
The Government is committed to assisting those in difficult and desperate situations overseas. For example, our humanitarian assistance contributes to international response efforts in Syria and in refugee-hosting neighbouring countries. Through multi-year funding, we are providing longerterm resilience support for Jordan and Lebanon focused on improving education and livelihood opportunities for refugees and their host communities. 
In the past ten years, Australia has resettled humanitarian entrants from 100 different countries. The Government has committed to providing a Humanitarian Program of 18,750 places each year from 2018-19, with an additional commitment for the Community Support program to support private sponsorship of refugees. Humanitarian entrants settled in Australia can access the universal health system and income support. They are also eligible to receive English language training, counselling and a range of settlement services. A specialised program of support is available to survivors of pre-settlement torture and trauma, which also provides education, training and resources for mainstream health and community organisations, including schools, to increase understanding of the refugee experience and improve access to these services for refugees.




11 SETTLEMENTS INCLUSIVE,  
MAKE CITIES AND HUMAN  
SAFE, RESILIENT  
AND SUSTAINABLE

\0xECPopulation growth will transform our cities. Our four largest cities are set to undergo a higher  density urban transformation.  Our aim for these cities should be to deliver high-quality, higher density living, connected by  world-class infrastructure services. In our smaller cities, we should ensure their many and diverse advantages are maximised.
Infrastructure Australia (2016) Australian Infrastructure Plan: Priorities and reforms for our nationis future

While Australia is sparsely populated, we are also highly urbanised. Australiais cities rank highly internationally as places to live, work and study. Easy access to the natural environment and green spaces, with opportunities to walk, cycle and enjoy the outdoors, makes Australian cities among the most liveable in the world.
We work together as a community to protect and value our cultural heritage for the enjoyment and benefit of all. We want our cities to continue to be productive, creative, accessible places that attract talent, encourage innovation, and create jobs and growth. 
All cities face challenges including managing traffic congestion, waste and pollution, housing affordability and disadvantage. Australiais urban population is rising. We need to plan for continued growth, to capitalise on opportunities, and manage impacts on social services, infrastructure, and the natural environment as  well as building resilience to natural hazards  and disasters. 

BUILDING SMART, RESILIENT  AND SUSTAINABLE CITIES
Taking a collaborative approach to how we shape and manage our cities, the Australian Government has appointed a Minister for Urban Infrastructure and Cities and established a framework for partnership between all levels of government, the private sector, research organisations and the community to build more sustainable, resilient and liveable cities. The focus is on maintaining and improving the liveability and productivity of our cities. 
City Deals: a new, collaborative  approach to urban policy

The Australian Government is using City Deals to bring together Australiais three levels of government to deliver long term outcomes for our large cities and regions. There is a particular focus on transformative infrastructure, regulatory changes to stimulate economic growth, strategic urban planning as well as integrated transport and land use planning to improve access to jobs, housing, and social outcomes.   
The most recent City Deal is the Western Sydney City Deal which is a 20-year agreement between the three levels of government to deliver a oncein-a-generation transformation of Sydneyis outer west n creating the \0xEBWestern Parkland Cityi. The agreement builds on the Australian Governmentis commitment to build the Western Sydney Airport to catalyse investment, development and job opportunities in the region and beyond. It also includes measures to realise the \0xEB30-minute cityi and maintain and enhance Western Sydneyis unique character by improving community infrastructure and liveability. 
City Deals have also been agreed for Launceston and Townsville and are in negotiation for Hobart, Geelong, Darwin and Perth. 

Ensuring our cities are resilient to natural hazards including bushfires, floods and cyclones, and to the evolving effects of climate change on infrastructure and systems, will reduce the potential impacts these hazards will have in the future and the financial liabilities of governments to rehabilitate damaged public assets. Australian governments cooperate with industry partners, and the international emergency management community, to improve the resilience of our critical infrastructure, economy, cities, and regions, and to strengthen and maintain Australiais crisis and emergency management capability. At the local government level, the cities of Melbourne and Sydney are participating in the international 100 Resilient Cities program, which supports cities to incorporate resilience thinking into local planning.
Both private and public sectors are investing in mobile and fixed telecommunications infrastructure in Australian cities and communities, providing a platform for smarter, more sustainable cities, which could also be supported by 5G and other emerging technologies. Australian experts are also developing innovative social and technological solutions to other challenges presented by urbanisation, for example, in the Tropical Urbanism and Design Lab at James Cook University, and through Monash Universityis Water Sensitive Cities initiative. 
Through the Smart Cities and Suburbs Program, innovative smart city projects are being delivered across the country that improve the liveability, productivity and sustainability of our cities and towns. The Program supports collaborative projects between local governments, industry, research organisations, tech start-ups and manufacturers to address a wide range of urban challenges, such as congestion, environmental management, and public safety. For example, a number of projects are deploying 3D technologies for city modelling to inform planning and citizen consultations, while smart sensor networks are being rolled out to improve the responsiveness of municipal services such as lighting, traffic control and waste management.
Around Australia, local councils are balancing the demand for housing and urban infill with the need to conserve access to green space for urban amenity and environmental services. Like in other cities around the world, development of community gardens in cities around Australia is becoming increasingly popular. Supported by grass-roots volunteer communities, schools and other community groups, these initiatives provide valuable environmental services as well as contributing to health and nutrition. 
New developments and urban renewal projects in cities actively seek sustainability credentials in response to consumer demand and citizen expectations. For example, the Barangaroo development in Sydney is converting a 22-hectare disused container wharf into urban facilities, homes and parklands with a commitment to  be carbon neutral, water positive, create zero waste emissions and contribute to community wellbeing. 
Australia has progressively adapted its building standards to encourage greener, more sustainable construction practices and building operations systems, with compulsory and voluntary standards guiding retrofitting of existing structures and new construction. The CEFCis Sustainable Cities Investment Fund is helping a portfolio of commercial properties achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2030 using best practice energy efficiency technologies. The Infrastructure Sustainability Council of Australia and Green Building Council of Australia work collaboratively with government and industry across Australia to practically improve the sustainability of our cities helping realise many of the SDGs at a project and community level. New infrastructure is also being designed with resilience to natural hazards in mind.
Screenshot of Free to Be public interactive map of Melbourne
Making cities safer and more inclusive  for girls and women

Plan International Australia has been working to improve the safety of cities, particularly for young women and girls. In Melbourne, partnering with CrowdSpot and Monash Universityis XYX Lab, girls and women were invited to pin a public interactive map \0xECFree to Be and describe their experience of that area. The feedback was shared with authorities such as the City of Melbourne, Metro Trains, and Victoria Police,  to help create a safer city for young girls and women. This innovative Australian project has since been expanded to Sydney, as well as cities internationally including New Delhi, Kampala, Lima and Madrid. Plan International has also been improving girlsi safety in cities around the world through its \0xECSafer Cities for Girls program, including in Hanoi, where girls participated in a Minecraft workshop with local authority leaders  to re-design public places using ICT technology to improve safety. 

HELPING TO MANAGE REGIONAL  AND GLOBAL URBANISATION
The speed and scale of urban population growth is a challenge to Australiais partners in the Indo-Pacific region. Australiais development assistance supports our partner countries in the region to plan, manage and finance urban development, with a focus on building resilience to climate-related shocks. In line with the Sendai Framework, this includes work to support partner governments with urban planning, the delivery of essential services, public transport, waste collection and improved community awareness and engagement with municipal services. 
Australia is sharing its knowledge and expertise in urban water management, which is a key issue for cities facing issues of water security and extreme weather events alongside growing populations. Australiais Cooperative Research Centre for Water Sensitive Cities has formed a partnership with the Asian Development Bank to help developing cities in the Asia-Pacific region transition towards sustainability. The integrated approach takes into account the linkages between water management, infrastructure, urban planning and public health, particularly for the poor, disadvantaged and vulnerable. This work currently has application in Myanmar and Fiji. This complements other work with the Asian Development Bank, such as a project to improve urban planning and water supply management in Nukuialofa, Tonga.
Philippines: building back better after Typhoon Haiyan

Australia is supporting the Philippines government to build the disaster resilience of its systems, communities and people. This includes Australiais humanitarian and recovery assistance to the Philippines after Typhoon Haiyan (2013), one of the most intense tropical cyclones on record. Through Australiais support, 1,533 of the poorest and most vulnerable families in Tacloban City and Palo, Leyte were able to rebuild their homes and their lives. Australiais \0xECbuild back better approach has ensured that the new homes were built in low-hazard areas, and used disaster-resilient designs.





12 ENSURE SUSTAINABLE  
CONSUMPTION AND  
PRODUCTION PATTERNS

\0xECIn recent years, we have seen reduced per-person use of greenfield land, cars and energy, and reduced per-person waste to landfill. Apart from waste to landfill, these changes are not yet enough to cause absolute declines in impact. Policies will need to accelerate the per-person decline in consumption and pollution to offset population growth.
Australia State of the Environment 2016

Tackling waste, improving resource efficiency and encouraging sustainable consumption and production patterns are important issues in Australia. Many Australian businesses see the commercial and long-term benefits of sustainability, as well as future business opportunities in providing sustainability solutions. For example, at the systems level, supply chain logistics group, Brambles, deploys a circular share and reuse system through its vast network. This model supports greater collaboration opportunities, reducing costs, carbon emissions, waste, and demand on natural resources.
Addressing unsustainable patterns of consumption and production must be a combined effort across all tiers of government, business, industry, civil society and with the advice of academia. In production, it involves more innovative thinking and approaches to more efficiently use inputs and to reduce or reuse waste and by-products. At the consumption end, it relies on consumer awareness, building and shaping sustainable habits, and enabling or encouraging more sustainable choices. Australian Government entities encourage sustainable practices through the consideration of environmental sustainability in their procurements.
Governments, businesses, industries, academia and civil society are investigating opportunities to integrate circular economy principles and waste minimisation into their day-to-day operations. As demand for sustainable, ethical, recycled or recyclable products grow, businesses are adapting and innovating to meet this demand. For example, in 2018, Sydney hosted the first Australian Circular Fashion Conference, focused on responsible fashion practice and supporting economic growth.
Responsible Textile Production and Responsible Water Consumption 

The Australian Government and the Australian 
Water Partnership fund the Alliance for Water 
Stewardship (Indo-Pacific) to work with the Council of Textile and Fashion and member companies to improve water stewardship through their supply chains to achieve sustainable and responsible production of clothes for the Australian and international market. The Alliance collaborates closely with the Better Cotton Initiative to provide a holistic supply chain solution for water management so consumers will be able to buy responsibly with greater knowledge of where the article came from and how it was made.

In April 2018, federal, state and territory 
Environment Ministers agreed to update Australiais National Waste Policy and develop a set of circular economy principles. Together with the Australian Packaging Covenant Organisation, which is the primary mechanism to manage consumer packaging waste in Australia, the Ministers also agreed to cut the supply of waste and to introduce a target of making 100 per cent of packaging reusable, recyclable or compostable by 2025.
The Australian Governmentis waste focus to date has been on decreasing supply, for example by improving recycling through a variety of product stewardship initiatives. The Government will also increase demand for recycled goods and waste, including through investment in waste-toenergy projects through the CEFC and ARENA. Bioenergy currently accounts for 7 per cent of renewable electricity production and 1-3 per cent of fuel consumption.49 Under the Governmentis Emissions Reduction Fund, pilot projects may be able to earn carbon credits from waste-to-energy and other related projects.
Yarra Valley Wateris Waste to Energy facility (ReWaste), in Victoria (opened in 2017), has the capacity to convert the equivalent of 33,000 tonnes of commercial food waste into energy that powers a neighbouring sewerage treatment plant, with excess electricity returned to the electricity grid. The Australian Packaging Covenant encourages industry to take responsibility for improving the sustainability of its packaging and aims to change the culture of business to design more sustainable packaging, increase recycling rates and reduce packaging litter.
REDUCING AND REUSING WASTE IN AUSTRALIA 
Waste management and resource recovery is an ongoing challenge, particularly with the large number of relevant supply chains and the complexity of national and state regulatory frameworks. Reducing waste and improving our use of waste will achieve broader environmental, economic and social benefits and will become increasingly important as the population continues to grow. In addition to Australiais 2009 National Waste Policy, which will be updated in 2018, all state and territory governments in Australia have in place comprehensive legislative and policy instruments to protect the environment and conserve natural resources, including waste management and resource recovery legislation. Waste management outcomes and trends vary significantly across states and territories. 
The annual quantity of waste generated per capita in Australia declined slightly between 2006-7 and 2014-15, with a trend towards more recycling and more recovery of energy from waste.50 Australians, both individuals and industry, are now recycling more: we recycled 30 per cent more in 2014-15 than we did in 2006-07, and sent less to landfill.51 
The nature of waste has changed, with more complex goods now a significant component of landfill, making the process of recovery or recycling of components more challenging and resource-intensive. The National Television and Computer Recycling scheme, established in 2011, is a key initiative to drive reduction in electronic waste, which is growing three times faster than any other type of waste in Australia. The Scheme recycling targets for televisions, computers, printers and computer products is progressively increasing each year, to reach 80 per cent of waste generated by 2026-27.52 Wasted food has significant impacts on the environment and greenhouse gas emissions, while costing Australiais economy an estimated $20 billion per year. The Government has developed a National Food Waste Strategy in close consultation with industry, business, academia, other levels of government and civil society. It will support collective action towards halving Australiais food waste by 2030 through the adoption of circular economy approaches and raising consumer awareness. 
Love Food, Hate Waste

The states of Victoria and New South Wales, and the City of Brisbane, have introduced the Love Food, Hate Waste campaign that aims to raise awareness of avoidable food waste. The web and social media-based campaign raises community awareness of the scope and impacts of food waste, and provides an interactive toolkit to help households minimise their food waste. This includes a recipe finder for common avoidably wasted food, to encourage the use of these leftovers, and tips for menu planning, shopping, cooking and storage. In Victoria, the campaign also works with local governments to extend the food waste avoidance message in local communities.

Legislative measures and a financial incentive scheme have supported the establishment of an oil recycling industry in Australia that, in 201617, recycled 286 million litres of oil. Chemicals in Australia are regulated according to their use, whether in therapeutic goods, food, pesticides and veterinary medicines or as industrial chemicals. State and territory governments regulate the use and disposal of chemicals, while the Australian Government assesses the risks associated with the introduction (import or manufacture) of the chemicals and provides information to promote their safe use. 
Australia supports the United Nations 10Year Framework of Programs on sustainable consumption and production n elements of this framework are reflected in the National Waste Policy and Product Stewardship schemes. 
Australia is party to a number of international conventions and agreements on chemicals and hazardous waste that have been adopted into domestic policy and regulation. 

PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE 
CONSUMPTION, PRODUCTION  AND TOURISM ABROAD
Australia aims to support developing countries maximise sustainable benefits from their natural resources, including through assisting to improve extractives sector governance, transparency and gender equality outcomes and looking to develop existing and new opportunities in sustainable tourism. Australia is the largest donor to the Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative and the Extractives Global Programmatic Support multi-donor trust fund in the World Bank, helping resource-rich developing nations use their oil, gas and mineral resources sustainably and transparently, including with a consideration to gender equality. In Mongolia, Australia is sharing its expertise and experience by helping to establish a national geological survey and develop policies to better manage mining resources and industry.
As covered under SDG2, SDG6 and SDG14, our development assistance supports work to improve food security, nutrition and water management in developing countries while promoting sustainable use of resources. Australia Awards Africa runs short courses focusing on training government policy makers and business organisations to manage and use resources more sustainably for agricultural and fisheries production. 
Intrepid Travel, Australian Volunteers International and the Australian Government have formed a collaborative partnership in Myanmar to improve tourism suppliersi skills to boost economic growth to meet consumer demand. The initiative has trained 28 candidates in sustainable tourism management and supported 10 businesses to develop their tourism products to take to market. The Sustainable Tourism Hub is providing business advisory services and skills development to small and medium sized tourism enterprises, focusing on people who would otherwise face significant barriers to participation in the tourism market in Myanmar, such as women, ethnic minorities and people with disabilities. The partnership is designed to meet increasing demand for sustainable, local experiences in the Myanmar tourism market. 
Separately, Australian Volunteers program participants work in sustainable tourism in the Philippines and Fiji, with projects including a focus on employment opportunities for people with disabilities.




13 TAKE URGENT ACTION  
TO COMBAT CLIMATE  
CHANGE AND ITS IMPACTS

\0xECObservations and climate modelling paint a consistent picture of ongoing, long-term climate change interacting with underlying natural variability.  These changes affect many Australians, particularly changes associated with increases in the frequency or intensity of heat events, fire weather and drought. Australia will need to plan for and adapt to some level of climate change.
CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology,  
State of the Climate 2016

Climate change is a global issue that requires international cooperation. Australiais policy is to meet our international commitments on emissions reduction while at the same time maintaining energy security and affordability, consistent with 
SDG7.
We are seeing rising temperatures, changing rainfall patterns, sea-level rise and ocean acidification and changes to the frequency and intensity of many extreme weather events. Australia has long experienced climate variability; our climate can vary dramatically from one year to the next.
Changes to the climate are likely to have impacts on water resources, coasts, infrastructure, health, agriculture, fisheries and biodiversity, and the anticipated impacts vary across the country and sectors. 
Effective emissions reduction efforts and actions to adapt to a changing climate will bring important social, economic and environmental benefits. There are interactions between climate change and natural disasters, with climate change projected to affect the impact and frequency of many types of natural disasters, which can have cascading impacts on other environmental, social and economic outcomes. 

AUSTRALIAN ACTION
Australia addresses climate change and its impacts by taking direct action to reduce emissions; supporting climate science research; building resilience; and reducing additional pressures on systems affected by climate change. The Australian Governmentis National Climate Change Resilience and Adaptation Strategy guides adaptation to climate change. Officials from government and scientific agencies cooperate through the Australian Government Disaster and Climate Resilience Reference Group, to consider the risks arising from climate change and natural disasters.
Australia has an extensive scientific community in government-funded agencies and through the university sector working on a broad range of climate change issues and contributing to the global body of climate research. For example, the Earth Systems and Climate Change Hub conducts research to improve our understanding of past, current and future climates and to improve the utility of climate information. 
The Government provides education, training, research and information to help Australians understand and respond to climate change. CSIROis Sustainable Futures education program supports the teaching of sustainability and environment in Australian primary and high schools: in 2016-17, the program reached 814 schools nation-wide. The Government also publishes data sets and resources, such as through the Climate Change in Australia website, supported by CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology.
Financial instruments to reduce emissions

As part of its mitigation approach, the Government has allocated $2.55 billion to purchase carbon credits through a reverse auction process. To date, the Emissions Reduction Fund has secured more than 191 million tonnes of emissions reductions through six auctions. As well as reducing emissions, the Fundis projects provide important co-benefits including income and employment for rural and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and improved biodiversity. State and territory governments are similarly enabling Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoplesi participation in carbon projects. For example, the Aboriginal Carbon Fund, sponsored under the Queensland CarbonPlus Fund, is investing in capacity-building activities to support greater Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community participation in carbon markets. 

Australia has a comprehensive approach to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, including through a transition to low-emissions electricity, higher energy efficiency and increased use of clean energy, as covered by SDG7. Australia is on track to surpass its 2020 target and is committed under the Paris Agreement to reducing emissions by 26 to 28 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030. Most state and territory governments and many local councils have their own adaptation plans or strategies and have adopted aspirational or legislated emissions reduction targets, including some with targets of reaching net zero emissions or adopting up to 100 per cent renewable energy. 
Local authorities are using pledges, action plans and grant programs, alongside public information, training and networking opportunities to mobilise climate change and sustainability action in their communities and to build resilience and adaptation capacity. Seventy local councils across Australia, representing over 8 million people, have joined the Climate Councilis Cities Power Partnership, which encourages, motivates and accelerates local initiatives in emissions reduction and clean energy. The Partnership is forecast to grow to 100 councils in 2018 and allows sharing of approaches and experience among councils and publicises their results. The Victorian Government and Moyne Shire Council produced a Local Coastal Hazard Assessment for the town of Port Fairy, giving a detailed picture of Port Fairyis existing and future coastal hazards to inform planning and management options for the future. The assessment identified properties under threat from coastal inundation over specific planning horizons, including if no action is taken. The local community has been heavily involved in the townis response to the threats of climate change, including the development of an adaptation plan. 
Businesses are also leading by example, seeking to reduce emissions in their own operations. For example, Australia Post has saved 17,000 tonnes of carbon through its National Energy Management Plan, while Austral Fisheries became the worldis first certified Carbon Neutral seafood business through carbon offsets produced in Western Australia in the form of a native biodiverse reforestation project.
Indigenous Land Corporation savanna burning 
Photo: Department of the Environment and Energy
Under the Emissions Reduction Fund, the Indigenous Land Corporation registered a savanna fire management project on Fish River in the Northern Territory. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are using traditional knowledge and practices with scientific approaches to undertake Emissions Reduction Fund projects in Northern Australia. Savanna burning projects avoid greenhouse gas emissions by lowering the frequency of late dry-season bushfires that would otherwise produce substantial greenhouse gas emissions, also improving biodiversity and the conservation of threatened species. 
Income received from these projects is helping provide meaningful jobs in local communities. For example, the Western Arnhem Land Fire Abatement project is a collaborative project between Conoco Phillipsis Darwin LNG facility, Charles Darwin University, Indigenous ranger groups and the Northern Territory Government. The project has achieved over 1.5 million tonnes of emissions reductions, and supported more than 300 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander jobs per year over 10 years.
ADDRESSING THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
Australia supports effective international efforts to combat climate change and its impacts through our international agreements, bilateral and multilateral initiatives, and through Australiais development assistance. 
Australia in the Green Climate Fund
In addition to its $200 million commitment (201518) to the Green Climate Fund, as co-chair of the Fund in 2016-17, Australia has driven the Fundis role as a catalyst for private sector financing for low-emissions and climate-resilient projects in new markets. Under Australiais leadership, the Board established a Private Sector Facility equipped with a range of financial instruments including equity, debt, guarantees and grants. Australia also advocated on behalf of Pacific countries to ensure that regions particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change can also benefit from investment in projects that would assist with necessary mitigation and adaptation measures. 

The potential impacts of climate hazards on communities are linked to vulnerabilities associated with a range of complex, interrelated factors, such as poverty, environmental degradation, disability and gender inequality. 
Given its cross-cutting nature as an issue, Australia is integrating climate action and resilience across its development assistance program, taking a holistic multi-hazard approach to risk reduction.
Australia engages with developing countries, particularly across the Indo-Pacific, with effective disaster risk reduction, climate change science, adaptation planning and capacity building to help them achieve low-carbon, sustainable and resilient economic development. Our region is particularly vulnerable to climate change, and is home to seven of the 10 countries most at-risk of climate-related disasters: Vanuatu; Tonga; Philippines; Bangladesh; Solomon Islands; Cambodia and Papua New Guinea. In recent years, the Pacific experienced two of the most severe cyclones on record: Tropical Cyclone Pam in Vanuatu and Tropical Cyclone Winston in Fiji and Tonga. 
Australia supports efforts to maintain important forest resources to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries. Australia took a leading role in establishing the AsiaPacific Rainforest Partnership, which promotes action and supports progress on activities to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (known as REDD+) in the region. Our launch of the International Partnership for Blue Carbon addresses the role of coastal ecosystems n mangroves, tidal marshes and seagrasses n in climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Integrated Coastal Management Program Vietnam

Vietnamis Mekong Delta is home to 20 million people and is the countryis most important agricultural region, producing more than half of the countryis rice. The Delta is experiencing rising sea levels due to climate change, with some areas of the coast already retreating by 30 metres a year and coastal mangrove forests in dramatic decline. Sea-level rise leads to saltwater intrusion and saline soils, affecting agricultural production. Australia, in partnership with Germany, is supporting the Government of Vietnam to strengthen its planning, technical and financial capacities to foster climate-resilient development through cost-effective mangrove rehabilitation and coastal forest protection, alternative farming practices and improvement of dyke construction and management.





14 USE THE OCEANS, SEAS AND  
CONSERVE AND SUSTAINABLY  
MARINE RESOURCES FOR  
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

\0xECAustraliais challenge in the next decades is to realise the potential economic benefits of the marine estate while maintaining social and environmental values\0xD6 Oceans are inextricably linked to some of the most pressing challenges facing society, both in Australia and globally, in the next decades: maritime sovereignty and security, energy security, food security, biodiversity conservation and ecosystem health, climate variability and change and the policy challenge of equitable resource allocation.
Oceans Policy Science Advisory Group, Marine Nation 
2025: Marine Science to Support Australiais Blue Economy

Australia is committed to the protection of marine biodiversity and sustainable management of our marine assets. We have one of the worldis largest marine jurisdictions and the second largest extent of marine protected areas in the world, including the World Heritage-listed Great Barrier Reef.
Around 40 per cent of waters around Australia are included in marine parks,53 exceeding the SDG14 Target to conserve at least 10 per cent  of marine areas. We are implementing world-class management of marine parks, through a series  of management plans.
Our oceans are home to a diverse array of marine species, many of which occur nowhere else in the world. Our marine and coastal ecosystems provide food and nutrition, while facilitating trade, tourism and transportation, and underpinning sustainable economic growth through the Blue Economy. They provide essential resources and are of immense cultural importance and value to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations.
Australiais most recent State of the Environment report (2016) showed the marine environment in general to be in good condition, but with some individual species and habitats in poor condition or declining. Many of the current threats to the health and sustainability of the marine environment derive from land-based activities. Pressures on the marine environment may increase with the global growth in the  Blue Economy. 
Protecting and Managing the  Great Barrier Reef

Photo: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
The Great Barrier Reef is renowned internationally for its ecological importance and beauty. It is the largest and best known coral reef ecosystem in the world, extending over 2,300 kilometres along the Queensland coast and covering an area of 350,000 square kilometres. It includes over 2,900 reefs, 1,050 islands as well as extensive seagrass meadows, mangrove forests and softbottom habitats.
The Reef is one of the most healthy and wellmanaged coral reef ecosystems in the world. However, the future health and resilience of the reef remains under threat from a range of factors including climate change, poor water quality, coastal development and the remaining impacts from fishing. In 2016-17, the Reef experienced widespread coral mortality due to successive bleaching events and a severe tropical cyclone.
In April 2018, the Australian Government announced it will invest more than $500 million to protect the Reef. As part of this investment, the Government will work with the Great Barrier Reef Foundation to tackle crown-of-thorns starfish, reduce pollution into the Reef and mitigate the impacts of climate change. The investment also seeks to inspire Australians, philanthropists and companies to co-invest to protect the Reef. Environmental management and compliance operations will also be expanded.
This investment directly supports the intensive work underway through the joint Australian and Queensland Governmentsi Reef 2050 Plan, the overarching framework for protecting and managing the Reef. The Plan sets clear actions, targets, objectives and outcomes to drive and guide management of the Reef. The Plan firmly responds to the pressures facing the Reef and will address cumulative impacts and increase the Reefis resilience to longer-term threats like climate change.

AUSTRALIAN ACTION
Australia has a range of policies and legislation in place to address key threats to marine life, protect iconic species and support sustainable use of ocean resources. Governments, businesses and civil society, including communities and individuals, are working to address marine debris and related issues such as by removing rubbish and preventing dumping on beaches and coastal areas. For example, the Tangaroa Blue Foundationis Australian Marine Debris Initiative collects data from rubbish collected during beach and river clean-up events and analyses it to determine how to stop the rubbish at source, and provides an important community awareness and education function. 
State and territory governments use integrated planning approaches to their marine areas for the sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture, trade and tourism as well as landbased activities that have an impact on the marine environment. For example, the Victorian Governmentis Port Phillip Bay Environmental Management Plan provides objectives for government, industry and the community to achieve long-term health outcomes for the Bayis 1,934 square kilometres of coastal waters. The Plan includes support for partnerships undertaking activities that will support the environmental health of the Bay and its rich diversity of marine flora and fauna.
Indigenous Rangers

The work of Indigenous rangers throughout Australia is instrumental in protecting and conserving Australiais environment and heritage assets, including in the marine environment. Seventeen Indigenous rangers have been authorised to take on marine Inspector duties as part of an initiative delivered by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. The rangers will be empowered to monitor and enforce parts of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act, working with local communities to protect the Reef and support marine conservation efforts.
The current program will train 40 additional 
Indigenous rangers and employ up to seven Indigenous Compliance Officers to strengthen marine conservation efforts along the Far North Queensland coast. 

FISHERIES MANAGEMENT
Australia has one of the best managed commercial fisheries in the world.54 The Australian Government, state and territory governments and the fishing industry support research to ensure the sustainable management of target species, and to understand and minimise impacts on non-target species. Effective management of key commercial stocks has seen overall improvement over recent years, with none classified as subject to overfishing. With jurisdiction over one of the largest fishing areas in the world, addressing illegal or unsustainable fishing practices in Australian waters is a particular challenge. The Government combats unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices through maritime enforcement activities to support efforts in restoring fish stocks to levels that can produce sustainable yield. Illegal fishing by foreign nationals in Australian waters is often driven by overfishing in the fishersi own waters, a lack of alternative ways to earn money and poverty.
Internationally, illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing can have a significant impact on economic development, jobs and growth, particularly for our neighbouring communities in the Pacific. Australia provides training and support for officials from Pacific Island countries to help them prevent, deter and eliminate illegal fishing. Partnerships also play a key role. WWFAustralia, WWF-Fiji and WWF-New Zealand have worked with industry and technological partners to implement the use of blockchain technology in tuna fisheries in the Pacific islands. Use of the technology will enable the tracing of tuna to assure consumers of its origin, sustainability, and whether the tuna was caught legally. 

PROTECTING OUR GLOBAL MARINE ENVIRONMENT
As an island nation, we are acutely aware of the essential nature of the marine environment and resources to our Pacific neighbours, many of whom are small island developing states. Coastal fisheries provide the primary or secondary source of income for up to 50 per cent of Pacific households and are an important source of nutrition. 
We are building Pacific countriesi capacity to adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate variability and to conserve and sustainably use their marine resources, including through regional organisations like the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Program, the Secretariat for Pacific Communities and the Office of the Pacific Ocean Commissioner. Through ACIAR, Australia is supporting sustainable communitybased fisheries management to enhance food security, nutrition and diversified livelihoods 
for the people of Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. In addition, Australia supports the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security (CTI-CFF), which promotes improved management of the globally-significant coral reef and coastal ecosystems in the Coral Triangle north of Australia. CTI-CFF participating countries are the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
Australia is a major contributor to international scientific efforts to study and monitor the oceans, including through the Integrated Marine Observing System and the Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network. CSIRO has worked for decades to support the capacity of developing countries to conserve and sustainably use marine resources and to engage in national, regional and global scientific programs. CSIROis work on modelling and monitoring marine litter movement, transport and accumulation for the UN Environment Program specifically addressed knowledge gaps identified as of global significance. CSIRO staff provided expertise to support this for numerous bodies such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, the International Whaling Commission and the Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Protection.
We are supporting the Pacific Maritime 
Boundaries Project, in partnership with the Pacific Community and Pacific Island countries, to help settle outstanding maritime boundaries through technical geospatial and legal assistance. Australia is strongly supporting efforts to develop an agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to address the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. We are negotiating in the WTO to prohibit subsidies for illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and for fishing that negatively affects overfished stocks.
Blue Economy Aquaculture Challenge

In 2016, Australia funded the Blue Economy Aquaculture Challenge, supporting ten winning submissions that have potential to transform sustainable aquaculture practices. While focused on SDG14, many of the solutions promised outcomes linked to other SDGs, such as health, nutrition, gender equality, employment, and sustainable production and consumption. The winners received funding and tailored support to pilot and scale their projects. EnerGaia, a winning entrant, has expanded its operations bringing their modular tank system for growing nutritious spirulina from rooftops in Bangkok to small scale farms in India. Another winner, AgriProtein, is the worldis largest producer of black soldier fly larvae, a replacement for ocean-caught fishmeal food. Fed on waste, it produces similar growth as ocean-caught fishmeal. 





15 SUSTAINABLE  
PROTECT, RESTORE  
AND PROMOTE  USE OF TERRESTRIAL 
ECOSYSTEMS

\0xECThe main pressures affecting the Australian environment today are the same as in 2011, climate change, land-use change, habitat fragmentation and degradation  and invasive species.  
Australia State of the Environment, 2016
Australiais land, its systems and resources are vital to our economic development and prosperity, our health and wellbeing and to our cultural and environmental heritage. Connection to land is the basis of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander relationships, identities, cultural practices and wellbeing.
Australiais environment, social amenity and economy have benefited significantly from a strong biosecurity system. These have kept Australia free of many pests and diseases, protecting our natural environment, resulting in safe and high-quality food production for domestic use and export.
With a unique environment and climate, and a continent that has existed for thousands of years in geographic isolation, we are the custodian of a range of unique flora and fauna that are not found anywhere else on Earth. We are one of only seventeen \0xECmegadiverse countries. The majority of species of Australiais fauna and flora, both terrestrial and marine, are still being discovered and described. Australia has 16 natural World Heritage sites that protect some of our most unusual and unique ecosystems.
Australiais biodiversity has been modified by humans through land clearing, habitat fragmentation, invasive species, burning, harvesting of species from land and sea, and climate change. Australiais most recent State of the Environment Report (2016) found Australiais biodiversity is under increased threat and has, overall, continued to decline; more than 1,700 species and ecological communities are known to be threatened and at risk of extinction.  Our current approaches to biodiversity management need to be continually improved to keep pace with the scale and magnitude of current pressures. Government investment alone is unable to address the scale of the issues and  we are moving towards more collaborative,  cross-sectoral approaches.
AN INTERLINKED APPROACH TO LOOKING AFTER THE LAND
Governments in Australia, together with businesses, environmental non-government organisations, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, community groups and individuals all contribute to positive biodiversity outcomes both through concerted efforts and implementing sustainable approaches. Given the linkages between biodiversity, economic activity, and health and wellbeing, everyone has an interest in maintaining the health and productivity of the land, but particularly those who derive their income and employment from it, or have a cultural connection. 
Governments and local authorities are integrating biodiversity management into future planning, including addressing the issue of habitat fragmentation through land-clearing. Australian natural resource management programs have benefited agricultural productivity, environmental conservation and community engagement, with flow on economic and social benefits. 
The National Landcare Program is a partnership between governments, business, communities and individuals to protect and conserve Australiais water, soil, plants, animals and ecosystems, as well as to support the productive and sustainable use of these valuable resources. The program addresses problems such as loss of vegetation, soil degradation, introduction of pest weeds and animals, changes in water quality and flows and changes in fire regimes. Local projects are also supported at the state and territory and local levels, working together with Landcare groups, such as through the Lismore City Council partnership with the New South Wales Government under the Rural Landholder Initiative. 
The Australian Government recognises and respects the knowledge that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have in managing Australiais land and sea, and their expertise in conserving biodiversity through their connection with the land, the environment and its systems and cycles. By mid-2017, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoplesi rights and interests in land were fully recognised across more than 40 per cent of the land area of Australia. This included native title determinations over approximately 34 per cent of Australia, with a further 26 per cent of Australia subject to application for recognition of native title rights. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander heritage sites are protected through the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, which establishes the 
National Heritage List and Commonwealth 
Heritage List that includes natural, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and historic places that are of outstanding heritage value to Australia.
Sustainable management of Australiais forests is underpinned by regional forest agreements, which enable their protection as important habitats, providing valuable environmental services and social amenity, as well as their sustainable use for economic resources. Approximately 26.7 million hectares of native forest and commercial plantations are certified under the Program for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC) accredited Responsible Wood Certification Scheme, while 1.2 million hectares have been certified by the Forest Stewardship Council. Australia has implemented laws to promote legal and sustainable production of timber products, and works with trading partners to support sustainable forest management and trade of legal timber products.
Australian Business and Biodiversity Initiative

The Australian Business and Biodiversity Initiative is an alliance of organisations from business, the not-for-profit sector, academia and government committed to promoting the mainstreaming of biodiversity into business practices and decisionmaking. Established in 2014, the Initiativeis mission is to raise awareness and improve the understanding of ecosystem service loss and degradation as a critical risk and opportunity for businesses, to support the development and uptake of practical solutions, and ultimately improve the health and resilience of Australiais environment and economy.

In Australia, more than 19 per cent (or 150 million hectares) of our terrestrial land area is permanently protected under national or state environment law. This protection aims to achieve long-term conservation of nature, including threatened species and ecological communities. Our National Parks protect some of the countryis most stunning natural areas and are a haven for many species. The Threatened Species Commissioner brings a national focus to conservation efforts, for example, the work to tackle the impacts of invasive species such as feral cats and foxes through creation of island and fenced safe havens.
Australiais vast national reserve network is made up of more than 10,500 properties, 

managed by State and Territory legislation and water resource management plans. Joint leadership by jurisdictions under the Lake Eyre Basin Intergovernmental Agreement, coupled with strong scientific advice and community involvement, is a major contributing factor to the Basinis good condition.
the Australian continent. Among the worldis largest internally-draining river basins, the Basin supports ecological, socio-economic and cultural values of very high national and international significance. The Basin supports grazing, mining, recreational and tourism activities, and human settlements including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities with significant cultural ties to the area.
The Basin stands out among the great river systems of the world because it is maintained in a stable state. Most of the current risks to the Basinis water resources and river ecosystems are directly associated with human activities and developments. However, 

SUPPORTING GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEMS
The Australian Government is an active participant in many international forums on biodiversity, environmental and forestry matters, and is committed to its obligations under relevant international agreements. We are a donor to international environment efforts including through the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund and the Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund. Australia is a major contributor to international scientific efforts to study and monitor the land, including the Intergovernmental Group on Earth Observations, a key body using data to answer questions on sustainable development. 
Australia treats wildlife trafficking and poaching as a serious crime. Australia has strict requirements governing the export of native mammals, birds, reptiles or amphibians and supports the international community to protect wildlife and forestry resources by implementing the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). Australia has advanced these efforts in the G20, United Nations General Assembly, APEC and the Hanoi Conference on illegal wildlife trade. We are working to build the capacity of Pacific Island CITES parties to implement the agreement, encouraging accession by nonparties and assisting with the introduction of electronic wildlife permitting systems to support legal, well-managed and sustainable trade in wildlife. Australian academic institutions and research organisations have worked with partners including the International Tropical Timber Organization to develop DNA \0xECfingerprinting of timber to assist with verification of legal timber in supply chains. 
Digital Earth Australia: Geoscience Australia

Geoscience Australiais Water Observations from Space, detailing the extent of water observations over the Burketown and Normanton regions in northern Queensland.
Digital Earth Australia is a world-first analysis platform that will deliver a unique capability to process, interrogate, and present Earth observation satellite data. It will track changes across Australia in unprecedented detail, identifying soil and coastal erosion, crop growth, water quality, and changes to cities and regions. The products created by Australian businesses and researchers using the platform will be transferrable to international markets as they evolve. While the underpinning satellite data is global, Australia is sharing the underlying technology with the world for free, so other countries can also apply it to their own sustainable development challenges.





PROMOTE PEACEFUL AND  
16 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
INCLUSIVE SOCIETIES FOR  
AND PROVIDE ACCESS TO  

JUSTICE FOR ALL
\0xECDemocracy represents the form of governance that is most likely to grow and sustain liberal values and encourage positive civic engagement. The process by which citizens can elect those who govern them, protected by a rule of law and informed by a free press, acts as a bulwark against the arbitrary exercise of executive authority. 
Professor Peter Shergold AC, Chancellor of Western Sydney 
University, \0xECRe-imagining Public Service, Speech to the Australia Social Policy Association, 4 August 2016
Australia has a long record of contributing to the development and strengthening of the rulesbased global order, including the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 and the development of international rules and norms. Our development assistance helps partner countries join and adhere to international rulesbased processes.
Australia was a strong advocate for the inclusion of a separate goal on governance and law and justice throughout negotiations of the 2030 Agenda. SDG16 lies at the heart of Australian values and our commitment to political, economic and religious freedoms; liberal democracy; the rule of law; and good governance, transparency and accountability. These elements are crucial to respecting, promoting and protecting human rights; achieving global security; and ensuring sustainable social, economic and environmental development as embodied in the SDGs and the Addis Agenda.

LAW AND INSTITUTIONS
The Australian system of government upholds the rule of law and separates the powers of the three branches of government: legislative, executive and judicial. Our Constitution establishes core principles and divides power between the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments. 
The rule of law underpins the governance of Australian society, with citizens and government bound by, and entitled to, the benefit of laws. The legislative process is transparent and the community is able to participate in the law-making process. A fair, accessible and transparent justice system provides integrity and oversight mechanisms. Independent bodies such as ombudsmen and special commissioners, in addition to an independent media, hold governments to account.
Australiais vibrant and varied civil society and discourse are key features of our democracy, cohesive society and success as a multicultural country. Compulsory voting from the age of 18 encourages civic engagement and participation. While legal and institutional frameworks support peace and inclusion in Australian society, these are bolstered by the participation of open and active communities which encourage debate and build collective resilience and trust. Australiais many volunteers play a key role in supporting activities of community groups and institutions which are particularly important to the inclusion of the disadvantaged.
Australia is considered one of the safest countries in the world.55 In cooperation with law enforcement authorities, Australians have supported the public safety objectives inherent in our strict firearms legislation, which includes controls on imports and exports, and significant penalties for firearms trafficking. A national firearms amnesty in 2017 collected a total of 57,324 firearms.
Our laws criminalising human trafficking, slavery, slavery-like practices and all forms of violence against children are complemented by joint efforts by governments and civil society to support victims and to bring perpetrators to justice. Trafficking in children carries a penalty of up to 25 years imprisonment. The Australian Government funds the Australian Red Cross to provide comprehensive support for people suspected to have experienced human trafficking, or slavery-like exploitation. Through its Freedom Partnership to End Modern Slavery initiative, the Salvation Army runs a dedicated safe house for victims of human trafficking and slavery. In addition, My Blue Sky is a website dedicated to preventing and addressing forced marriage by providing tailored content on what forced marriage is and an opportunity to contact AntiSlavery Australia for free, confidential legal and migration advice.
Australia has a strong regime to detect, deter and combat money-laundering and terrorism financing, and collect, analyse and disseminate financial intelligence on suspicious financial transactions and other matters submitted by regulated businesses (such as financial, remittance and gambling services). Australiais Fintel Alliance is a public-private partnership, which combats money laundering and terrorism financing by assisting the private sector to identify and report suspicious transactions and help law enforcement partners investigate and prosecute serious criminal activity. Australia has broad cross-government cooperation on the detection and disruption of serious fraud, corruption and serious crime.
The Public Data Policy Statement released in December 2015 commits Australian Government entities to release non-sensitive data as open by default, supplementing existing legislation such as the Freedom of Information Act 1982, which facilitates access to Government records. Australia has also committed to the Open Government Partnership, a multilateral initiative that commits governments to transparency, citizen empowerment, anti-corruption and using new technologies to improve governance. 
SDG16 and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples face significant challenges across aspects of SDG16.66 They are more likely than non- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to be victims of violence. In 2014-15, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children up to 17 years old were 6.7 times more likely to be the subject of substantiated child protection notifications56 than non- Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are over-represented in Australiais criminal justice system. As at June 2016, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples represented 3 per cent of Australiais population yet comprised 27 per cent of all prisoners.  
In 2016, the Australian Government tasked the Australian Law Reform Commission to conduct an inquiry into the incarceration rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Commission made a series of recommendations noting that reducing the incarceration rate, coupled with greater support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in contact with the criminal justice system, will, in turn, lead to improved health, social and economic opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Commissionis report was tabled in Parliament on 28 March 2018. 
The Council of Australian Governments is working to improve the coordination of government services, especially in-prison training and rehabilitation programs, the Prison to Work program and employment services, health and income support services, to better support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander prisoners, both men and women, to move into employment, security and prosperity. One approach is the development of a new model of \0xECthrough care to support young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men and women to transition out of detention and return to their communities and families safely and without reoffending. This approach provides intensive case management to support rehabilitation and address the underlying causes of offending behaviour, including low levels of education, unemployment, drug and alcohol abuse and poor community engagement. 
The Healing Foundation conducts healing work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men that is impacting positively on families and communities in the Northern Territory and the Torres Strait. This project is supporting men through cultural, educational and therapeutic healing activities; assisting men to gain confidence and the capacity to take up meaningful employment, and overcome issues such as family and domestic violence, incarceration, and poor health and wellbeing.
The Australian Government supports state and territory governments and local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in their efforts to improve Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander justice and community safety outcomes, including through local justice reinvestment and place-based approaches. The Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission is developing new resources to increase the awareness, understanding and use of Aboriginal cultural rights under the Stateis Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities. 

CONTRIBUTING TO GLOBAL PEACE  AND JUSTICE
Australia will continue to support and build effective governance, peace and stability around the world, including through our membership of the UN Human Rights Council and other multilateral mechanisms, periodic membership of the Security Council, the Australia Group, the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Bali Process. Australia has played a leading role in establishing new rules and norms in areas as diverse as conventional weapons, digital trade, internet governance, global health standards and regional approaches to irregular migration and human trafficking.  
We are a consistent contributor to the UN 
Department of Political Affairs, the UN Peacebuilding Fund and the World Bankis State and Peacebuilding Fund, which all support conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts, inclusive mediation and dialogue processes for peace. The Australian Government is a global leader advancing commitments to the Women, Peace and Security agenda. We have integrated a gender perspective into international peace and security policy outcomes and in training Australian personnel deployed to conflict zones to ensure we meet the needs of women in complex crises.  
Australia is assisting the acceleration of the 
SDG16 targets through its support for the 
Pathfinders for Peaceful, Just and Inclusive Societies initiative at New York University and norm-setting policy forums like the OECD Development Assistance Committee Governance Network and International Network on Conflict and Fragility.  In the Pacific, we are working with the Institute for Economics and Peace to develop baseline data to track progress under SDG16.
By seeking to understand how politics operates, how authority is exercised and how decisionmaking works in each context, we invest in building effective institutions that can deliver stability, social cohesion, inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction, and in advancing gender equality. This includes assistance to governments, civil society and the private sector. 
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (2003-17)

Australia played a major role in the 15-nation 
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI) to address lawlessness, economic collapse and state failure and re-set government institutions. RAMSI was formulated, drawn from and overseen by PIF nations. Australian officials from DFAT, Australian Federal Police and the Australian Defence Force led military and police from five nations to restore law and order. RAMSI is recognised as one of the most successful multilateral stabilisation interventions ever and an example of Pacific diplomacy and cooperation. Public support for RAMSI and its work also remained high throughout.

Australia shares its experience and expertise to help strengthen capacity and leadership in our region. We have large governance programs in Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands and the Philippines. The Australian Federal Police works in the Pacific, Indonesia and Timor-Leste to help reduce violence, deliver justice and combat corruption. 
The Attorney-Generalis Department and Department of Home Affairs deliver international legal assistance programs to help strengthen national legal systems, promote the rule of law and prevent crime.




17 IMPLEMENTATION AND REVITALISE  
STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF 
THE GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR  
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

\0xECThe SDGs provide points of focus around which we can innovate and collaborate in the search for solutions to critical global and local sustainability challenges, while at the same time positioning competitively for the future. Through our participation in the UN Global Compact and the incorporation of the SDGs into our strategies, we will continue to invest in these priority areas and work together with Governments, civil society, academia, and other businesses to realise the opportunities the SDGs offer to all, and we call on other business leaders to join us.
Australian CEO Statement of Support for the  
Sustainable Development Goals

BUSINESS AND MULTI-SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS

Government, the business sector and civil society partnerships are vital to making progress on the 2030 Agenda, offering innovative and responsive solutions to complex challenges. 
Companies will continue to draw on their unique skills and expertise to deliver on the SDGs in profit, non-profit and shared-value enterprises with promising efforts in social impact investing, creating shared value initiatives and industryled interfaces like the Australian Business and Biodiversity Initiative. 
Our work with a wide range of partners, including civil society organisations, the private sector and multilateral organisations, helps to magnify the impact of Australiais development assistance program. Australia is focused on using ODA to catalyse greater investment from other sources including the private sector, in accordance with the Addis Agenda. For example, the Business Partnerships Platform actions Australian government policy of engaging the private sector in aid and development by matching funding from business for projects that support commercial objectives, while using private sector capabilities to address intractable development challenges.
Sector Wide Engagement: Extractives

In April 2018, Cardno International Development, in partnership with the Columbia Center on Sustainable Investment and the UN SDSN convened a roundtable, \0xEBThe Extractives Sector and the UN SDGs: partnerships for progressing the goalsi. Fifty-two stakeholders from the private sector, academia, civil society and government explored innovative approaches to mobilising and accelerating resources towards Agenda 2030. Profiling examples of leadership and collaboration, key take-aways included:
\0xEF SDGs need to be integrated into existing reporting mechanisms rather than by establishing new ones, and could also be integrated into existing processes, including impact assessments.
\0xEF Shared value models hold excellent potential for SDG progress: simultaneously addressing business, environmental and social challenges; linking SDGs with core business; and drawing on partnerships.
\0xEF Trust and transparency are key components of successful partnerships, which should be co-designed and supported by independent brokers who establish frameworks, provide advice, and keep objectives at front of mind. 

The SDGs have inspired new cross-sectoral partnerships, such as that between ACFID, ACOSS, GCNA and SDSN Australia/Pacific, which delivered Australian SDG summits in 2016 and 2018, the latter in collaboration with the 
UNAA. The Western Australian SDG Network, established in 2016, brings together partners 
from civil society, the education sector, local government and engaged community members to localise and build understanding, ownership and action for the SDGs in Western Australia.
Australia takes a multi-stakeholder approach to many of the issues contained in the 2030 Agenda, both domestically and internationally. This includes Government engaging in open dialogue on issues with civil society and business, drawing on expertise from the university sector, or playing a facilitator or convening role in bringing groups together. Many of the examples provided in this review involve a multi-stakeholder approach. Further examples include the Prime Ministeris Community Business Partnership, which brings together leaders from the business and community sectors to promote philanthropic giving and investment in Australia. Internationally, Australia is a founding co-chair of the Global Action on Disability Network that brings together civil society, donor governments, multilateral agencies and the private sector to advance disability inclusion in sustainable development and humanitarian action. The Minister for International Development and the Pacific leads Australiais engagement in this network.
Recognising the role that sport can play across the SDGs, DFATis sport for development program is built on partnerships between the Australian Government and Australian, regional and Pacific Island sporting organisations and federations. The program supports sixteen sports across nine countries that deliver activities to address primary risk factors associated with non-communicable diseases, particularly physical inactivity, and address inequalities experienced by women, girls and people living with disability. 
GOVERNMENT TO GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIPS
Australia has a responsibility to contribute to global efforts to reduce poverty, alleviate suffering and promote sustainable development, as a prosperous country with a commitment to global stability and prosperity. We work through our bilateral and multilateral relationships at a Government level, in addition to multi-sectoral partnerships including with civil society, the education and research and business sectors to address the 2030 Agenda.
Australia directly supports developing country partnersi engagement in the 2030 Agenda, with a focus on both the Addis Agenda and the SDGs, including funding for the Asia Pacific Development Effectiveness Facility, which helps countries better understand and manage their development finance (public, private, domestic and international) and direct this finance to the SDGs. Australia also supports Indonesiais SDG Secretariat to assist with Indonesiais implementation of the 2030 Agenda and supported establishment of the Pacific Roadmap for Sustainable Development. We participate in a wide range of partnerships that enable us to deliver collectively on the SDGs, for example through the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Program, promoting cooperation on protecting and improving the environment and delivering sustainable environmental development outcomes in the Pacific region.
We will continue to build innovative solutions in partnership with other countries, private sector, civil society and engaged individuals. As an example, the ASEAN-Australia smart cities program, announced at the ASEAN-Australia special summit in March 2018, will support members of ASEAN to create smart, sustainable cities in a rapidly urbanising environment, through education, training, technical assistance and support for innovation. 
MIKTA: an innovative partnership

MIKTA brings together Mexico, Indonesia, Republic of Korea (ROK), Turkey and Australia. The group seeks to build consensus on complex and challenging issues, drawing on the diverse perspectives of its members and their shared interest in an effective, rulesbased global order. MIKTAis diversity means we have an opportunity to build consensus across very different constituencies, increasing our understanding of the various positions and perspectives. Our exchanges include collaboration between academics, diplomats, journalists, parliamentarians, and experts in areas ranging from trade to international security, gender equality, governance and sustainable development. In July 2017, Australia coordinated a MIKTA officialsi mission in the Pacific to learn about the sustainable development challenges facing the region, with a focus on climate change, oceans management and regional cooperation. Together, we launched the MIKTA Education Challenge in 2017 to increase access to education in emergencies, particularly for girls.

MULTILATERAL PARTNERSHIPS

Australia has benefited from a global rules-based system and open markets to underpin our own peace and prosperity and we want to help others, particularly in our region, to do the same. In the face of challenging global growth prospects in the medium term and rising trade tensions, Australia continues to advance a strong case for open markets and the rules-based system in the WTO, APEC, the G20 and the OECD. 
Recognising the role that unsustainable debt can play in slowing down economic development, Australia was an original contributor to the World Bankis Heavily Indebted Poor Country initiative. More recently, our cooperation with partners in the Indo-Pacific region includes assistance with public financial management. Australia was a founding member of the Addis Ababa 
Tax Initiative in 2015, and is on track to fulfil its commitment to doubling expenditure on domestic resource mobilisation-related assistance to developing countries by 2020.

MOBILISING RESOURCES FOR THE SDGS
In line with the Addis Agenda, our development assistance recognises aid flows into developing countries are far outweighed by foreign direct investment, equity flows and remittances, and takes account of the important role of a countryis own domestic resources. Our aid efforts include a focus on catalysing this flow of finance to support sustainable growing economies, for example through strengthening partnersi tax systems to better mobilise domestic resources for providing social services. 
Our development assistance and international engagement responds to the needs of our partners to build inclusive workforces, economies and institutions while managing a range of challenges. It also reflects the relevant experience and expertise Australia can provide. Australiais assistance works across sectors to:
\0xEF Improve governance, education and health and enhance productivity in agriculture, fisheries and water
\0xEF Build the infrastructure and capacity to strengthen developing countries' ability to benefit from trade
\0xEF Reduce poverty and promote the inclusive participation of the most disadvantaged, including women and girls and people living with disabilities
\0xEF Tackle inequality and climate change, and boost resilience to natural disasters.
Our impact investing initiatives include programs that build market infrastructure; support businesses and social enterprises to become investment-ready; and participate in transactions to reduce risk for private investors, encouraging them to invest. For example, Australiais Emerging Markets Impact Investment Fund will help small and medium-sized enterprises that are actively improving the lives of the poor in South and South East Asia. In the Pacific, Australiais Pacific Readiness for Investing in Social Enterprise program helped secure a $600,000 investment by an Australian impact investment fund in 2017 to support a Vanuatu coffee producer plant 200 hectares of coffee trees after their plantation was devastated by a major tropical cyclone. Small and medium-sized enterprises are major drivers of economic growth, but often lack access to capital to expand. With loans, equity and guarantees through the new fund, we will be reducing the risk for other investors and attracting private investment for SDG outcomes. 
Supporting inclusive economic growth through partnerships and capacity building in trade

Australia is party to a number of high quality bilateral and regional FTAs that support our trade and economic growth as well as that of our trading partners. The ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA, which entered into force for most parties in 2010, included a program to build the capacity of ASEAN countries to support implementation, for example providing \0xEBtrain the traineri workshops in rules of origin for customs officials. Negotiation of the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER) Plus incorporated support from Australia and New Zealand for Pacific Island countries in their negotiations, including funding for the Office of the Chief Trade Adviser and training for negotiators. Such capacity building can carry through into future negotiations and agreements with other trading partners.
Australia provides complete duty-free quotafree conditions for imports from least developed countries (LDCs). In 2016, Australia initiated a review of its Generalized System of Preferences, with the view to modernising the rules of origin and updating the eligibility requirements in line with the recommendations of the Ministerial Decision on LDC Rules of Origin from the Tenth WTO Ministerial Conference. Australia demonstrated leadership on the WTO LDC Services Waiver. We are now delivering trade in services training to LDCs. Australia actively encouraged WTO Members to accept the Protocol Amending the WTO Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

PARTNERS IN TECHNOLOGY,  RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
Australiais government-funded science agencies and universities all have extensive international connections that support international collaboration and knowledge sharing across the full spectrum of the SDGs. They contribute to technology transfer and training, and strengthening key infrastructure including measurement capabilities in the Indo-Pacific. They also deliver on the Addis Agendais commitment to science, technology, innovation and capacitybuilding. As prominent, leading, and often very large institutions with a broad remit around the creation and dissemination of knowledge, universities have a natural alignment with the aims of the SDGs and unique capabilities to contribute to their implementation, as has been shown in a number of examples in this Review. 
The Vice Chancellors of nine Australian universities have signed the SDSN Australia/ Pacific-led University Commitment to the SDGs, which affirms the universityis intention to support and promote the SDGs through their research, education and operations, as well as to implementing new and innovative initiatives across research, education, operations and community leadership, in response to and in support of the SDGs.

Aus4Innovation collaboration with Vietnam

Aus4Innovationis system-wide approach will allow the Government of Vietnam to prepare for emerging challenges and technological transformation by building a stronger national innovation system. Partnerships between Australian and Vietnamese public and private institutions will build local capacity and attract new funding to ensure enduring benefits. Aus4Innovation will support development of Vietnamis innovation capacity through research commissioned to underpin preparedness for a digital future, industry relevant research and technology transfer in agriculture, and modes of creative thinking in education to feed an entrepreneurial and start-up economy.


DATA FOR THE GOALS
AUSTRALIAiS APPROACH TO DATA  FOR THE SDGS
Australia recognises the importance of collecting and reporting data against the SDG Indicators: relevant, quality and timely statistics provide evidence for national decision-making and policy. We have made concerted efforts to identify relevant, pre-existing data sets that match or closely align to the SDG Indicators. In line with the UN Statistical Commissionis guidance, Australia has approached the issue of data analysis, identification and reporting from the perspective that countries will approach the indicator framework in line with their own national priorities and capabilities. 
Australiais consideration of the SDG Indicators has been a whole-of-government exercise. Australiais national statistical agency, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) undertook a data mapping exercise for the SDGs, in conjunction with lead agencies, exploring both ABS and other Government-held data sources to identify relevant and appropriate data sources that could support an SDG Indicator. Agencies then assessed the datasets for publication, based on data quality, similarity to the UN methodology and timeliness of reporting. 
Like other countries, Australia has challenges in identifying datasets. These include: 
\0xEF the diversity of potential data providers within the Australian Government
\0xEF that datasets can often be spread across a number of Australian jurisdictions; and
\0xEF the number of SDG Indicators that have no, as yet, accepted methodology for collection (the Tier III Indicators). 
The Australian Government has developed an 
SDG data platform to house available Australian Government datasets on the SDG Indicators, and to indicate the status of Australian data collection against all 232 SDG Indicators. The platform is a whole-of-government initiative, funded by DFAT, produced by Australiais Department of Environment and Energy, in close cooperation with the ABS, and relying on data contributions from across all relevant government agencies. The platform provides a single point of access to anyone wishing to find out about the status of Australiais data on each of the SDG Indicators.
As progress is made on identifying datasets and on refining the SDG Indicators themselves n in particular, as Indicators move from a Tier III to a Tier I or II n additional datasets will be uploaded to the platform. Data on the platform will be updated as new datasets become available and historical data will be retained to allow consideration of a time series of datasets.
The platform will also assist with streamlining reporting for other purposes: the SDGs interact with a great number of other policy and reporting instruments, such as the Sendai Framework, and we need to be conscious of the burden of reporting, ensuring we are not reporting against multiple sets of similar indicators. Agencies are also considering the inclusion of alternate datasets that are more appropriate to the Australian context, in keeping with the intention of the SDG Indicator framework, with the UN noting that SDG Indicators may be complemented by indicators at the regional and national levels.
Australiais National Cities Performance Framework 57

Australiais Smart Cities Plan (outlined under SDG11) includes a commitment to measure the success of Government policies and inform Australians about the trends and changes in our cities. The National Cities Performance Framework supports this approach by bringing together critical economic, social and environmental data for Australiais largest cities into an easily-accessible Dashboard. The Dashboard is the first official framework of its kind in Australia and was developed to help Australiais three levels of government, industry and communities better understand the performance of our cities. The Dashboard focuses on jobs and skills; infrastructure and investment; liveability and sustainability; innovation and digital opportunities; governance; planning and regulation; and housing. The indicators on the Dashboard are from a wide range of data sources and are consistent across cities, allowing users to consider multiple indicators together, to provide detailed insights into a city and its performance.

AUSTRALIAiS SUPPORT FOR  THE UN DATA PROCESS
Australia supports the global indicator framework. While imperfect, the list provides a practical starting point from which countries can begin to assess and measure progress. A number of Australian Government agencies have provided statistical and technical expertise and advice on the SDG Indicator concepts and specifications, and Australia also sits as an observer on the Inter Agency Expert Group on SDGs (IAEG-SDGs).
Australia has contributed scientific expertise to develop and improve the methodology that sits behind some of the SDG Indicators. For example, Australiais CSIRO has led an international team that has drafted the first global Material Flow Accounting Manual to support reporting against Targets 8.4 and 12.2. CSIRO has also assisted the UN Convention to Combat Desertification to develop methodologies and guidance for the use of remote sensing and modelling methods to track SDG Indicator 15.3.1. This work was instrumental in the Indicatoris reclassification from Tier III (no established method) to Tier II (conceptually clear, internationally established method) by the IAEG-SDGs in November 2017.

DISAGGREGATION
This multi-stakeholder group has developed a range of disability data tools including the Short Set of Questions on Disability and the UNICEF/ WG Module on Child Functioning. These tools have been tested extensively and when added to ongoing collections provide an efficient approach to monitor implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the SDGs by disaggregating data by disability status. 
An ongoing challenge for Australia is the disaggregation of all data sets. An example of our work on this includes Australiais support for the Washington Group on Disability Statistics, established under the UN Statistical Commission. 
Individual Deprivation Measure:  a new way of measuring poverty

The Australian Government is working in partnership with the Australian National University and the International Womenis Development Agency to deliver the Individual Deprivation Measure (IDM). This gender-sensitive and multidimensional measure assesses deprivation at the individual level, in relation to 15 dimensions of life, making it possible to see who is poor, in what way and to what extent. The IDM is helping to overcome the current limitations of poverty data by getting below the household level to provide individual-level assessment of deprivation. By enabling disaggregation of data, and measuring what poor women and men say defines poverty, the IDM helps build a gendersensitive, nuanced, intersectional picture of deprivation, which can help governments and organisations to tackle poverty more effectively through better targeting of policy and programming. Individual level, gender-sensitive, multidimensional measurement is critical to tracking global progress towards the SDGs, and understanding how development efforts are contributing to \0xEBleaving no one behindi. The IDM aligns with some 25 per cent of the 53 genderrelated SDG Indicators. It can also provide disaggregated data for some SDG Indicators where this is not specifically required, consistent with the call for disaggregated data wherever possible. Following early use in Fiji, the IDM is being further developed through studies in up to five countries to ready it for global use by 2020.

INNOVATION AND COLLABORATION
Innovative data solutions, like Earth Observation technology, will be crucial to help inform decision-makers about performance against certain SDG Targets and Indicators. Australia is at the forefront of designing and utilising innovative solutions, like the application of big data, to capture SDG-relevant data, to assist with assessing performance against the SDGs or to assist with developing alternative or improved methodology for the SDG Indicators. Digital Earth Australia (DEA) is an example of such Australian innovation. Led by Geoscience Australia, DEA translates decades of satellite data into information and insights about Australiais land and oceans and can help measure and drive progress against the SDGs. The underpinning technology, which was pioneered by Geoscience Australia, CSIRO and Australiais National Computational Infrastructure, now forms the basis of the broader Open Data Cube and is being used or considered by almost 40 countries. 
Collaboration with other data providers collecting datasets against the SDG Indicators is also important. Bringing in multiple data sources can be useful to highlight Australiais performance on the Goals and Targets, across space and time, not just at the SDG Indicator level. Referring to data from multiple sources can also assist in identifying connections, overlaps and interactions between the SDGs. Examples of relevant initiatives include:
The Australian Urban Research Infrastructure Network (AURIN), is an Australian Government funded data project, set up to enable a common platform for urban data for research and policy purposes. Through the AURIN portal, AURIN Map, and an open Application Programming Interface (API), there is access to over 3,500 datasets, from 90 different sources. AURIN is now working to align its data work plan with the SDGs and classifying datasets as SDG relevant within its metadata catalogue.58
The Australian National Development Index (ANDI), a civil society and research collaboration, incorporated as a not-for-profit company. Its more than 60 partners represent a broad range of interest groups: welfare, environmental, trade union, business, academic, ethnic, religious, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, youth and children, local government and human rights organisations. ANDIis broad aim is to establish a set of goals and measures for Australiais progress \0xEBbeyond GDPi, which represent a clearer, more considered and more holistic vision of the future Australians want, and are based on an inclusive national community engagement process and extensive national research. 
The Transforming Australia Project, undertaken by the multi-stakeholder National Sustainable Development Council, which has produced a baseline report assessing how Australia is progressing against each of the SDGs based on relevant data sets identified against select Goals and Targets and subsequent analysis by experts. This information is then used to indicate how Australia is progressing towards achieving each of the SDGs, with the aim of identifying areas of priority for Australia.

SUPPORTING DATA FOR THE SDGS  IN THE INDO-PACIFIC
Australiais assistance to partner countries to implement the 2030 Agenda includes providing assistance with SDG reporting and data collection. As a member of the PIF, Australia has supported the development of the Pacific Roadmap for Sustainable Development for the implementation, monitoring and reporting on the SDGs. We have worked with the Secretariat of the Pacific Community and the Pacific Statistics Steering Committee to agree on a subset of SDG Indicators that is appropriate for the Pacific, and that includes regional indicators tailored to Pacific countriesi development contexts. 
Australiais funding to the UN Development Programmeis (UNDP) Pacific Office has supported technical assistance and other data and statistics work in the Pacific. Other Australian assistance on data and statistics has included: supporting the Pacific Communityis Statistics for Development Divisionis implementation of a Ten-Year Pacific Statistics Strategy; assisting the Pacific Communityis Regional Methods Board to set standards to assist with improving the efficiency and consistency of major statistics collections in the region; and supporting five long-term partnerships to provide technical assistance and statistical leadership support across economic, social, environmental and governance statistics to National Statistics Offices in Indonesia, Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and the Pacific region.
In the Indo-Pacific, Australia contributes funding to UNDPis Asia-Pacific Development Effectiveness Facility, which is assisting countries to better map, manage and target all financial flows to national sustainable development priorities. The ABS participates in UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacificis Regional Steering Group on Population and Social Statistics and has been involved in consultations to develop a regional work plan that includes strategies to increase user engagement and to strengthen data disaggregation in SDG Indicator frameworks. CSIRO provides policy advice and capacity building as part of its engagement with the UN Centre for Regional Development Regional 3R Forum for Asia and the Pacific and in several projects for the UN Environment Programme Bangkok office.

KEY NATIONAL POLICIES AND COMMITMENTS  RELEVANT TO THE SDGS
Note: While grouped under the most relevant SDG, many of these policies cross multiple SDGs
