A. INTRODUCTION 

Overview. The Lao Peopleis Democratic 
Republic (Lao PDR) is a land-locked, ethnically diverse, and mountainous country with an estimated population of around 6.5 million. Strong economic growth has enabled Lao PDR to move from the ranks of low income economies to a \0xEClower middle-income country from 2010.1  Lao PDR aims to graduate from Least Developed Country (LDC) status by 2020. With economic growth still heavily reliant on natural resources, the Government is diversifying to move towards more inclusive and sustained growth. More than half of the population are under the age of 25 years. To benefit from the demographic dividend to the economy, the Government is prioritizing the enhancement of skills and knowledge among youth.
Lao PDR is committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Prime Minister is Chairman of the National Steering Committee for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in the Lao PDR.2 Lao PDR was among the earliest countries to localize the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and integrate them into its Eighth National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP) in 2016, with around 60 percent of the 160 NSEDP indicators linked to the SDGs. Each of the three dimensions of sustainable development (economic, social, and environmental) relates to an NSEDP outcome, with outputs, targets, and indicators. Crosscutting components such as governance, innovation and technology, gender equality, youth and womenis empowerment, and Green Growth targets and indicators foster integration across the three dimensions of the NSEDP. Lao PDRis planning frameworks - comprising the NSEDP, its Development Strategy 2025 and Vision 2030 - focus on promoting green growth and sustainable development, maintaining steady economic growth, achieving a constant reduction of poverty, and graduating from Least Developed Country status. 
Lao PDR has adopted its own SDG 18 on unexploded ordnance (UXO). UXO remains a daunting barrier to the progress of development in Lao PDR. From 1964 to 1973, during the Indochina war, more than 500,000 bombing missions dropped over two million tons of bombs, or nearly one ton for every man, woman and child in the population at the time. More than 40 years after the end of war, an estimated 80 million cluster submunitions remain unexploded, affecting 15 of 18 provinces in the country and 25 percent of all villages. UXOs have a crosscutting impact on SDGs, since UXOs limit safe access to agricultural and land for development projects, and also make the construction of transport and power infrastructure, schools, hospitals, and water supply facilities much more costly and dangerous. Consequently, the Prime Minister of Lao PDR H.E. Mr. Thongloun Sisoulith and UN Secretary-General Mr. Ban Kimoon formally launched the countryis SDG 18 (\0xECLives Safe from UXO) on 7 September 2016 in Vientiane. 
Lao PDR is actively engaged in its international commitments. In addition to the SDGs, Lao PDR is implementing other international agreements, as shown by the following examples: 
\0xEF Lao PDR has acceded to or ratified seven out of nine key international human rights instruments.3 The country continues to incorporate these obligations into its national laws, policies, and programmes. 
\0xEF The Government has accepted 116 of the 196 recommendations made by the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review in 2015 and is addressing implementation gaps in the human rights instruments.
\0xEF Lao PDR became the first country in ASEAN to ratify the Paris Agreement on Climate Change by passing a national law on its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution. While Lao PDRis contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions is still negligible, the government is determined to substantially increase the countryis forest cover to 70 percent by 2020, enhance the resilience of agriculture, and conserve and restore valuable terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems.4 
\0xEF Lao PDRis leadership role in implementing the Convention on Cluster Munitions5 is widely acknowledged.6 
1. metHodoLogy, proCess and inputs for tHe review 
Lao PDRis localization of the SDGs from early 2016 laid a firm base for this Voluntary National Review (VNR). Lao PDRis national planning process converged with the SDG launch, providing the opportunity to integrate the SDGs into the Eighth NSEDP. By September 2017, the Government, supported by development partners, had developed a provisional list of SDG indicators adapted to Lao PDRis context and identified key issues in moving forward with SDGs. The year-long process involved all ministries and government entities, representatives of mass organizations, and national and international development partners. 
The VNR of the 2030 Agenda was developed based on the principle of leaving no one behind. In partnership with UN agencies, the National SDG Secretariat conducted the first stakeholder consultations for VNR preparation in late 2017, with public officials from all 18 provinces to enable them to understand the nature and importance of the SDGs and implement relevant strategies in each province. Advocacy and awareness programmes on the 2030 Agenda and SDGs have been conducted among students and academia at local universities. Discussions on SDGs have also been inserted into the agenda of Round Table Meetings over the past two years. In February 2018, line ministries submitted sectoral progress reports on their SDG implementation to the National SDG Secretariat, as inputs for the first VNR report for Lao PDR. To ensure an inclusive, participatory, and transparent VNR process, the National SDG Secretariat organized another round of consultations in April 2018, with stakeholders from government, the National Assembly, private sector, academia, civil society organizations, international nongovernmental organizations, the UN agencies, and development partners. Since around 60 percent of the Eighth NSEDP indicators are linked to the SDGs, the inputs from monitoring the NSEDP have also been used. 
Inputs from youth and volunteer groups were obtained for the VNR process. With support from development partners, several consultations on SDGs engaged volunteer groups and young people in Vientiane, Savannakhet, and Sekong provinces. The aim was to draw on volunteersi and young peopleis inputs to achieving the Agenda 2030. Key findings and recommendations from these consultations focused on the following:
\0xEF Awareness of the SDGs: About 31 percent of participants were already interested in topics related to development, indicating potential for them to become active players in a whole-of-society approach.
\0xEF Ways to harness the power of volunteers: The approaches discussed included partnerships with local administrations, data collection by involving youth and volunteer groups within the SDG indicator and monitoring framework; and role models for younger generations to engage in volunteer and community work.
\0xEF Volunteer contributions to specific SDGs in Lao PDR: Volunteers are at the heart of the community radio project (SDGs 3, 4, 5, 10, 16). The Youth Resource Centre run by volunteers in Savannakhet works to empower vulnerable young people aged 14-22, disadvantaged families, and victims of human trafficking.
The VNR process included concrete feedback from civil society organizations. Thirty participants from 28 civil society organizations (CSOs) discussed the draft VNR at a two-day workshop organized  on 26-27 April 2018 in Vientiane Capital. The outcome of the 2-day workshop was a series of recommendations on SDG implementation, some of which are as follows: 
\0xEF Providing skills training and vocational schools focusing on employable skills, providing social protection to workers in the informal sector, and implementing labour and commercial laws effectively. 
\0xEF Creating SMART model farms that apply agro-ecology and organic agriculture and supporting SMEs to bring about increased income and a sustainable living standard.
\0xEF Expanding access to education and health services for people with disabilities, promoting access for the elderly to free health care, and promoting a culture of healthy diets and healthy lifestyles.
\0xEF Strengthening legal capacity and ethics among lawyers and accountable mechanisms. 
\0xEF Regulating more types of wastes released to watercourses nationwide as well as prioritizing waste recycling, collection and sorting systems, and raising awareness on the importance of liveable cities.



2. poLiCy and enabLing environment 

2.1 Creating ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals
Lao PDR actively participated in the design of the new global agenda 2030. The national consultations that provided inputs into the sustainable development agenda built on not only the views of Government, but also those of civil society, private sector, and citizens from across the country. In September 2015, the Lao delegation led by the President participated in the UN Sustainable Development Summit, where the world adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets. 
Within the country, the Government has implemented policy decisions to ensure ownership of the SDGs. First, the Government has assigned various line ministries as focal points for each SDG. Second, throughout 2016 and the first part of 2017, the Government held many consultation workshops, including with the participation of development partners, which discussed and debated each SDGis target and indicators, and identified and adapted indicators for use by ministries. Third, the Government has initiated the preparation of a national SDG Roadmap (see below). Fourth, the Government has incorporated the SDGs into all national planning frameworks (section A 2.2). 
The SDG Roadmap emphasizes institutional strengthening and partnerships. The Roadmap will include awareness-raising strategies, multi-stakeholder consultations and dialogue, mechanisms to create horizontal and vertical policy coherence, budgeting for the future, and plans for monitoring, reporting and accountability. Highlights include: 
\0xEF Needs assessment and costing. The volume of public and private investment required for SDG achievement will need to be determined. 
\0xEF Institutional strengthening for monitoring SDGs. Lao PDR will need to finalize the selection of national SDG indicators, strengthen statistical capacities across ministries, harness new technologies, and tap into new sources of data. 
\0xEF Issue-based partnerships. The draft roadmap emphasizes effective partnerships that are not centrally planned, but rather, based on issues.
2.2 Incorporating the Sustainable Development Goals in national frameworks 
The Government of Lao PDR is implementing the SDGs through the NSEDPs and the sector development plans of each ministry. Lao PDR has incorporated the SDGs into its national planning frameworks. The lessons learned from the implementation of the Seventh NSEDP (2011?2015), especially with regard to the unfinished Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), informed the development of the Eighth NSEDP. By 2016, the government had localized and integrated the SDGs into the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework of the Eighth NSEDP, with around 60 percent of the 160 NSEDP indicators linked to the SDGs (Table 1), and taking into account the unfinished business of MDGs (Table 2). This means that data collected for those NSEDP indicators will also provide a basis for SDG reporting. The sector development plans of line ministries include additional SDG indicators. The Government will incorporate the 2030 Agenda into the countryis Ninth NSEDP (2021-2025), the Tenth NSEDP (20262030) and accompanying sectoral strategies. These successive medium-term plans fit into the countryis longer-term plans, notably the Ten-Year Strategy (2016-2025) and the 2030 Vision, providing Lao PDR with the opportunity to continue implementing the SDGs through its national planning frameworks up to 2030. Successful implementation of these national plans will address unfinished business relating to the MDGs, deliver early progress on the SDGs, and drive the countryis graduation from the ranks of LDCs.
The government has identified crosscutting strategies to achieve its national development goals: 
\0xEF Accelerating progress on the off-track MDGs and on the cross-cutting UXO goal (SDG 18);
\0xEF Promoting environmentally-friendly production and green growth;
\0xEF Enhancing 	public 	governance 	and administration;
\0xEF Promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women and youth;
\0xEF Promoting local innovation and use of science, technology and telecommunications and enhancing information and communication 
technologies (ICT);
\0xEF Continuing the diversification of the economy by stimulating the non-resource sector and making the private sector a cornerstone of future development; 
\0xEF Increasing the competitiveness of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) by developing human resources and infrastructure required for SME growth, and by enabling communities, farmers and entrepreneurs to access services, technologies and resources; 
\0xEF Increasing productivity, especially in the agricultural sector;
\0xEF Promoting greater integration into the regional and global economy and value chains; and
\0xEF Recognizing the increasing importance of South-South partners, and the emergence of new development banks and initiatives.7 
2.3 Integrating the three dimensions of sustainable development  
The global 2030 Agenda8 requires the implementation of SDGs to respect and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development. Accordingly, Lao PDRis NSEDP reflects the three dimensions (economic, social, and environmental) in its Outcome areas, while NSEDP outputs relate to one or more of the SDGs, in its target and indicator areas. Crosscutting components n such  as governance, innovation and technology, gender equality, youth and womenis empowerment, and 
Green Growth targets and indicators n foster integration across the three dimensions of the NSEDP. The integration is also fostered by having Green Growth indicators and LDC graduation criteria that extend across all three pillars of the NSEDP. 
2.4 Leaving no one behind 
In Lao PDR, altitude and location are the key factors setting apart the poorest and most marginalized groups from other groups. Around 80 percent of Lao PDR is mountainous, and altitude and location are key determinants of livelihood options and access to services. An estimated 7 to 9 percent of population live in rural areas without road access, and some 26 percent of the population live in upland areas, with high levels of poverty.9 These groups have the least access to services, the poorest health and nutritional status, the lowest levels of education, and the highest under-five mortality rates. Traditionally, those living in high and remote areas are often of different ethnicity from that of lowland groups, with a different language. The causal factors in access to services and livelihood improvement are tied more to geography than to ethnicity. The Government has taken steps to make the whole population feel that they are Laotians regardless of their ethnicity, language, or religion. In its national development strategies, the Government focuses poverty reduction measures on such remote and poor communities. A poverty monitoring system has been set up to this end. Progress is slow because of capacity and budget constraints.  
Adolescent girls require special attention. Lao PDR is among the countries with the highest proportion of early marriage and the highest adolescent birth rate in the region. This indicates that adolescent girls are not yet receiving the necessary attention and investment to develop their full potential. Lao PDR needs to take critical decisions with regard to its young population, particularly adolescent girls. One in five adolescent girls drop out of school; one in four girls aged 15-19 are married, and from the same age group, one in ten girls have begun childbearing. Investments in adolescent girlsi health, nutrition, and education contributes to reducing early pregnancy, maternal mortality, and child stunting. Such gains translate to improved health and education outcomes, which contribute to LDC graduation.  
People with disabilities are another vulnerable group. Disabilities in Lao PDR are often caused by UXO, road traffic accidents, disease and congenital conditions. The overall prevalence of disabilities among the population 5 years and over is 2.8 percent. 10 Lao PDR ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in 2009 and submitted the State Partyis Report in 2016.11 Lao PDR has set up the National Commission for Persons with Disabilities and the Elderly, and has taken several measures to implement the CRPD as laid out in its Report, such as the Decree on Persons with Disabilities (No. 137) in 2014, and adopting a National Strategy and Plan of Action on Inclusive Education (20112015).
Other vulnerable groups include farmers with limited access to land, migrants, unskilled and unemployed workers, and unpaid workers. Women, children, and the elderly are particularly vulnerable.
2.5 Consolidating institutional mechanisms
The governmentis institutional mechanisms established by Presidential Decree show the highest priority accorded to the implementation of the national development plans and the SDGs. The President issued a Decree on 20 September 2017 appointing the Prime Minister to chair the National Steering Committee for SDG implementation, with members of the Committee drawn from all concerned ministries, ministry-equivalent agencies, and mass organizations. The National Steering Committee will oversee the coordination and implementation of the SDGs through the NSEDP and the sectoral development plans of various ministries up to 2030, including the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation results. The Decree mandates SDG implementation by every ministry and sector, and at different levels throughout the country. The 26 National Steering Committee members all have ministerial or vice-ministerial status. The Committee then appointed the National SDG Secretariat in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and SDG focal points in relevant line ministries to lead and take ownership of each SDG. 12 The National SDG Secretariat (Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Planning and Investment) works with line ministries to track the progress of SDG implementation. Also in coordination with line ministries, the National SDG Secretariat works closely with United Nations agencies and other development partners to ensure the support necessary for accelerating progress towards the 2030 Agenda.
2.6 Addressing structural issues
Stakeholder participation
In development programmes, Lao PDR has made significant advances in enlarging the space for stakeholders. Approaches to increasing participation have to be culturally sensitive. Lao PDR has various channels and forums for participation, which range from indirect channels through representative institutions such as the National Assembly to the mass organizations and formal business associations. Participation also takes place through other interest groups, including CSOs, the media, and other forms of communication. The National SDG Secretariat sought the engagement of Lao CSOs in the national SDGs and the preparation for the VNR (section A1). 
Engaging local administrations in systematic implementation and monitoring is critical. The effectiveness of implementing and monitoring the SDGs depends on a wide range of issues relating to local-specific contexts and challenges. These challenges require the government and local administrations to develop local monitoring systems, identify gaps, and implement corrective action to accelerate progress. To this end, the Government has already initiated institutional strengthening within local administrations to understand, implement, and monitor the progress towards the NSEDP goals and selected SDG targets. The Governmentis framework identifies four major governance themes: public service improvement, participation, rule of law and sound financial management. These four elements cut across every sector. Issues in service delivery, financing planning and management in health, education and other sectors need to be addressed from a governance perspective.
Anti-Corruption measures 
Lao PDR has publicly committed to tackling corruption and established the institutional frameworks to this end. In its statement at the Universal Periodic Review13 in 2015, the Lao PDR delegation emphasized the implementation of the Law on Anti-Corruption, and other related laws and legal instruments, particularly the Decree on the declaration of assets for government officials at all levels. Lao PDRis Law on Anti-Corruption (2012) designates the Counter-Corruption Organization as the state organisation responsible for preventing and countering corruption throughout the country, and tasks the State Inspection Authority with implementing these duties. In addition, the Anti-Money Laundering Intelligence Unit has been placed under the direct supervision and leadership of the National Coordination Committee for Anti Money Laundering and Countering of Financing Terrorism, as part of the Bank of Lao PDR. The Anti-Money Laundering Intelligence Unit has mandates and responsibility to collect and analyse information relating to money laundering and report such incidents to the National Coordination Committee for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering of Financing 
Terrorism for its review and consideration.14
The Government has begun implementing a successful anti-corruption drive. The Government issued an anti-corruption action plan in 2013, largely based on a strategic anticorruption plan issued a year earlier, focusing government action on: (i) political training and awareness of laws; (ii) research on, and drafting of, new legislation and amending existing laws; (iii) reorganization of the state administration mechanism; and (iv) improvement of organisations and officials in charge of the fight against anti-corruption. This is a sevenyear plan, and the government expects to fulfil the targets by 2020. It has already started implementing the plan, mainly through the amendment and enactment of a new set of laws, and the restructuring of the internal bureaucratic and administrative system. Overall, the governmentis anti-corruption drive is gradually making inroads into reducing this problem. In 2017, Lao PDR ranked 135 out of 176 countries and territories, with a score of 29 (zero being highly corrupt and 100 very clean) in the Corruption Perception Index calculated by the international NGO Transparency International. The score has generally improved over the past five years from 21 in 2012. 
Lao PDR is witnessing a new level of transparency. This is shown by the released reports of the State Inspection Authority (SIA) on the use of state funds by ministries and provincial offices, by corruption-related arrests, by the SIA nationwide audit of assets of officials, including over 1,900 officials and central level civil servants, and more than 140,000 working in provincial administrations.15





B. PROGRESS ON GOALS AND TARGETS 
Section B sets out the progress and challenges in localizing, implementing and reporting on the SDGs. Table 3 summarizes the progress and challenges under the three Outcomes of the NSEDP, while subsequent sections (B1 to B18) discuss each SDG and the national priorities in going forward towards the 2030 Agenda. These sections also show the infographics on each SDG, developed by the National SDG Secretariat in Lao and in English to support its advocacy in publications, posters and online.





1.1. Progress and challenges 
Over the past 27 years, Lao PDR has made tremendous progress in reducing poverty. By 2012/13, Lao PDR had already halved the poverty rate from 1992/93 levels, achieving MDG target 1A ahead of time. Household welfare improved in terms of ownership of assets, condition of housing, and access to services and markets. The poor on average have become less poor, as shown by the steady reduction in the poverty gap and poverty severity over time. The governmentis drive to expand rural infrastructure, roads and services have led to poverty reduction in these areas, enhancing market access for agricultural produce and improving livelihood opportunities. 
16
Challenges remain, with a significant proportion of the population at risk of falling into poverty. Households in agriculture are twice more likely than non-farm households to fall back into poverty, as they are highly vulnerable to shocks. The limited health insurance coverage and social protection limit the ability of households to mitigate risks. Overall, poverty reduction and consumption growth lag behind the countryis GDP growth, the growth being resource-intensive.17  
Inequity patterns emerge from differences in location and access, which affect education and livelihoods. The poverty rate in rural areas is 2.9 times that of the urban areas (2012/13).  One-third of the population in upland areas is still below the poverty line, while in lowland areas, only about one-fifth of the population is poor. The ethnic groups, who traditionally live in mountainous and remote areas difficult to access, have seen slower progress in poverty reduction. The lowland groups, with the highest levels of education, have the lowest poverty rate. Inequality has grown: in 2012/13, consumption of the richest quintile was 6.4 times that of the poorest, while two decades ago, the difference was 4.7 times. 
18 
Measurement issues: Lao PDR has two systems for measuring poverty prevalence. The first is the five-yearly household survey on expenditures and consumption, measuring poverty indicators according to international standards and definitions. In the second approach, the government monitors poverty annually by using administrative data on income and access to basic services, going down to household level. The programme monitors access to clean water, health facilities, and schools, in terms of their distance from the households in a given village. This is an innovative home-grown system, which gives yearly data. Social protection coverage has significant data gaps, which the government is addressing with support from development partners. 
1.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Targeting the poor in planning, budgeting, and programme delivery. The poorer groups are largely known. The challenge lies in appropriate targeting below the district level with different sectors working in a coordinated and convergent approach. Reaching the poorest in remote areas will require much more resources than reaching the less poor in other areas. The rising inequality in urban areas19 shows the need for targeting the urban poor.
\0xEF Prioritizing interventions based on evidence. Since access, education, employment/livelihood and the price of agricultural produce are known determinants of poverty levels,20 the priority is to accelerate the improvement of education, training, livelihoods, agricultural productivity, and rural infrastructure for the poor. Strategies to reach the most vulnerable groups need to consider what has worked. Community radio volunteer broadcasters in Xieng Khouang, Sekong, Oudomxay and other provinces and relevant districts have been able to reach vulnerable groups, especially women and girls, with radio installed in mobile phones. The results have been increased awareness and useful knowledge on issues such as agriculture, family relations, education, health, and nutrition. Radio programs on agriculture have been extremely popular among rural communities. 
\0xEF Strengthening social protection systems to cover vulnerable groups. Initiatives such as the Health Equity Fund schemes and Free Delivery of Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health Care (\0xECFree MNCH) represent significant progress. However, access to social security coverage remains limited and welfare programmes fragmented. Support is required to widen the scope of social protection schemes, namely, to support the implementation of the forthcoming National Social Protection Strategy (SDG Target 1.3 and SDG 8).  
\0xEF Increasing efforts to tap domestic capital through public-private partnerships. Local administrations need to mobilize the private sector to invest jointly in local economic development and increase sourcing from local firms and workers. 



2.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR has achieved the MDG target of halving the proportion of hungry people.21 The proportion of undernourished in the population22 has declined from 42.8 percent in 1990 to around 18.5 percent in 2015.23 Lao PDR reaffirmed its commitment to fight hunger and undernutrition through the launch of the National Zero Hunger Challenge in May 2015, and through its Agricultural Development Strategy, National Nutrition Strategy, and the NSEDP.
Despite recent progress, Lao PDR is still offtrack on the target of reducing underweight and stunting. In 2016/17, some 33 percent of children under five years of age were stunted, and 9 percent were wasted. Undernutrition in Lao PDR shows strong inequalities, associated with poverty patterns. Stunting in rural areas without road access is twice that in urban areas. Stunting in children from some highland ethnic groups are nearly double those of children from lowland groups. Children from the poorest households have stunting rates three times higher than those among children from the richest households. Even in rich households, 20 percent of children suffer from stunting.24 
The causes of undernutrition have not been adequately addressed.25 These are primarily poor infant and young child feeding practices (including low rates of exclusive breastfeeding for children under the age of 6 months), poor maternal nutrition, high adolescent birth rates among some ethnic groups, and poor female education. Children of uneducated women have stunting rates four times higher than do children of mothers with at least secondary education.26  
Food insecurity is still significant. Threats to food security include soil degradation and decreasing yields, linked to land pressure from population and large-scale investment projects, limited access to irrigation, rainfalldependent agricultural practices, disease outbreaks among livestock, the difficulties for farmers to find economically attractive legal alternatives to opium growing,27 low resilience to natural disasters and climate change, and UXOs, which make farmland unsafe. Around 11 percent of rural households have poor and borderline food consumption.28 
Measurement issues: Undernourishment is tracked from food balance sheets and food consumed by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO)29 for three-year periods. Undernourishment is also measured in five-yearly Lao Household Expenditure and Consumption Surveys (LECS) that produce the percentage of population under the Food Poverty Line, that is, those consuming less than the minimum dietary energy requirements of 2,100 kcal/ person/ day. LECS will also measure for the very first time in Lao PDR the prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity in the population, based on the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES). Child undernutrition is measured by child anthropometry surveys, which are not conducted annually. Mechanisms need to be put in place for tracking child malnutrition more frequently, such as sentinel surveillance and/or rapid assessment methods. Much more data is needed on adolescent girlsi nutrition in Lao PDR. Future design of surveys and agricultural censuses will need to incorporate measures of agricultural productivity and incomes of smallscale food producers by sex. At present, the proxy indicator agricultural value added per labour unit is inadequate.  
2.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Accelerating the implementation of the Agricultural Development Strategy 2020. The Strategy supports the shift from a subsistence to market-oriented agricultural production that is adapted to climate change and focused on smallholder farmers. Other related measures include increasing the capacity of farmersi associations, improving agricultural production infrastructure, upgrading technologies, and strengthening farmersi access to inputs and financial products, which will all help to add value to farmersi agricultural products. 
\0xEF Accelerating the implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of Action 2016-2020. The Plan emphasized a multi-sectoral response to undernutrition, with nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions that converge on high-risk districts. The Government is also scaling up the \0xECFirst 1,000 Days approach30 (from preconception to two years of age) with behaviour change interventions. 
\0xEF Strengthening service delivery to the most deprived, using participatory strategies. Such strategies involve empowering village health volunteers, farmer groups, and village extension workers with the required knowledge and support. The most deprived groups with the lowest access to services, and also the highest levels of child stunting are those living in rural areas without road access (constituting 7 percent of the total population in 2011/12), households in the poorest quintile (19 percent of the total), families with uneducated or poorly educated women (21 percent of the total), and ethnic groups living in high remote areas (33 percent of the total).31 



3.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR has achieved the MDG target of reducing its maternal mortality ratio (MMR) by three-quarters from 1990 levels. Over the past two decades, MMR has declined from 1,100 per 100,000 live births in 1990 to around 220 in 2013 (estimated by United Nations Agencies32) and 206 in 2015 according to the Lao Population & Housing Census. Major hospitals can provide caesarean services, and basic emergency obstetric and newborn care services are available in every district. Nonetheless, MMR is still high by any standards.
Lao PDR has also made significant progress in reducing under-five and infant mortality. In 2015, these had declined to half the levels in 1990. The most recent survey shows that in 2016/17, under-five mortality rate has now declined to 46 per thousand live births, which is a significant achievement. Immunization programmes have made good progress, although still below the levels required to induce herd immunity and reduce the threat of outbreaks. 
The high MMR is explained by the limited coverage and inadequate quality of services, poor nutrition, and low contraceptive use. About 64 percent of births (2016/17) are assisted by trained health personnel33 and 64.5 percent of deliveries take place in health facilities (2016/17), which shows improvement from the 2011/12 survey. Service quality and referral systems need improvement. High anaemia rates, low contraceptive use34 and high fertility rates are also major contributors to high maternal mortality. Among married women and women in union, the unmet need for modern contraceptives is still high (28 percent in 2016/17). 
Adolescent pregnancy requires attention. Despite achieving adolescent birth rate of 83 per 1000 live births (the national target was 90), this rate remains one of the highest in the region. The high adolescent birth rate requires prioritizing the availability and use of contraceptives, especially among unmarried adolescents who still have difficulties in accessing such services, despite the national policy on birth spacing.35 The rate is highest among adolescents with little or no education or those living in areas without road access.
Disparities in maternal and child health service coverage and outcomes are pronounced. The lowest coverage levels are in rural areas without road access, among women with primary or no education, women from the poorest households, and women from ethnic communities living in remote areas. The disparities are starkest between poverty quintiles: in 2011/12, the richest and poorest quintiles had up to 80 percentage points difference in maternal health services coverage. Mortality rates are much higher among children from the poorest and/or most remote households, and those born of mothers with no education, adolescent mothers, and mothers who are older (above age 34 years).36 
HIV prevalence has been generally low. HIV prevalence among female sex worker remains stable (1 percent), but shows an increasing trend in men having sex with men, from 1.6 in 2014 to 2.4 percent in 2017. The overall knowledge on HIV remains low.37 Progress on the three global targets for HIV treatment scale-up beyond 201538 is constrained by difficulties in reaching people living with HIV (PLHIV) and referral to treatment. In 2017, around 75 percent (11,876) of the estimated PLHIV in Lao PDR knew their status and 47 
percent of PLHIV were receiving antiretroviral therapy, which is well below the global target. Some 75 percent of those on antiretroviral therapy had suppressed viral load.39   
Lao PDR has achieved more than 90 percent treatment rate of young children with confirmed malaria40  but malaria resurgence threatens its steady progress. From 2000 to 2011, malaria cases and deaths declined by half. From December 2011, outbreaks with a confirmed artemisinin-resistant strain led to a sharp rise in cases and deaths. The demand for forest products, infrastructure projects near or in forested areas, and porous borders heighten migration-related malaria risk. Bed net coverage will need to improve: a 2016 survey in three high malaria burden provinces found only 74.3 percent of children under age five using long-lasting insecticidal nets.41 
TB treatment success rate is over 90 percent and from 1990 to 2014, Lao PDR more than halved the prevalence of all forms of TB. TB incidence has also declined. However, mortality due to TB does not show a declining trend.42 TB detection needs to be urgently improved: around one-third of cases are detected and the rest remain undiagnosed and untreated. 43
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and injuries pose a growing threat. An estimated 48 percent of total deaths in Lao PDR in 2014 were due to NCDs.44 The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified adult risk factors, among them a high rate of tobacco use.45 An estimated 9 percent of total deaths in the Lao PDR were attributed to injury.46 Road accident statistics show a rise of the death rate from road accidents, from 8.6 per 100,000 in 2006 to 15.3 per 100,000 in 2015.47 The increase is largely associated with unsafe road conditions, rapid expansion of roads, the growth in the number of motorbikes and vehicles, inexperienced motorists, and limited capacity to enforce traffic laws and regulations. 
Out-of-pocket spending has been a dominant source of financing for health. A persistently high level of out-of-pocket spending (45 percent in 2016) remains a major challenge for the countryis progress towards the universal health coverage target. The country is highly dependent on the Global Fund and Gavi - the Vaccine Alliance - for the financing of its immunization, malaria, tuberculosis (TB), and HIV/AIDS program. Lao PDR entered the accelerated transition phase of Gavi in 2017 and is now undergoing the transition process. The country needs to accelerate progress towards the universal health coverage target, while effectively managing the transition from external financing to more sustainable and predictable financing.
Measurement issues: Systems to report on the older (MDG) targets need review and those for new SDG targets need further development. Health information systems and the civil registration and vital statistics system need strengthening. Inadequacies in these systems affect the quality of service data. Surveys such as the Lao Social Indicators Survey provide a useful countercheck of administrative data and show substantial differences with health service data on some indicators, such as immunization and antenatal care. Improvement of country monitoring systems will require identifying and including SDG indicators that currently lie outside existing administrative reports. 
The established monitoring systems are not yet equipped to monitor indicators specific to adolescent girls.
3.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Improving service accessibility, availability and ensuring acceptable quality. This includes expanding outreach as well as improving the quality of services at all levels. 
\0xEF Accelerating health system reform. The Ministry is prioritizing improvement of health staff quality and availability, especially in remote areas. Increased and sustained levels of funding are also necessary to fund health commodities and accelerate interventions in poorer and remote areas. Health education, sanitation and other preventative health interventions need to be stepped up. Management and logistics systems for health supplies and essential drugs need strengthening to address frequent stock outs.48 
\0xEF Addressing behavioural and other factors impeding the response to HIV/ AIDS. These factors include cultural taboos, difficulties in reaching the key high-risk populations, and the mobility of young migrant populations. The limited capacity and coverage of health care services constrain the integration of HIV testing and treatment into the health care system.  
\0xEF Stepping up efforts to combat malaria with Greater Mekong Sub-region partners. Lao PDR has committed to achieving malaria elimination by 2030,49 together with China, Myanmar, Thailand, and Viet Nam.



4.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR has achieved universal coverage in primary enrolment. The primary net enrolment rate (NER) reached 98.8 percent in 2016. Lao PDR has two types of primary schools: incomplete and complete. Incomplete schools are those that cannot provide the complete primary education cycle due to infrastructure constraints. Complete primary schools are able to provide the full range of classes in the primary cycle up to grade 5. In recent years, expanding the number of primary complete schools has enabled many more children to complete their primary education: 80.9 percent of all primary schools in 2015/16 are now complete schools (from 48 percent in 2007/08). Consequently, disparities in primary enrolment decreased from 30 percentage points in 2007 to around 5 percentage points by 2015/16. 50,51
Lao PDR has also achieved gender parity at primary level. The gender parity index (GPI) calculated with gross enrolment ratios was 
0.98, and the GPI of completion rates reached 1.00 in 2017, meaning that the proportion of girls making it to grade 5 is the same as that of boys as a percentage of the total relevant age group. Gender parity has not yet been achieved at secondary level, which explains why the GPI in literacy is still low (that is, in favour of males) among the youth and adult population, especially among the older groups. 
Significant gains were also realized in secondary education. The national gross enrolment ratio (GER) target for lower secondary education was achieved in 2015/16, reaching 82.2 percent. Upper secondary GER has increased from below 20 percent in the early 1990s to 47.8 percent. Overall, secondary GER had increased to 67.2 percent by 2015/16. 
52
Many children still drop out of school, usually in the early grades. Around 30,000 primary students drop out from primary education every year,53 and therefore the survival rate to grade 5 was only around 79.6 percent in 2016.54  Survival rates vary by province from 59.7 percent in Saravane to 95.5 percent in Vientiane capital (2015/16). Childrenis lack of school readiness is a key factor. The access to early childhood education is limited. About 56 percent of new entrants in grade 1 had preschool experience in 2016, most of whom had been enrolled in urban areas. The dropout rates and disparities in secondary education 
cycle are also significant.55  
The overall quality of teaching and learning needs improvement. Assessments of grade 5 students in 2006 and 200956 highlighted the low learning outcomes in the Lao language achieved by students. A more recent assessment in 2011/12 showed weaknesses in both language and mathematics: one quarter of fourth grade pupils did not have a good command of reading.57 
Less accessible areas continue to lag behind. School attendance, survival, and literacy are lowest among children and adolescents in remote rural areas, those with uneducated mothers, those living in households in the poorest quintile, and those from the more remote ethnic groups.58 In such communities, the demand for education, especially secondary education, is low.
The literacy target for youth remains to be achieved. A large proportion of children do not continue on to secondary education. In response, the Government has non-formal education programmes, and the numbers enrolled in these classes at lower secondary level have rapidly increased. However, the quality and efficiency of these programs are still inadequate.
Measurement issues: Lao PDR has an effective education management information system (EMIS), which produces data routinely disaggregated by sex and robust enough for annual planning. Many SDG 4 indicators can be monitored through EMIS. Data on technical and vocational education and training (TVET) need strengthening and linkage with employment outcomes. Education for children with disabilities will require further inter-ministerial work. Successive surveys and censuses will need standardization: the mix of self-reported and tested literacy rates in different surveys funded by different partners is not conducive to interpreting trends. The education system has not yet established mechanisms to regularly assess and report on the quality and outcome of services. Current data on learning outcomes in primary school are obtained through one-off or infrequent assessments by external partners that do not always follow the same standards.59 The Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) plans to institute mechanisms for standardized measurement of learning outcomes that can be tracked across time.  
4.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Strengthening financial planning to ensure fiscal sustainability and meet priority needs. The education budget for non-wage recurrent support is inadequate. Avoiding greater reliance on external sources will mean dropping initiatives that do not align with sector priorities or are fiscally unrealistic. 
\0xEF Addressing non-performance in teachers. This issue contributes directly to the low-level of student performance60 and requires technical and financial support. To recruit and retain quality teachers, Lao PDR will implement skills upgrading and quality assurance. Appropriate human resource policies, such as local area recruitment and salary improvements, will also be required.61
\0xEF Strengthening multi-sectoral response to early childhood development and education (ECD/ECE). In view of its impact on school readiness and education outcomes, ECD/ECE needs a holistic approach with health, nutrition, and parenting education. 
\0xEF Positioning Lao PDR to benefit from ASEAN integration. Recognizing that the current TVET system needs improvement and expansion, Lao PDR is taking steps to improve and benchmark the system with ASEAN standards, and address the gap in the supply of skills and qualifications in the workforce to meet the changing demands of the economy. 
\0xEF Prioritizing lifelong learning and expanding flexible learning and nonformal education programmes. Providing a bridge into mainstream education and promoting lifelong learning will better prepare Lao PDR for LDC graduation. Given that lifelong learning is a policy priority, the MoES is developing the lifelong learning strategy and plan for Lao PDR, making a multi-sectoral approach the central tenet of the design and implementation of the policy. 



5.1. Progress and challenges
The share of women is relatively high in the Lao National Assembly, but low in other decision-making positions. The NSEDP stipulates that the share of women should increase to 20 percent of leading management positions at provincial and district level, 10 percent at village level, 30 percent at central level, and 30 percent for the Eighth National Assembly. The share of women in the National Assembly/ Parliament is 27.5 percent, which is well above the world average (23.5 percent).62 The President and Vice-President of the National Assembly are also women. Women account for 31.5 percent in provincial assemblies. However, the share of women in leadership and management-level positions is around 5 percent (2012).63 In 2017, women represented about 45 percent of the 183,680 civil servants overall, but few were in senior positions. 64 In 2015, only 1.7 and 7.2 percent respectively of village chiefs and deputy village chiefs were female.65 
Women and girls lag behind in access to education and health. The gender parity indices (GPI) especially for secondary education and literacy show that females are behind males. While female adult literacy rate increased from 63 percent in 2005 to 79 percent in 2015, male literacy rate is still much higher (83 percent in 2005, 90 percent in 2015).66 Maternal mortality ratio is still high (SDG 3). The demand for contraception among women and adolescent girls is not fully met. Lao PDR is among the countries with the highest rates of early marriage and adolescent births in the region. Some 32.7 percent of young women aged 20-24 were married before age 18, compared to 10.8 percent of men. The adolescent birth rate is 83 per 1,000.67 
The social welfare and legal systems need to strengthen mechanisms to protect women and children from violence, and provide legal and counselling services. The issue of physical or sexual violence by a partner or non-partner continues to be a challenge.68 The Centre for Counselling and Protection of Women and Children, established by the Lao Womenis Union, and its network in 15 provinces have the central role of providing psychological, legal, and health counselling for women and children who are victims of physical, sexual and other forms of violence. The Centre also provides temporary shelter, telephone hotline and subsistence for victims, facilitates legal actions against abusers, provides shortterm skills training, and refers cases for further management and rehabilitation to appropriate institutions. 
Women are still constrained in livelihood options and economic opportunities. Women constitute the majority of workers in the informal sectors and among unpaid family workers, largely because they are less educated. Women have less access to farming inputs and credit. In 2015, 61 percent of women in the labour force worked as unpaid family workers, compared to 26 percent of men. One out of every four working women was reported to be an own account worker, compared to one out of two working men. While own account work, especially in the informal sector, can be vulnerable, it also offers greater autonomy and control. 69
The Constitution of the Lao PDR guarantees equality between men and women in politics, economy, culture, and society, as well as in the family. The Lao Womenis Union (LWU), established in 1955 is mandated to represent women of all ethnic groups, to protect women\0xEBs rights and benefits. LWU is guided by the principle of Gender Equality for National Development. It has three campaigns: \0xECGood Citizen, Good Development, and Good Family. and reaches out to women from the national, provincial, district and village levels. The National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Mothers and Children, established since 2003, is mandated to define national policies, strategies, and programmes for the development and promotion of women. It is also responsible for implementing national policy for the advancement of women as well as mainstreaming gender in all sectors. The Women Parliamentarians Caucus was formed in late 2002. It  is responsible for organizing female leadership trainings and for gender training workshops for parliamentarians. It has been successful in mobilizing attention on the issue of domestic violence, and is expected to propose new legislation on the matter.
Measurement issues: Gender indicators need more frequent and systematic updates. The indicators relating to early marriage, reproductive health access, and unpaid domestic and care work are collected through five-yearly household surveys, such as the Lao Social Indicators Survey (LSIS), Labour Force Survey (LFS), and LECS. Incorporating the same indicator into more than one survey would provide updates that are more frequent. Administrative systems need to be tailored to measure indicators on adolescent pregnancy and political empowerment. At present, the health administrative data system is not set up to monitor adolescent pregnancy, which is a proxy for early marriage. Data on the share of women in leadership positions is available, but reporting needs to be standardized (for example, which positions to be reported on). Data on violence against women and girls is not regularly collected, as the measurement has to use special surveys to ensure safety and confidentiality.70 In this regard, the 2014 Lao National Survey on Womenis Health and Life Experiences (LNS-WHLE) was groundbreaking. Lao PDR does not have systems yet to monitor female ownership or secure rights over agricultural land n these indicators could be incorporated into existing surveys.
5.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies: 
\0xEF Improving the implementation and monitoring of national gender equality laws, policies, and instruments. These include enforcing the existing family law, which does not allow marriage before the age of consent; the gender output in the Eighth NSEDP; the 2016-2020 Womenis Development Plan, the National Gender Equality Development Plan; the Second 
National Strategy on Gender Equality (2016-
2025), the National Law on Preventing and Combatting Violence against Women and Children, the National Action Plan on Eliminating Violence against Women and Children, and the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).
\0xEF Strengthening national capacity to generate gender statistics and enable gender-sensitive planning. In May 2000, the Prime Ministeris Office issued a Directive on the inclusion of sex-disaggregated statistics in policy and planning, and on gender-sensitive development programs/ projects. In January 2005, the Prime Ministeris Office issued an additional Notification on the implementation of sex-disaggregated statistics requiring all sectors to apply this widely in practice. 
\0xEF Disaggregation of data by sex and age has improved, but is still inconsistent. Moreover, many areas such as employment, migration, incomes, disability, domestic violence, ethnicity, and residence need robust gender statistics. Data on violence against women and girls need to be regularly collected and monitored with due consideration of the principles to ensure womenis safety and confidentiality.
\0xEF Developing measures to combat violence against women. Appropriate detection, response, and protection mechanisms are required as well as strengthened institutional capacities. A strong coordinating body and a clear referral system within and across the sectors are also required.
\0xEF Harnessing the full potential of Lao womenis participation in the market economy as entrepreneurs, employees, and consumers. Appropriate strategies and policies to reduce the gender equality gap in employment will need to be further developed, such as specific support to women SME owners, and to the expansion of vocational training and counselling centres for women.
\0xEF Addressing the issues that prevent adolescent girls from reaching their full potential. As illustrated in the Infographic, a focus on the adolescent girl will help to accelerate progress towards all SDGs, and in particular SDGs 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8. 

The Noi 2030 Framework n Achieving Gender Equality & Empowerment of Adolescent Girls 

 


6.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR achieved the MDG target on improved water and sanitation.71 In 2015, 76 percent and 71 percent of the population respectively had access to improved sources of drinking water and improved sanitation facilities.72 The high prevalence of open defecation - an estimated 23 percent in 2015 - is still a concern.73 The LSIS 2016/17 was able to measure access to \0xECsafely managed services at 15.3 percent (the source water was tested and free of E. coli), while 54.1 percent of the population have a handwashing facility with water and soap or detergent.
Disparities remain significant. The difference in safe water coverage between urban and rural was 17 percentage points in 2015.74 The gap between uneducated families and bettereducated families and that between the richest and poorest quintiles is much larger (over 30 percentage points in 2011/12).75 Disparities in safe sanitation are far greater, with 38 percentage points difference between rural and urban areas in 2015.76 Sanitation coverage is eight times better among the rich than among the poor. Among disadvantaged groups, more than half still practice open defecation.77 
Lao PDR is rich in water resources. Water resources in the country are used in several sectors including irrigation, hydropower, navigation, fisheries, urban water supply, and rural water supply. Water usage is predominantly agricultural.78 More attention is needed to water stress, water use efficiency, and water safety. Mountain springs and streams, and shallow groundwater are the main sources for rural and small-town water supply. Surface water is the main source for urban water supply. Water pollution from agricultural and industrial sectors, including mineral exploitation, is an emerging problem. Arsenic contamination has been mapped in some areas.
The Water and Water Resources Law, updated and approved by the National Assembly in 2017, aims to improve the sustainability of Laois water resources. The law is expected to influence the monitoring, management and planning of the countryis vast rivers. New provisions have been added on water rights and use, including wastewater discharge permits, wetlands and water-resources protection, ground-water management, and river-basin management. Additionally, the law expands the terms and conditions of large, medium, and small-scale uses and includes articles on environmental flows for hydropower as well as stipulations related to irrigation use. The process benefitted from extensive consultations with a wide range of stakeholders, including the private sector. 
Measurement issues: The indicator on open defecation needs to be monitored since this remains a priority issue. Data collection systems are not yet set up to monitor the SDG indicators on safely treated wastewater, bodies of water with good ambient water quality, and water use efficiency. Tracking financing and policies for water and sanitation is also a challenge. Policies and procedures for participation of local communities in water and sanitation management cannot yet be tracked, since monitoring systems for rural water and sanitation services are still incomplete. 6.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies: 
\0xEF Addressing the issue of water safety and quality. This requires wide-ranging measures, from providing safe water supply for arsenic-affected areas, to preventing sewerage and other pollutants from entering the river system. 
\0xEF Expanding rural sanitation. The government is scaling up its pilot initiative in Champasak and Sekong provinces. 
\0xEF Promoting behaviour change programmes to improve hygiene and stop defecation. Both social and health reasons are needed to change behaviour, since health messages in themselves may not be persuasive enough. Consequently, such programmes will require the involvement of different local authorities, not only health. 
\0xEF Preventing the release of toxic and chemical wastes from economic development activities into river systems and associated watersheds. Management and control by local administrations will need to be strengthened.
\0xEF Conducting water resources assessments and river basin planning as part of the Mekong Integrated Water Resource Management Project. This follows the approval of the updated 2017 Water and Water Resources Law and will feed into the National River Basin Development Strategy 
2030 and Five-Year Action Plan (20182022). 



7.1. Progress and challenges
By 2016, 92 percent of households in Lao PDR had access to electricity.79 The highest household electrification ratio is in Vientiane Capital (100 percent) and the lowest in Sekong (74 percent).80 Even in rural areas with no road access, 37 percent of households had access 
to electricity.81 
The power sector in Lao PDR has been a major source of growth over the past two decades. The expansion of the power sector supported an impressive electrification effort, improving livelihoods and supporting businesses. The quality of electricity has been rated positively compared to neighbouring countries.82 The sectoris contribution to fiscal revenues has been relatively modest. Government revenues from the power sector are expected to increase gradually in going forward. Lao PDR is blessed with abundant hydropower resources and has high energy efficiency due to the dominant role of hydropower in the mix of energy sources in Lao PDR.
Householdsi use of clean fuels and technology is still low. Only 4 percent and 2 percent of households respectively use electricity and gas for cooking,83 which are less hazardous to health and the environment than the alternatives. Two-thirds of households prefer to use firewood for cooking, and around one-quarter use charcoal, which is a wood product. 
Measurement issues: Energy access is measured by the electrification ratio and by the use of clean fuels and technology.84 The electrification ratio is available from administrative data systems in the Ministry of Energy and Mines and from census /survey data. The proportion of population with primary reliance on clean fuels and technology is obtained only from census or survey data on the use of cooking fuel by households. Renewable energy share and energy intensity are calculated by the International Energy Agency from national energy balances and statistics produced by the Ministry of Energy and Mines.85 
7.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies: 
\0xEF Making 	the 	power 	sector 	more sustainable. This means strengthening the power system planning and the project selection process to ensure that only economically viable, fiscally sustainable, and environmentally justifiable projects are selected. Investments would have higher returns and lower risks but would be fewer. The public entities in the power sector needs to be strengthened through stronger financial and corporate management and improved commercial orientation.
\0xEF Meeting domestic demand for energy. Domestic demand for electricity is expected to increase, reflecting the governmentis policy on the acceleration of rural electrification and industrial development. Since the supply sources are largely in the north and south, while the growth in demand will be most rapid in the central region, the planned investments in transmission and distribution systems are projected to require substantial increase in financial resources. Therefore, options to achieve similar results in system operations but at much lower costs to the public sector will need to be explored, such as involving the private sector.
\0xEF Developing the countryis hydropower resources sustainably and optimally. Harnessing the potential on a sustainable basis requires addressing the associated challenges, such as assessing and minimizing negative social and environmental impacts, balancing domestic consumption needs and export opportunities, and using revenues generated from electricity exports to decrease the dependence on natural resource-intensive sectors. 
\0xEF Developing renewable energies beyond the development of hydropower export potential. Lao PDRis Renewable Energy Development Strategy sets out the efficient utilization and development of all energy resources. Policy priorities focus on small power development for self-sufficiency and grid connection, biofuels production and marketing, and development of other clean energies in the country.86 
\0xEF Strengthening institutions in the energy sector. Institutional strengthening is required to promote renewable energy and energy efficiency, and improve energy demand-side management, energy 
auditing, and regulatory interventions. 87



8.1. Progress and challenges
The Lao PDR economy is still heavily reliant on natural resource sectors. The economic growth has been largely resource-driven and capital-intensive, but not broad-based and inclusive generating sufficient productive employment. Labour productivity grew significantly from 1995, but remains low and without sufficient impact on the agriculture and fishery sectors,88 which account for about 70 percent of employed persons.89 The agriculture sector has low productivity (4 to 10 times lower than non-agricultural sectors in 2010).90 In this context, the further development of local SMEs are key to diversifying the economy (see SDG 
9).
The two Labour Surveys (2010 and 2017) use different concepts. The 2017 Labour Force Survey applies the new concept of statistics of work, employment, and labour underutilization adopted by the 19th International Conference of Labour Statisticians in 2013. The important difference from the previous definition is that those who worked solely or mainly for own consumption during the reference period are no longer considered to be in employment but to be outside the labour force. The application of this new concept significantly alters the description of the labour market particularly in an agrarian economy with considerable proportion of the population in subsistence activities.91 Additionally, the results from the two surveys are not directly comparable. 
A large proportion of the working age population work in subsistence-level activities, mainly for own consumption, and decent work opportunities are limited. The high level of vulnerable work is driven by the agriculture and fishery sector, sales workers, and elementary occupations.92 Most agricultural work and informal sector work are characterized by low incomes, poor working conditions, and inadequate access to social protection and workplace representation. Lao migrant workers are a vulnerable group, accounting for around 8 percent of Lao PDRis working population,93 and mostly working in Thailand. 
Child labour statistics date from 2010, when Lao PDR undertook the first-ever Child Labour Survey (LCLS). The survey highlighted the governmentis commitment to eliminating the worst forms of child labour, according to the International Labour Organizationis (ILO) conventions on child labour. Lao PDRis Labour Law 2013 sets the minimum age for working children at 14 years. However, enforcement and monitoring the law still need strengthening. About 15 percent of children (17 percent of girls and 13 percent of boys) aged 5 to 17 years were working children or children in employment. In Lao PDR, child labour and working children are largely rural phenomena. 
Access to social protection is still inadequate. Only workers employed in the formal Lao economy have social security coverage, while workers in the informal economy have inadequate access to basic coverage. Health insurance coverage is still low.
The skills gap in the labour force needs to be addressed. To meet the market demand for medium- and high-skilled workers, especially within the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), special efforts will be needed to upgrade education and training for young people, improve labour skills, raise national skills standards, and promote mutual recognition of qualifications.
Measurement issues - labour: Labour force surveys and censuses provide much of the data. The 2017 LFS (see above) has come up with new statistics on employment, unemployment, and labour underutilization. Because of restrictive methods used to identify the labour force, the unemployment rate is high and labour force participation rate low, highlighting the challenges of insufficient productive employment opportunities. The 2017 LFS also estimates statistics for work in the informal sector and informal employment outside the informal sector. The share of own account workers and unpaid family workers is a good proxy for the proportion of informal employment in non-agricultural employment,94 but it provides little information on policy measures that can encourage formalization. Census or special surveys are also required for child labour statistics. The indicator on government spending in social protection and employment programmes requires establishing mechanisms for regular monitoring. Systems for monitoring occupational safety and health need improvement: the government can track the number of cases of occupational injury but not frequency rates.95
Measurement issues - economic growth: 
Financial services access indicators, which have been localized, are monitored by the Bank of Lao PDR (BoL) through its administrative systems. Other SDG 8 indicators can be monitored with administrative systems, but capacity needs to be built up. The Ministry of Industry and Commerce tracks the indicators on the time required to clear imports and obtain an operating license. Sustainable tourism can only be measured through a proxy indicator, as the system for national accounts is not yet fully developed. 
8.2. Looking forward
The Government is in the process of formulating the First National Rural Employment Strategy, which will enhance collaboration and synergy among national and provincial authorities towards increasing rural incomes and employment, as well as strengthen labour and social protection in rural areas. The Government is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Promoting agriculture sector productivity and increased earnings for farm workers. This is key to poverty reduction and livelihood improvement in Lao PDR. Measures include (i) improving design and maintenance of irrigation systems, (ii) improving access to infrastructure (SDG 9), (iii) increasing value capture by smallholder farmers through partnerships with private enterprises and government linkage support, (iv) improving production and processing facilities with private sector involvement, (v) promoting labour-saving technologies suitable for small-scale farms and producer groups, (vi) organizing producer groups and cooperatives for improved access to input and product markets, (vii) facilitating rural finance, and (viii) incorporating the value chain approach into extension services to promote private investments in the rice value chain, and possibly in higher valueadding crops.  
\0xEF Ensuring compliance with labour and social security laws to avoid exacerbating inequalities especially in terms of minimum wages, promoting policies that ensure the protection of workers and a safe and healthy working environment will provide the incentives and support for workers to retain employment in the non-agriculture sector.  
\0xEF Investing in training and skills development of the labour force. Those working in the informal economy remain a predominant part of the Lao economy. Many still face the barriers of accessing skills. Consequently, formal training systems need to be reoriented and made more flexible to meet the needs of informal workers. The government is developing national skills standards, and testing and certification systems benchmarked with standards of other ASEAN economies and is seeking to make the TVET system more responsive to labour market needs. Skills training and upgrading will also be achieved through public-private partnerships.  
\0xEF Promoting employment services to serve jobseekers and employers with different needs. Strong public employment services play an important role in job matching, enhancing employability, addressing skill mismatches, and linking support directly to employers and workers through various labour market programmes. To expand coverage and provide additional services to specific target groups, collaboration will be enhanced with private employment agencies, non-profit organizations, and non-governmental institutions. The private employment services will also require appropriate regulation. 
\0xEF Strengthening institutional capacities. Support is required to develop labour market information and analysis, strengthen institutional data systems to monitor and support implementation of labour-related laws and policies, and ensure a social protection floor (see also SDG 1). 
\0xEF Increasing efforts that enhance foreign investorsi linkages with the local economy, through labour markets, supply chain linkages, demonstration, and collaboration.
\0xEF Promote the One District, One Product Strategy. This is a government strategy to reduce poverty, create jobs, equip people with relevant skills, and bring Lao products to the regional and international market. In May 2017, the Trade Department under the Ministry of Industry and Commerce recorded more than 484 products from 17 provinces and Vientiane Capital, and awarded more than 130 businesses with the One District, One Product trademark. 



9.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR had made tremendous progress in developing its transport infrastructure. Around 85 percent of the rural population now live in villages with all-weather road access. Regional transport linkages have improved connectivity to neighbouring countries, leading to increased intraregional trade. Road transport accounts for nearly 90 percent of passengers, and some 81 percent of freight volumes.96 The length and quality of the road infrastructure still need improvement, especially in rural areas, while urban areas need better transport infrastructure and services. The new Lao PDR Road Sector II Project is part of the countryis national program to build climate-resilient roads and infrastructure.97
The Government of Lao PDR places high importance on science, technology, and innovation in the countryis development. This is shown by the Eighth NSEDP, which commits to enhancing local innovation and promoting the use of science, technology, and telecommunications across all outputs and outcomes. The same commitment has been demonstrated in top political forums. The Ministry of Science and Technology participated in the 2015 Declaration of the Seventh World Science Forum on the Enabling Power of Science held in Hungary in 2015, which offered approaches and lessons that could be adapted to the context of Lao PDR. In this regard, much support is needed in capacity building and human resource development to ensure that Lao citizens are well equipped with relevant knowledge and technologies to turn policy into action and to accelerate the development of Lao PDR in the right direction. 
SMEs and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) are major employers but their productivity is relatively low. SMEs and MSMEs are hampered by skill shortages and the lack of access to technology, finance, and markets. Small (and registered) firms in Lao PDR consider access to finance as one of their three major obstacles for business growth. The 2012 report on Enterprise Surveys98 showed that access to finance was also a major challenge to firm start-up, maintenance, and expansion. Firms cited the extensive requirements by banks for loan documentation and collateral as key barriers.99 The 2016 report shows that access to finance was among the top five major obstacles for business growth.100 BoL statistics also reveals that while SMEs account for over 98 percent of enterprises in Lao PDR, only 20 percent of bank credit goes to SMEs.
Access to technology is required especially for the development of agro-industries and food industries. SMEs will need to address product quality and productivity to cope with increasing competition within ASEAN.101 Skill shortages are reported by medium-sized businesses as the most serious constraint.102 The government has made concerted efforts to apply appropriate policies to improve the business environment, enhance access to finance for the private sector, and improve cross-border trade. 
The further development of local SMEs is a key policy priority. The key objectives of the SME Development Plan 2016-2020103 are (i) to improve the enabling environment for SMEs; (ii) to enhance the competitiveness and sustainable growth of Lao SMEs, and (ii) to enable their integration into regional (especially the ASEAN Economic Community) and international markets. The SME Development Plan 2016-2020 covers the following priorities: (i) the promotion of productivity, technology and innovation, (ii) the promotion of access to finance, (iii) the promotion of access to business development services, (iv) the enhancement of market access and expansion, (v) the strengthening of entrepreneurial development, (vi) the policy to create a favourable environment for businesses, and (vii) policies on customs and taxation.
Promoting SMEs will be especially beneficial for women. Women make up more than half the owners of newly registered enterprises.104 Around 31 percent of formal enterprises with more than five employees are owned by females in Lao PDR, which compares favourably with many countries, but is still lower than the average for East Asia. Female-owned firms are more likely to operate in the retail sector and less in the manufacturing sector. Those firms owned by women are much smaller in terms of number of employees compared to firms owned by men. The legal framework for doing business does not have gender discriminatory elements, but in practice, household responsibilities and lack of mobility due to personal duties makes it more difficult to start a business. Female entrepreneurs in Lao PDR are also less likely to have a bank account or credit line. 105
Measurement issues: Road access is tracked through the countryis National Committee for Rural Development and Poverty Eradication (NCRDPE), which counts only the villages that are accessible with all-weather roads, a standard higher than the global indicator, which specifies only that the population live within 2 km of an all-season road. Data on passenger and freight volumes are collected annually by the Ministry of Transport. The Ministry of Post and Telecommunications can report on the share of population covered by a mobile network by collecting the data from internet service providers and using population estimates from the Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB). Monitoring official development assistance (ODA) and other official flows to infrastructure will require more work, since external funding for infrastructure goes outside the Government budget system, making it difficult to monitor total inflows. The indicators for inclusive and sustainable industrialization requires special surveys of manufacturing establishments. Only international estimates are available for the indicator on CO2 emission.106 
9.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Promoting the growth of SMEs. The Eighth NSEDP focuses on enhancing the competitiveness of locally owned SMEs. The Department of Small and Medium Enterprise Promotion in the Ministry of Industry and Commerce is the government agency responsible for SME development. It is still a young institution and needs capacity strengthening to improve the policy framework, eliminate bureaucratic barriers, and introduce measures to enable SMEs 
to take advantage of Lao PDRis increased trade openness. 
\0xEF Strengthening the links between FDI and SMEs. Despite dependence on FDI, the linkages to the local economy are weak. Policies and supportive measures are needed to support local SMEs and incentivize FDI firms to source their supply chains from such SMEs.  
\0xEF Managing the establishment and development of Special and Specific Economic Zones (SEZs) in line with best practices. Additional resources and expertise are needed to support SEZ development.
\0xEF Promoting Green Growth. The Eighth NSEDP has indicators that allow the Government to track the countryis Green Growth status. The indicators include those related to social and environmental criteria for public infrastructure investment projects, concessions, and SEZ projects; diversification away from the resource sector, and education and certification to this end; labour productivity in resource and non-resource sectors; water and sanitation; nature tourism sites; forest coverage; natural disaster impacts; sustainable management of production forests; initial environmental examination and environmental impact assessment processes for development projects; land use classification; Green and Clean Towns; and biodiversity.



10.1. Progress and challenges
Tracking the inclusiveness of growth in Lao PDR is crucial. Lao PDR has a high GDP growth rates. The World Bank estimates that for every percent of GDP growth, poverty declined by 0.4 percent. However, inequality has widened, with an increase in Gini coefficient, and the gains for the bottom 40 percent are lower than the gains for the rest of the population.107 
Non-monetary dimensions of deprivation add to the impact of poverty on vulnerable groups. These include persistently high malnutrition, low female literacy and education, high rates of adolescent pregnancies, lack of access to and uneven quality of basic services. The majority of working age people from these vulnerable groups have incomplete primary education or no formal education, which limit their livelihood options. 
Measurement issues: Systems are already in place to track the status of the left behind population, but the administrative data may need some retooling. LECS data and administrative data from the Poverty Monitoring Programme of the NCRDPE can both be used; the latter approach may need revisiting to produce regular data on income for the SDG indicators. Lao PDR has localized the indicators for the target on financial regulation and monitoring. Other SDG 10 indicators face measurement challenges. The impact of sound fiscal, wage and social protection policies is meant to be tracked through the labour share of GDP, comprising wages and social protection transfers. Currently, only the labour (wages) share of GDP can be reported. Other data gaps relate to discrimination and migration.
10.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Increase the access of the poor to services, livelihoods, and resources. Lao PDR is working with development partners to implement a range of measures aimed at reducing gross inequities in basic services and resource distribution. These include measures such as ensuring good local governance, empowering communities to participate in decision making, expanding livelihood options, enhancing resilience to economic and climate-related setbacks, providing basic services, creating jobs, and providing skills, training and education. Policies for consolidation of villages and subsequent resettlement will promote adequate infrastructure provision, as well as capacity development and access to productive land for the resettled groups. 
\0xEF Strengthening social protection systems to cover vulnerable groups. While significant progress has been made on reducing poverty (SDG 1), access to social security coverage remains limited and welfare programmes are fragmented. Support is required to widen the scope of social protection schemes.108 (SDG target 1.3 and SDG 8). 
\0xEF Adopting good international practice for SEZs and financial sector laws. The Government is currently revising laws and related regulations towards compliance with international standards (including the localized indicator 10.5.1). The Payment System Law was approved in 2017, while the Law on Commercial Bank and Securities Law is expected to be approved in 2019. 



11.1. Progress and challenges
Urbanization needs urgent attention. Census data show that the share of the urban population has increased from 27 percent in 2005 to 33 percent in 2015. This is largely due to rural-urban migration. More than two-thirds of population growth in Vientiane Capital in recent years was caused by net in-migration.109 While the current level of urbanization in Lao PDR is low compared to the global average (54 percent in 2014),110 further growth of Lao PDRis cities can be expected. It will be important to invest in city and transport policies and infrastructure that are conducive to developing sustainable and liveable cities. 
The Vientiane city core area is being developed into an environmentally sustainable and pedestrian-friendly city. Following an urban development sector assessment in 2012, the Vientiane Sustainable Urban Transport Project was approved in 2015. The project aims to improve transportation systems in the capital city. The project will bring traffic and transportation management under the control of one unique entity. A Bus Rapid Transit system will be developed for Vientiane Capital, followed by improved traffic management, paid parking systems, and better accessibility for pedestrians and non-motor 
traffic in the core of the city. 111    
Lao PDR has numerous heritage sites. Lao PDR has more than 2,000 tourist sites, of which there are 1,200 nature sites, over 600 cultural sites, around 300 historical sites, and two world heritage towns.112 In 2014, Luang Prabang Province received the prestigious ASEAN Environmentally Sustainable City (ESC) Award. The Award recognized the exemplary initiative to keep the city clean, green, and liveable even as it continued to grow as a centre of economic activity.113 Luang Prabang has also been awarded as ASEAN Clean Tourist 
City.
Measurement issues: Lao PDR has adopted its own definition of inadequate housing. The UN definition notes that this SDG indicator means households that lack one or more of the following: durable housing, sufficient living space, easy access to safe water, access to adequate sanitation, and security of tenure. In the Lao context, the 2013 MDG Progress Report114 defined \0xECinadequate housing as houses with any one of the following: unsafe water, inadequate sanitation, and earthen floor (or floor with \0xECfundamental materials). The same approach is taken for SDG 11. Protection of cultural and natural heritage is measured by the number of sites and state budget support to these sites. Ecotourism sites will be measured separately from cultural and historical sites, as this was one of the green growth indicators adopted for the NSEDP. Moreover, the \0xECstate budget support to these sites will need to be defined. The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment can report on the air quality in selected cities (i.e., the annual mean levels of fine particulate matter), but only on PM10 and not on PM2.5, although both are required. While the indicator should be weighted by population;115 it may not be possible to do nationwide population weighting since air quality is measured only in certain cities. Data is unavailable on the global indicators related to sustainable transport systems, urban planning, and management.
Government methodology and data collection are not aligned with international disaster data collection initiatives, such as EM-DAT.116 EM-DAT data should use national-level data which is more granular. Harmonizing may be needed on definitions and data collection methods. Additionally, the international procedures for measuring direct economic losses need technical support e.g., for Post-Disaster Needs Assessment.117
11.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Making cities and towns better places to live in. The Eighth NSEDP includes programmes to enhance urban water and urban sanitation, improve public governance and administration, and establish \0xECGreen and Clean Towns (including climate-smart planning). The Department of Housing and Urban Planning, and the Ministry of Public Works and Transportation have adopted an urban sector strategy. This includes strategies on solid waste, water sector investment, urban sanitation, capacity development for urban planning and development authorities; improvement of the legal and regulatory framework for the urban sector; urban transport and housing development. Priority will be given to roads in commercial and high-density areas and to roads leading to markets, schools, hospitals, and other public facilities. Private investment in transport infrastructure and services is needed.118 
\0xEF Preparing instruments for sustainable land use. The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) is developing \0xECClean and Beautiful Guidelines as part of promoting environmental quality, which are expected to be approved in the near future. MoNRE is also in the process of proposing the National Land Use Master Plan to the National Assembly for consideration.
\0xEF Strengthening management controls to protect heritage sites. Tourism in protected areas needs to be properly managed to generate opportunities for local economic diversification, prevent degradation, and raise public revenue for the preservation of assets. Cultural and historical sites need more stringent use and enforcement of cultural heritage impact assessments as part of development planning, strengthened conservation planning, heritage education for residents and tourists, promotion of cultural industries, and reinvestment of taxes and fees into heritage conservation.
\0xEF Strengthening data systems on sustainable cities. Systems to collect data for indicators on housing, waste management, pollution and urban transport need to be strengthened and definitions made more consistent.  



12.1. Progress and challenges
The efficient use and sustainable management of natural resources is a priority for Lao PDR. This priority has been mainstreamed into the Eighth NSEDP under the third outcome of Environmental Protection and Sustainable Natural Resources Management. 
Ecotourism is also a national priority in the 
Eighth NSEDP. It is part of at least two Green Growth indicators. Outcome 1, Output 5 and Outcome 2, Outputs 6 in the NSEDP promote tourism and ecotourism. The Government has committed to ecotourism in the Lao PDR Action Plan to implement the 2016 Pakse Declaration on ASEAN Roadmap for Strategic Development of Ecotourism Clusters & Tourism Corridors.119 
Measurement issues: Most targets under SDG 12 still lack robust measurement systems. The Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment, with international support, is still setting up systems for measuring indicators such as the Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP), National Action Plan, material footprint, material footprint per capita, and material footprint per GDP. Localized indicators have been developed to monitor Target 12.8 on information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles, and Target 12.b on sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism. The indicators will require the MoES to implement curricula changes to incorporate education on sustainable development and track the number of universities with sustainability campus plans. The Ministry of Information, Culture and Tourism will need to report on the implementation of the Lao PDR Action Plan for the Pakse Declaration (Annex 1). 
12.2. Looking forward 
The Governmentis Green Growth Strategy potentially fits with SDG 12 (Box 1). The relative newness of sustainable consumption and production in Lao PDR means that policy and operational frameworks are inadequate. 
\0xEF Both policy makers and the public need to be made aware of SDG 12. 
\0xEF The national policy framework on sustainable consumption and production should fit with existing frameworks. To this end, MoNRE is in the process of identifying Green Procurement guidelines and indicators that will fit into the Lao context. 
\0xEF SMEs will need to develop their human resources and skills, while Government entities and SMEs will need access to the best available technologies and environmental practices, innovations and marketing tools. 

Box 1. The National Green Growth Strategy of the Lao Peopleis Democratic Republic
On 8 December 2016, the Government of Lao PDR established a Green Growth National Steering Committee to guide and lead green growth activities countrywide. The National Green Growth Strategy of the Lao PDR is still in the consultation process. It aims to ensure the achievement of national goals and targets in an efficient, effective, and sustainable manner. The Strategy mainstreams the \0xECGreen Growth Agenda into Lao PDRis Vision 2030, Ten-Year Strategy (2016-2025) and the Eighth Five-Year Socio-Economic Development Plan (2016-2020). 
The National Green Growth Strategy does not \0xECbelong only to SDG 12, which is only part of the Strategy. Rather, the Strategy extends across several SDGs, but it is discussed here for convenience. Within the NSEDP, there are currently 15 indicators linked to Green Growth. Work is ongoing to review and revise these as necessary, depending on the development of the National Green Growth Strategy.
The current indicators in the Eighth NSEDP linked to Green Growth include those related to social and environmental criteria for large public infrastructure investment projects and concessions; the processes of initial environmental examination and environmental impact assessment for development projects; diversification away from the resources sector; education and certification in the non-resource sectors; labour productivity in resource and non-resource sectors; water and sanitation; nature tourism sites; forest coverage; natural disaster impacts; sustainable management of production forests; land use classification; Green and Clean Towns; and biodiversity.


13.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR is highly vulnerable to the impacts of natural hazards and climate change. Lao PDR is exposed to a range of natural phenomena, including typhoons, floods, landslides, droughts, strong winds, as well as small scale earthquakes in the northern parts of the country. The country is seeing an increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods. The majority of floods occur in the central and southern parts of the country along the Mekong plain. From 1990 to 2015, Lao PDR had 21 floods and storms, with the more severe ones affecting over 500,000 people.120 Reducing the impact of these disasters on the population will require effective disaster preparedness and risk reduction.
The impact will be felt on crops, livestock, fisheries, and communities in Lao PDR. Changes in rainfall and temperature patterns have significant ramifications for ecosystems, and communities and the livelihoods that depend on them. More precipitation during the traditional growing season will affect crops through increased flooding, waterlogging of soils, and higher incidence of fungal disease and pests. Large rainfall events are expected to occur more frequently, triggering floods and landslides.121  Lao PDRis capture fisheries in their current form are highly vulnerable to climate change. The projected increase in both average and extreme temperatures are likely to affect health. 
On 7 September 2016, Lao PDR became the first ASEAN country to ratify the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. On that date, Lao PDR passed a national law on its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution, which became the basis of Lao PDRis ratification of the Paris Agreement. On 1 October 2015, the Government submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).122 Lao PDRis NDC was prepared through an inclusive stakeholder consultation process, and was based on existing national plans and strategies. These include: 7th and 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plans (20112015 and 2016-2020), Vision 2030, National Climate Change Strategy (2010), Forestry 
Strategy to the Year 2020 of the Lao PDR (2005), Renewable Energy Development Strategy (2011), Sustainable Transport Development Strategy (2010), Climate Change Action Plan of Lao PDR for 2013-2020 (2013), National Adaptation Programme of Action (2009), the Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2013), and Investment and Financial Flows to Address Climate Change in Energy, Agriculture and Water Sector (2015). 
Greenhouse gas emissions have doubled in ten years. Lao PDR recorded a net sink of CO2 in 1990 and a net emission by year 2000.123 Of the total CO2 emissions, nearly all were emitted by land-use change and forestry. The agriculture sector produced the greatest share of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). 
Phase-out of ozone-depleting substances (ODS) is on track. These have declined to near-zero in 2014.124 The remaining ODS, which are hydro-chlorofluorocarbons, are scheduled to phase out by 2030.125 
Measurement issues:  On resilience and adaptive capacity, the global indicators cover the impact of disaster, and the establishment of disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies and plans of action. Lao PDRis national and subnational DRR systems will need to be strong on resilience and adaptive capacity, and have clear timelines and action points to facilitate robust monitoring. Target 13.2 promotes the integration of climate change measures into national policies, strategies, and planning. The NDC lists five priority sectors for climate action n agriculture, forestry, health, water, and transport/urban development. Lao PDR will report on the progress of its Intended NDC implementation, which also includes progress on previous commitments such as the 2009 National Adaptation Programme of Action126 and the National Strategy on Climate Change. Qualitative reviews will be required to assess the integration of mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction, and early warning into Lao PDRis education curricula at primary, secondary, and tertiary level.  
13.2. Looking forward
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies, as set out in its NDC127 submission: 
\0xEF Capacity strengthening to establish a credible institution with direct access to climate finance. Thus far, Lao PDR has received funding through the indirect channel. Since each countryis ability to gain direct access to international climate finance will depend largely on its institutional capacities, analysing existing capacities within MoNRE and identifying where capacity should be built is an important starting point. 
\0xEF Ensuring that domestic and international finance is successfully acquired, utilized, and accounted for. This will entail needs assessments, identification of financing sources and access routes, formulation of projects, programmes, and sector-wide approaches to access finance, systems to coordinate, manage and implement projects, and mechanisms for monitoring reporting and verification of climate finance. 
\0xEF Strengthening the overall strategy, coordination of NDC implementation and regulatory framework. Within this established framework, effective arrangements for liaison with responsible line ministries, international stakeholders, and development partners at national and local levels are being put in place to facilitate implementation of the NDC. 
\0xEF Strengthening national technical capacity in mitigation and adaptation. One of the most crucial requirements is to strengthen technical capacity n not just across sectors, but at all levels of engagement from central government decision-makers through to local levels and technical staff. 
\0xEF Strengthening institutional capacities for monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) of the NDC. Lao PDR recognizes that a sound MRV system is the cornerstone of effective national implementation, as it allows progress against implementation plans to be demonstrated and provides data for learning for future project development. The government will need to develop a greenhouse gas inventory system, a Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) MRV framework, adaptation evaluation indicators and tracking systems for climate finance. These will be based on readiness assessments to assess the current organizational arrangements, personnel capacity, national policies, and existing domestic MRV systems. 



14.1. Progress and challenges
Lao PDR has adapted SDG 14 to fit its landlocked country status. The global list of SDGs lacks freshwater resources as a separate goal, although freshwater resources form part of SDG 15. Lao PDR considers that three targets under SDG 14 (14.4, 14.6, and 14.b) are relevant to freshwater resources. Lao PDR, therefore, has replaced the \0xECoceans, seas and marine resources in the original formulation of SDG 14 with \0xECaquatic resources, which shall be taken to mean resources relating to lakes, rivers, and streams.
Lao PDRis diverse freshwater ecosystem provides food and livelihood security. The Lao population rely mainly on subsistence fisheries. Aquaculture is on the increase, but it is still less important than are capture fisheries for food security. The fisheries also support businesses, ranging from services for fishing families to boat builders and fishing gear suppliers. 
The countryis aquatic resources are facing threats on multiple fronts. Developments that cause habitat degradation, water pollution or restrict migration affect fisheries. Stringent controls are difficult to enforce, given the multitude of small fisheries and the strong reliance of the population on fishery.
Measurement issues: Indicators for the three relevant targets under SDG 14 have been adapted for use by Lao PDR (Annex 2) but data is not yet available. The management of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels is a priority for Lao PDR. The country is able to use the kilometres and numbers of fish conservation zones as a proxy indicator. The globally recommended indicator \0xECProportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels cannot be used, as stock assessments of each stock are currently not available.128 It is also not feasible at present to monitor changes in total catch or catch rates. Access for small-scale artisanal fishers to resources and markets can be monitored through the FAOis Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (CCRF).129 The three indicators related to small-scale fisheries are (i) the existence of instruments that specifically target or address the small-scale fisheries sector, (ii) ongoing specific initiatives to implement the small-scale fisheries Guidelines, and (iii) the existence of mechanisms enabling small-scale fishers and fish workers to contribute to decision-making processes. These three indicators are part of an FAO survey on CCRF implementation.
14.2. Looking forward 
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Promoting community and comanagement schemes for aquatic resources. Some of these have been effective in conserving stocks. Communitybased fisheries or co-management programmes support Fish Conservation Zones, which are protected areas, usually in deep pools. Additional measures such as total allowable catch limits, transferable or non-transferable quotas, and economic incentives may be needed.
\0xEF Improving the planning and management of the sector. Better information is required on catches and aquaculture. Inadequate information on the economic significance of the fisheries sector undermines their importance and subsequent management. The fisheries value is estimated to be around 7 percent of the countryis GDP.130 
\0xEF Optimizing the potential of aquaculture for commercial development and poverty alleviation. From a financial perspective, aquaculture compares well with alternative traditional enterprises such as rice and capture fishery, and new enterprises, such as fruit and coffee production. However, aquaculture is constrained by the lack of inputs (e.g., fish seed, supplemental feed, and manures), lack of access to credit, technical information, and extension services, and lack of awareness among 
farmers. 131 
\0xEF Reducing vulnerability to climate change. Lao PDRis capture fisheries in their current form are highly vulnerable to climate change. The country will need to shift towards greater reliance on aquaculture.  



15.1. Progress and challenges
Definitions are key in monitoring forest cover and sustainable management plans. Lao PDRis definition of forest sets a higher standard for tree crown cover than that in the international definition (Box 2).  
The data source for reporting on forest cover has changed, leading to a new coverage figure. The new data source is now the forest cover maps being developed by the Department of Forestry of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) in a fiveyear cycle. These are proposed to be the basis for reporting on efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD+) as well as for the National Communications Reports to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Accordingly, forest coverage data is now different from that used in 2011, when forest cover was reported to be 40.3 percent,132 the figure used by the 2013 MDG Progress Report. Tables 4 and 5 capture the changes made in forest coverage. The current forest area, according to the new data source and definitions, is 58 percent of the land area in Lao PDR (Table 5). 
Lao PDR has used its resources to advance the countryis growth and development. However, the Government recognizes that excessive resource use will undermine future growth prospects. Deforestation rates were estimated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forest as 0.26 percent per annum between 2010 and 2015.133 Continued environmental degradation will negatively affect livelihoods, especially for the poor. 
Measurement issues: Most of the SDG 15 indicators required adaptation to fit Lao PDRis national circumstances and definitions. There are still some pending issues n for instance, clear criteria need to be established for what is considered sustainable management of all types of forests. The Prime Ministeris Order No. 15, 2016, which imposes a ban on logging from production forests, has been highly effective. It has allowed the forest sector to shift to a more sustainable basis by implementing and testing more participatory models of forest management, and introduce important forest governance reforms including certification and timber legality assurance systems. Certification model testing has started. Therefore, the indicator on production forest certification remains appropriate (indicator 15.2.1). Furthermore, the indicator is already an NSEDP indicator. The proportion of land area covered by conservation forests is a wellaccepted indicator for targets 15.2 and 15.4. Land degradation (light, moderate, and severe) is measured through the Agricultural Census.134 Systems still need to be set up within the government to monitor the progress towards biodiversity national targets (target 15.9), financial resources for biodiversity, ecosystems and sustainable forest management (targets 15a and 15b), and the trafficking of protected flora and fauna (target 15.7).
15.2. Looking forward 
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Strengthening the governance of the natural resource sectors. Reversing deforestation and forest degradation and reversing biodiversity loss are national priorities for Lao PDR. The capacity to manage forests needs to be strengthened, including for ensuring stronger oversight arrangements over salvage logging, enforcing the ban on illegal timber trade, combating poaching and wildlife trafficking, and preventing illegal mining. 
\0xEF Strengthening implementation of existing national policies and action plans relating to ecosystems and natural resources. These include the Eighth NSEDP 2016-2020, Vision 2030, National Climate Change Strategy (2010), Forestry Strategy to the Year 2020 of the Lao PDR (2005), Renewable Energy Development Strategy (2011), Sustainable Transport Development Strategy (2010), Climate Change Action Plan of Lao PDR for 2013-2020 (2013), National Adaptation Programme of Action (2009), the Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2013) and the National REDD+ Strategy (to be approved by June 2018).
\0xEF Promoting private sector involvement and community benefit sharing. Projects affecting protection forests are required to contribute funds for natural resource management.135 These include hydropower projects, which are required to contribute one percent of the total value of the sale of the electricity per annum. The Government has also established the Forest Resource Development Fund from various sources, which needs to be made financially sustainable. Equally, the government with support from development partners will need to continue expanding existing initiatives, such as payment for environmental services and payment from preserving forests for carbon sequestration (e.g., REDD+136).




Box 2. Forest cover definitions
The definition of forest from the UNis Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) 
The FAOis definition of \0xECForest is \0xECLand spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 meters and a canopy cover of more than 10 percent, or trees able to reach these thresholds in situ. It does not include land that is predominantly under agricultural or urban land use. 
The definition includes areas with young trees that have not yet reached but which are expected to reach a canopy cover of at least 10 percent and tree height of 5 meters or more. It also includes areas that are temporarily unstocked due to clear-cutting as part of a forest management practice or natural disasters, and which are expected to regenerate within 5 years. In exceptional cases, local conditions may justify the use of a longer time frame. It includes abandoned shifting cultivation land with a regeneration of trees that have, or are expected to reach, a canopy cover of at least 10 percent and tree height of at least 5 meters. While some plantations are included (rubber wood, cork oak and Christmas tree plantations), and areas with bamboo and palms are also included (provided that land use, height and canopy cover criteria are met), the definition excludes tree stands in agricultural production systems, such as fruit tree plantations, oil palm plantations, olive orchards and agroforestry systems where crops are grown under tree cover.
Lao PDRis definition of forest 
Current Forest includes natural forests and plantation forests. It refers to land with a tree canopy cover of more than 20 percent and an area of more than 0.5 hectare. The trees should be able to reach a minimum diameter of 10 cm at breast height. The basis for the distinction between forest and other land use groups is the crown density. Oil palm plantations and bamboo forests, however, are not considered as forests.
Potential Forest is a previous forest area where the crown cover has been reduced below 20 percent for one reason or another, such as logging or shifting cultivation. It includes regenerating vegetation (below) and bamboo. 
Regenerating Vegetation are previously forested areas where the crown density has been reduced to less than 20 percent because of logging, shifting cultivation or other reasons. If the area is left to grow undisturbed, it will become a forest again. Regenerating Vegetation include abandoned fallow and disturbed stands with a crown density less than 20 percent. 
Plantation Forests include all sustainable plantations, including young ones with a crown density less than 20 percent. Rubber plantations are also classified as Plantation Forest. However, coffee, tea and shade-providing trees for coffee and tea, as well as fruit trees, are not classified as Plantation Forest.  
References:
\0xEF FAO, 2012. FRA 2015: Terms and definitions. Forest Resources Assessment Working Paper 180. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. Available from:  http://www.
fao.org/docrep/017/ap862e/ap862e00.pdf   Accessed 21 May 2018.
\0xEF Forestry Strategy to the Year 2020 of Lao PDR, July 2005 and Forestry Law 2007, Lao PDR
\0xEF Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, 2018. Lao PDRis Forest Reference Emission Level and Forest Reference Level for REDD+ Results Payment under the UNFCCC (Jan 2018). Available from: http://redd.unfccc.int/submissions.html?country=lao Accessed 21 May 2018.


16.1. Progress and challenges
The greater openness of borders poses both opportunities and challenges for realizing SDG 16. Increased and affordable access to regular migration channels protects migrant workers, while reducing exploitation and trafficking of children, women, and men. However, without effective law enforcement and protection mechanisms, the greater openness brought about by the ASEAN 
Economic Community (AEC) will have a negative impact. Looser customs and border control procedures could lead to a rise in illegal trade, trafficking, and crime. Increased connectivity is beneficial for trade and economic growth, but it also opens the way for transnational crime syndicates. 
Birth registration is important, not only as a goal in itself but to protect children by making it easier to trace and report them. Universal birth registration has not yet been achieved. In 2017, the percentage of children under 5 whose births had been registered with a civil authority was 73 per cent.
Steady progress has been made towards establishing rule of law, but significant challenges remain. The expansion of legal services is constrained by human and financial factors, such as the costs of running legal aid facilities, the insufficient number of qualified lawyers and judges, and the limited understanding about access to justice among men and women. Strengthening governance and addressing corruption are also required for the economy to become more competitive. Lao PDR has initiated a successful anti-corruption campaign (section A2.6). Its Corruption Perceptions Index in 2017 was 135 out of 180. 
Measurement issues: Administrative systems for SDG 16 indicators need strengthening to produce regular and robust reports with sexdisaggregated data. These are the indicators on homicide victims and victims of violence, the handling of cases by the Ministry of Justice and the Peopleis Supreme Court, transparency in budget planning and execution,  the composition of public sector employees (by gender, ethnicity and disability status), and birth registration. In the case of trafficking, technical support is needed to apply the standards and methodology of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in measuring the \0xECdetected victims of trafficking per 100,000 population. The group of indicators on violence and abuse against children and women (see also SDG 5) require specially designed surveys at periodic intervals. Such surveys cannot be integrated with normal household surveys, since (i) a special methodology has to be applied to protect the safety and confidentiality of respondents and ensure adherence to WHO guidelines137 on safety and ethics, and (ii) a survey response plan must be implemented to provide services for respondents who need and want help for past or current experiences of violence.   
16.2. Looking forward 
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies:
\0xEF Strengthening collaboration with other countries in the region to accelerate implementation of regional frameworks and combat transnational crime. These include the ASEAN Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children and the ASEAN Convention against Trafficking in Persons. It also includes collaboration on combatting transnational organized crime, especially money flows, and terrorism.
\0xEF Strengthening measures to manage tourism growth and address risks. Increasing numbers of children in Southeast Asia are sexually exploited by local and foreign visitors who make use of facilities developed for tourism to gain access to children.138,139 The Government of Lao PDR is addressing these risks through joint efforts by the police (Ministry of Public Security) and the MoICT. 
\0xEF Strengthening government services and social workers to intervene as appropriate in cases of children at risk. The Governmentis programme to produce qualified and trained professional social workers from tertiary education institutes140 needs to be supported by providing social workers with the budget, competencies and legal authority to intervene at community and household level. Universal coverage by services that provide birth registration and other identification documents will also be required. 



17.1. Progress and challenges
The Lao PDR firmly upholds its foreign policy based on the principle of peace, independence, friendship and cooperation to pursue its national security and development agenda. In this context, the country has become an active and responsible member of various sub-regional, regional and international organizations.   
Regional and international cooperation and integration are high on the national agenda, as highlighted in the current 8th NSEDP. Lao PDR assumed the Chairmanship of ASEAN in 2016, which marked the start of implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025. With the youngest labour force in the region, Lao PDR is expected to benefit from the demographic transition. ASEAN economic integration should create more opportunities to grow and diversify in different directions. As a member of the World Trade Organization, Lao PDR has been actively engaging in the global economic integration. The Government has made legislative amendments in a number of areas, including among other, tax, trade and intellectual property. Furthermore, Lao PDR has been promoting economic integration through focusing on effective implementation of goods and services commitments at both the WTO and ASEAN levels. Recent progress includes the launch of the Lao Services Portal, which contains information related to trade and investment services; the establishment of a Regulatory Authority for the Telecommunication Sector; and the adoption of sector regulations, in particular the framework for competition, interconnection, licensing regime and spectrum management. To comply with the AEC integration process, Lao PDR is expected to reduce its import tariffs on goods imported from other ASEAN countries to zero by 2018 and remove non-tariff barriers. 
The Government continues to put emphasis on information and communication technology. Efforts are being made to enforce the Law on Intellectual Property and the associated implementation of trademarks, copyrights, and industrial patents. A National Science and Technology Strategy 2013-2020 and a Vision 2030 have been developed and a Law on Science and Technology has been presented to the National Assembly for approval. Key initiatives to further improve the contribution of science and technology to development include: making ICT work for education, establishing private sector partnerships for ICT development, connecting rural communities, linking research and farmers and establishing an online early warning system. 
The development financing landscape has seen a significant increase in both domestic and international private finance. Various laws and decrees help to shape the direction of private investment such as the Investment Promotion Law 2009 and its 2016 revision and the Enterprise Law which set the framework for private sector investment. A strategic plan for capital market development covers the period 2016-2025. 
In securing financing for SDGs, the predictability and sustainability of funding sources remain a challenge. Currently some critical interventions are dependent on external funding. The NSEDP includes outputs and indicators related to tracking of domestic revenues and expenditure, FDI, ODA and South-South Cooperation.
The Vientiane Declaration on Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (2016-2025) is the overarching framework for development cooperation in Lao PDR. The Declaration aligns Lao PDRis cooperation principles with the global agenda on effective development cooperation, including the 2012 Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation, the 2014 Mexico High Level 
Meeting Communiqu\0xC8, the 2015 Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the SDGs. At the national level, the Government, together with its partners, has currently developed a monitoring framework called Vientiane Declaration Country Action Plan (VDCAP), which is in line with the global partnership for effective development cooperation. This will guide how effective development cooperation is monitored and reported on.  In addition, to support multi-stakeholder partnerships for sustainable development, Lao PDR has recently reviewed and reconfirmed the commitment to further enhance the national development cooperation forum, the Round Table Process, including Sector Working Groups. The Round Table Process is guided by globally agreed principles on effective development cooperation such as government ownership of development priorities and plans, a focus on results, inclusive development partnerships and transparency and accountability to one another. 
The Lao PDRnUnited Nations Partnership Framework (2017-2021) articulates the collective response of the UN system to national development priorities. The Partnership Framework aims to identify strategic focus areas, promote synergy, improve coordination, and ensure transparency and predictability of resources. It also aims to make the knowledge networks and expertise of the UN system more systematically accessible to the Government of Lao PDR.
Measurement issues: Indicators proposed for SDG 17 capture the crosscutting elements that can be currently monitored at country level in Lao PDR. These include indicators on aid effectiveness and financing for development, workersi remittances, debt service, technology, and statistical capacities. Clear official definitions are needed for some indicators, such as what counts as foreign direct investment (FDI) and SSC. Other indicators will require adding questions to existing surveys. For example, the proportion of individuals using the Internet is an established indicator but can only be accurately gauged through surveys, as internet subscriptions recorded by the Ministry of Post and Telecommunication do not reflect internet use through mobile phones, especially among the young.
17.2. Looking forward 
The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following strategies: 
\0xEF Translating the principles of the Vientiane Declaration and its Country Action Plan (VDCAP 2016-2020) into practice. This is an important task as the adoption of the Vientiane Declaration is a joint responsibility of the Government and its partners to transition from an aid effectiveness agenda to transformative, inclusive, and accountable multistakeholder partnerships. This will be done within the Round Table Process, including Sector Working Groups.
\0xEF Improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the budget allocation and monitoring process. The NSEDP has indicators on domestic revenue, external funds, and expenditure, which illustrate the Governmentis focus on this issue. The aim is to have guaranteed funding for core basic services and UXO activities. 
\0xEF Establishing a rule of law state by 2020. The Government with development partnersi support is implementing a comprehensive Legal Sector Master Plan. Efforts focus on strengthening institutional and human resource capacities to protect and advocate for peopleis rights, building stronger safeguards for the exercise of the rights of all citizens, improving peopleis access to law and justice institutions, developing clearer, more consistent, and responsive laws and regulations, and monitoring and reporting on international legal obligations. 
\0xEF Tackling the measurement and data challenges identified in this report. Lao PDR has passed Statistics Law No.03/NA, dated 30 June 2010 with a clause requiring gender disaggregated statistics.141 Support is needed to strengthen statistical capacities to track SDGs and fully implement the Statistics Law. Among the gaps that have been identified are the lack of systematic disaggregation of data by gender and especially by disability status. Monitoring the well-being of people with disabilities needs to start with key indicators, such as access to basic services. Other national priorities include strengthening and expanding the coverage of the civil registration and vital statistics system and strengthening administrative information systems to reliably track key service coverage and outcome indicators. 

LIVES SAFE 

18.1. Progress and challenges
Addressing and even quantifying the impact of UXO142  remains a challenge. Over the last decade, UXO casualties were reduced by 85 per cent. In recent years, a combination of effective risk education, clearance of contaminated areas and wider economic opportunities that reduce risky behaviour have seen the numbers of casualties dropping from 302 in 2008 to 41 in 2017.
A major national survey is underway to provide details on geographic areas contaminated by UXOs in the form of Confirmed Hazardous Areas (CHAs). The survey results will inform long-term resource planning, prioritization and clearance. In recent years, a results-oriented methodology has evolved for identifying, prioritizing, and clearing confirmed contaminated areas. Continued development and expansion of these processes have significantly increased the numbers of UXO being identified and destroyed. Throughout the implementation of the survey over the past two years, 7,068 CHAs were established by the end of 2017, equivalent to 51,247.48 hectares of CHAs remaining to be cleared. Already, Lao PDR has recorded more than 53,000 hectares of land cleared of UXO and more than 1.3 million items of UXO destroyed. 
An estimated 20,000 survivors remain out of more than 50,000 people killed, maimed, or injured from 1964-2008. Lao PDR has adopted a UXO Victim Assistance Strategy that seeks to enhance medical services, rehabilitation, and socio-economic support for survivors. The UXO Victim Assistance Strategy has provided some 1,400 survivors with medical care, physical rehabilitation, psychosocial support, economic reintegration, and vocational training.
Challenges remain despite the progress:  
\0xEF The scale and impact of the UXO problem far exceeds the resources and capacities available to deal with it, particularly clearance capacity. Millions of UXO remain and thousands of hectares of confirmed hazardous areas remain to be cleared. 
\0xEF Support to achieve the three targets under SDG 18 is not balanced: for example, funding for the survey is currently out of balance with the funding allocated to clearance, risk education, and support to UXO victims. 
\0xEF The lack of capacity for coordination, planning, quality assurance, and information management inhibits optimal operational performance. 
\0xEF Other sectors and partners still do not include UXO in their strategic planning, budgeting or action plans, although they are required to build the cost into all development projects they undertake in contaminated areas.143 
Measurement issues: The National Regulatory Authority has applied new indicators to reflect the shift to new survey procedures and evidence-based clearance. As an example, the focus on the number of hectares cleared has been expanded to include efficiency indicators, such as the number of UXO removed. The indicators for target 18.2 and 18.3 are difficult to measure at this time. Most of the current indicator are process indicators that can be collected during routine operational implementation and reporting. Lao PDR has an Information Management System for Mine Action (IMSMA) that will be able to link to data systems in other sectors and enable wider monitoring. 
18.2. Looking forward 
The scale and scope of the issue lie well beyond the national capacity to cope, and support from development partners continues to be required. The new Lao PDR UXO Survey Procedures, adopted on 15 January 2015, have already contributed to greater efficiencies in the sector. Together with the system for prioritization of clearance tasks, announced at the Sixth State Party Meeting, it is expected that these new procedures will accelerate clearance. The Government of Lao PDR is prioritizing the following actions and strategies:
\0xEF Strengthening national capacity for coordination and efficiency. 
\0xEF Ensuring the quality of operational data in the national database, in order to enable proper data analysis and a more robust evidence-based reporting.
\0xEF Developing management policy and procedures to \0xECmain-stream UXO survivors into health, education, and employment services. 
\0xEF Assisting line Ministries to take into account the impact of UXO in their planning and budgeting.
\0xEF Developing a comprehensive resource mobilization and fund-raising strategy, expanding beyond traditional donors. 
\0xEF Continuing to strengthen the capacity of the Lao Army in humanitarian mine action. 
\0xEF Identifying and promoting emerging technologies that will improve the performance and efficiency of operations.

   C. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION  

To achieve national development goals, the SDGs and LDC graduation, Lao PDR will need to maximize strategic allocations of development finance from different sources. The Government estimates that implementing the National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP, 2016\0xF32020) will require over USD 21.4 billion, as endorsed by the National Assembly in 2016.144 Some 40 to 49 per cent will need to come from foreign and domestic private investment, and another 40 to 49 per cent from financial institutions. Government investment is expected to be around 12 to 15 per cent, while ODA is expected to contribute from around 15 to 24 per cent of the total. 145
Three strategic priorities will help in managing the different flows of development finance. These are (i) leveraging the private sector to support achievement of the national development agenda, (ii) ensuring efficient and effective spending of public revenues, and (iii) using the complementarity between the different external public finance flows. In the past ODA has been used to fill the fiscal gap and contribute to social sector spending; the increase in domestic public revenues can now be increasingly used for this purpose. 
A mix of strategies is required for financing the achievement of national goals and priorities.146 These are as follows:
\0xEF Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of domestic public revenues by strengthening planning, budgeting, and budget monitoring systems, examining the allocation of domestic public revenue against national priorities, and increasing social sector allocations to address social inequalities;
\0xEF Expanding the Round Table Implementation Mechanism to more comprehensively coordinate and manage other development finance flows, in line with the Vientiane Declaration on Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (2016-2025); 
\0xEF Promoting the domestic private sector in Lao PDR through measures to improve the overall business climate, enhance economic diversity and resilience, and promote not only major project investment, but also enable access to finance for micro- and small- and medium enterprises; 
\0xEF Ensuring that private sector investment is aligned with NSEDP goals and priorities, and reviewing bank lending practices in this context; 
\0xEF Maximizing the growth potential of FDI by (i) improving investment and trade-related administrative procedures and regulations; (ii) undertaking reforms that enable the Government to better implement the revised regulations; and (iii) using diagnostic tools to map processes and pinpoint inefficiencies; 
\0xEF Reviewing current FDI themes and incentives against NSEDP requirements, and promoting tourism\0xF3 especially ecotourism and cultural tourism;
\0xEF Sharpening the criteria for Public Private Partnerships to ensure that such a partnership serves a clear and vital public sector purpose in line with the NSEDP; 
\0xEF Improving monitoring and evaluating mechanisms to ensure data integrity and up-to-date data to better predict the financing needs of NSEDP and the 2030 Agenda; 
\0xEF Implementing a clear strategy on debt, including publicly announced targets on key debt measures for transitioning from an LDC to a middle-income economy;
\0xEF Developing Corporate Social Responsibility approaches and partnerships that contribute towards national development goals. 
The preceding sections on each SDG have identified the priorities of Lao PDR, where support and partnerships will be required. 

D. NEXT STEPS  

The next step will be to establish baselines for all indicators that have been localized (Annex 2). The data shown in the tables in Annex 1 do not cover all the SDG indicators that Lao PDR has adopted. Many sets of data required for the indicators - especially disaggregated data - are still not available or updated. The Lao Statistics Bureau is monitoring the SDGs and conducting a gap analysis on the data issue. 
Awareness raising, public education and stakeholder consultation are important next steps for 2018\0xF32020, in the runup to the next NSEDP. The National SDG Secretariat has already initiated an outreach program, in collaboration with UN agencies, to local universities and some government offices at central and local levels. Future stakeholder consultations will focus, among others, on questions relevant to Lao PDR for each SDG, on challenges identified in the VNR, and on engagement with a broad array of stakeholders. 

E. CONCLUSIONS  

Lao PDR sequenced its MDG review and SDG localization to converge with the development of national plans. The MDG review in 2015 and SDG localization in early 2016 ensured early SDG integration into the Eighth NSEDP and maximized potential synergies with both national and sectoral plans. In late 2015 also, the United Nations in Lao PDR developed and finalized its analysis to inform the Lao PDRnUN Partnership Framework (2017-2021), which articulates the UNis support to Lao PDR.
Extra efforts are still required in planning and coordination to reach the poorest and most disadvantaged groups. Collaboration and coordination needs to improve both horizontally across line ministries, and vertically between central and local levels, so that interventions converge to reach the poorest and most disadvantaged communities. A start has been made with the development and implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy and Plan of Action 2016-2020, which emphasize a multi-sectoral response to undernutrition, with nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions converging on high-risk districts. Such coordinated interventions will be expanded to and intensified in other sectors.
Administrative data systems in many goal areas still need strengthening. As Lao PDR moves forward with the SDGs and implements its national development plans (NSEDP and sectoral plans), enhanced support is needed to strengthen the information systems of ministries, particularly in the areas where these cannot yet produce robust and disaggregated data on the localized SDG indicators.
Lao PDR will implement the SDGs through its national development plans using various financing sources identified in the assessment of development finance and aid. The Government is committed to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure, as shown by the localized indicators for effective, accountable, and transparent institutions under SDG 16 and by the NSEDP Outputs on fiscal and monetary policies, integrated development planning and budgeting, and the quality of investment. Together, these will help to strengthen planning, budgeting, and budget monitoring systems, review the allocation of domestic public revenue against national priorities, and increase core social sector allocations to address social inequalities. 
The Governmentis strong commitment to the 2030 Agenda drives the VNR process. This commitment underpins the institutional arrangements set up for the SDGs, as well as the early localization of the SDGs, and the integration of the SDGs into the national planning frameworks. Going forward, the Government will continue to engage a broad array of stakeholders to address the challenges identified in this report, learn from past lessons, and consolidate achievements as the country moves towards the realization of the National Strategy on Socio-Economic Development 2025 and the Vision 2030 as well as the Sustainable Development Goals.
