
Key messages 
The VNR 2018 has been prepared for the Government of National Coalition and is based on the outcomes and recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference (NDC) (October 2015 to October 2016), which include recommendations for implementation of the SDGs and their integration in the national constitution. The NDC provides a national framework for transformation and policy reform.  The VNR process is based on the Quarter-Century Strategy (2007-2031) and the current cycle (2017-2020) of the national planning frameworks.  The key messages of the review are structured around (a) commitments to take actions, (b) peace dividend, (b) agriculture transformation, (c) social transformation, and (d) means of implementation:  
 
(a) Commitments to take actions 
 
1. The Government of The Sudan is committed to implement Agenda 2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and to engage all people in the betterment of their lives and development of their country 
2. A High-Level National Mechanism (HLNM) has been established by a presidential decree in 2016 to oversee the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the country. The HLNM consists of ministers and high-level officials, and the Ministry of Security and Social Development as co-chair, and the National Population Council (NPC) as secretariat and to coordinate HLNM activities 
3. All sectors and line ministries have owned the SDGs. Harmonization   of the national development plans and strategies with Agenda 2030 and the SDGs is continuing, with the support of the National Population Council. Matrices been prepared and their use is ongoing in all sectors  
4. Advocacy and publicity for the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs is high and the engagement of local media is strong and is supported by media networks under the auspices of the National Population Council 
5. The levels of knowledge and technical capacity on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs is growing and need to be rapidly developed among all stakeholders: government, private sector, NGOs and CBOs 
 
(b) Peace dividend 
 
1. Peace is an affirmed government strategy and is the first and foremost national priority. It is the responsibility of government and the entire society to advance peace in all dimensions, including security, justice and development 
2. Peace and development in the Sudan go hand-in-hand. They reinforce each other in a virtuous cycle, which is the transformation force towards sustainable development and peaceful country  
3. The Sudan, both government and people, have shown long-term resolve to make peace and to sustain development. Therefore, the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan is an opportunity to harness the potentials of leaving no one behind in peace and leaving no one behind in development  
4. The internal conflict, which the Sudanese people have endured for decades, has now come to an end.  Justice and the rule of law are being achieved through official institutions and community-based organizations, and in partnership with neighboring and friendly countries and agencies 
5. Peace and stability will create opportunities for communities affected by the war to recover and develop, and to transform from relief and humanitarian assistance to rehabilitation and development   
6. The Sudan have cumulated a wealth of knowledge, experience and practices, engaging youth and women, on peace building for development and on development activities for peace, that can share with the international community  
7. Peace building is gaining pace and high momentum throughout the country and is expected to rapidly continue and prevail in the future. Undoubtedly, peace and stability will create a conducive environment for accelerating the implementation of the SDGs in the country. The post conflict situation will also come with its challenges to sustain peace  
8. investment in peace for sustainable development means investment in the multiple needs of people for housing, food, education, health, water, sanitation, justice, security, etc.   The peace dividend will accrue in multiple social, economic, political, security areas. The virtuous cycle of the dividend is important for sustaining peace and for implementing the SDGs  
9. Rehabilitation and integration activities (water, housing, health, education, justice, security and settlement and integration of families and communities) are priorities for peace building, prosperity and sustainability 
10. The role of women, youth and community-based organizations in peace building and rehabilitation is gaining high momentum, and it will be sustained through the allocation of human and financial resources   
11. The National Dialogue Conference have succeeded in building trust and establishing a national transparent platform to discuss all issues and concerns that challenge peace and development in the country. Implementation matrices have been prepared and allocated to ministries for integrating the recommendations of the NDC into the existing planning structures and frameworks, and for regular monitoring, reporting and accountability through the Council of Ministers. Six high level presidential councils have been formulated and officially inaugurated by the president to ensure the implementation of the NDC recommendations.  
12. The presence of a large number of refugees, illegal migrants and vulnerable population groups makes the Sudan a transit, source and destination of human trafficking, which constitutes a major threat to peace and security in the country, the region and globally.  
 
 
(c) Agriculture transformation 
 
1. Agriculture transformation is the engine of SDGs implementation in the Sudan. With a wealth of natural resources, especially fertile soil and water, the Sudanis comparative advantage is in Agriculture. The Sudan has been recognized for its huge and diversified natural resources, which if well utilized the country shall have the prospects of achieving sustainable development and prosperity for its people. Because of its agriculture potentials, the Sudan has been identified as one of the top countries capable of contributing effectively to the regional and global food security. 
2. Transformation of agriculture will accelerate the implementation of the SDGs in the Sudan in multiple ways and with tangible ripple effects, especially ending poverty (SDG1), fighting hunger and malnutrition (SDG2), improving health (SDG3) and education (SDG4) increasing decent work, employment opportunities and economic growth (SDG8), reducing inequality (SDG10), promoting peace and the settlement of people in stable societies (SDG16). 
3. Transformation of agriculture is achievable through allocating a minimum of 10 percent of the Government budget to agriculture and achieving a 6 percent annual growth in Agriculture GDP. This will have to be accompanied with policies to increase productivity, add value to agriculture production and to target investment in agriculture industries and exportable agriculture goods, to accelerate the implementation of the SDGs in the Sudan. 
4. Agriculture transformation requires efficient and optimal distribution of roles between the government and private sector. The government to focus on the policies and plans that will create conducive environment through the provision of incentives for investment in the agricultural sector and removal of obstacles limiting effective participation. The capacities of the private sector and the society as a whole will be engaged more effectively in large- and small-scale agriculture businesses 
5. Implementation of the Sudan Initiative for Achieving Food Security in the Arab Countries provides the investment opportunity for transforming agriculture to a modern production sector. The initiative calls for the investment of US$ 9.94 to develop 3.4 million hectares to produce 14.92 million tones of various crops for the local and regional markets. 
6. Development of organic agriculture for exports and increase the use of promising local technologies such as Zero-tillage Technology to increase production and agriculture productivity 
7. Development of an irrigated agriculture system in western Sudan based on the availability of underground water resources, and to complement the rainy season in Darfur and Kordofan. Such development will reduce the risks of drought and vulnerability of people to food shortage and malnutrition  
 
(d) Social transformation 
 
1. The Sudan is witnessing profound social and cultural transformations in rural and urban areas, and the social and cultural institutions of societies and communities are changing. The social systems are changing from social affairs to social development, and the people and communities are changing from recipients of charities and humanitarian assistance to participants in development and producers of goods and services in their local communities.  
2. Implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs will build on the strong social values and momentums to empower people to participate in development and to improve their quality of life 
3. Poverty is a major challenge for achieving sustainable development in the Sudan Poverty variations by state, education level of head of household, quality of housing, sources of drinking water, and type of sanitation services are remarkable. Besides increasing income levels, there is need to promote the capabilities of people through investment in housing, safe drinking water sanitation, food and nutrition.  
4. The social protection systems are rapidly expanding and increasingly reaching the poor and vulnerable people. Social development policies in the country are focused on addressing poverty through family and community measures, on promoting the 
participation of people in development, and on achieving social justice and social peace    
5. The Sudan is experiencing a demographic dividend resembled in increasing youth and working age population. This dividend will be harnessed through investment in education, especially girlis education, in health and in the creation of jobs and employment opportunities, especially for youth and young adults 
6. Investment in health and in the implementation of the comprehensive and transformational national health policy (2017 -2030) will enable the country to attain universal health coverage and improve the standard of health and wellbeing for all people. Investment in health will accelerate SDGs implementation through addressing health inequalities and adopting people-centered and Health in All Policies approach.  
7. The health policy will achieve transformation in several ways: from out-of-pocket to prepaid finance health system with protection of the vulnerable people; from government-based to multi-stakeholder engagement; from Ministry of Health Policy to a national health policy; from curative and disease-oriented policy to health prevention and promotion of wellbeing. These health transformations will accelerate the achievement of the sustainable health and will promote human resources development in the country.  
8. Full implementation of the 2010 Child Act will lead to 65 percent achievement of the sustainable development goals in the Sudan. Targeting children through investment in their care, protection and development (health, education, water and sanitation) will lead to high level outcomes and improved quality of life for children. Increasing investment in the welfare of children will reduce infant and child mortality and improve maternal health and morbidity.  
 
 
(e) Means of implementation 
 
1. The Sudan has been successful in diversifying the sources of economic growth and in establishing new partnerships for peace and for development. The economy has been resilient, and some sectors, especially infrastructure, energy industry, electricity and water, have been steadily growing, and are expected to grow more rapidly in the future.  
2. Minerals, especially gold, have emerged as an important engine of economic development and growth. The minerals sector will continue to attract foreign direct investment to generate income and to create employment opportunities (formal and informal) for millions of youth aged 20 to 34. Economic growth is expected to rapidly recover and increase to 8 percent annually.  
3. The potentials for increasing trade with neighboring countries, especially with South Sudan, Ethiopia, Chad, Eritrea and Egypt, are great. With the development of advanced transportation networks trade with neighboring countries will increase and will need to be facilitated through commensurate banking infrastructure financial strategies  
4. The debt burden is crushing and is unsustainable, and the continuing reluctance to admit the Sudan to the group of Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) is unjustifiable and not in consistence with Agenda 2030 and the SDGs 
5. The Sudan succeeded in the mobilization of stakeholders during the difficult times of conflict and sanctions. The engagement of stakeholders will continue during the SDGs era, and will be facilitated by the SDGs framework so as to ensure buy-in and commitment to Agenda 2030. 
6. The generation of data and information have been negatively impacted by the financial and technical constraints of the sanctions on the country. Nonetheless, the Sudan continued to revitalize this sector through investment in increasing the population register and its coverage, increasing registration of vital events, and development of the legal framework for information and statistics.  
7. There is need to invest in the use of information and data to generate new knowledge for the SDGs, especially through engaging researchers in universities and the centers of excellence in the country. This will increase the interactions between data users and producers and will enhance the quality of policy and decision making, and planning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
This Voluntary National Review 2018 (VNR 2018) shows how the Sudan is embracing Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, based on its national priorities on sustaining peace and stability and on achieving development transformation and prosperity for the current and future generations. The Sudan is owning and domesticating the new agenda. Meanwhile it is developing its own national participatory and consultative dialogue approach for engaging all stakeholders in promoting the prosperity of people and protecting the planet through peace and development.  
 
While Agenda 2030 and the SDGs provide a framework for supporting Sudanis approach to achieving peace, stability and development transformation, it is also a tool for reviewing the national development plans and for integrating the dimensions and principles of sustainable development into the national priorities on peace and development and the vision for A civilized, peaceful and united Sudanese nation "1 articulated in the Quarter-Century Strategy (QCS 20072031).  The NVR 2018 is a process for understanding the linkages and interactions of the dimensions of sustainable development (economic, social and environmental) in the Sudan, and for identifying the most important factors and the means of implementation that can harness and accelerate prosperity for people during the short SDGs period to 2030.    
 
The VNR 2018 process aims to raise the profile of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the country, especially among all stakeholders (government, the private sector, community-based organization, voluntary organizations, etc.) leaders, key officials, planners and policy makers. 
 
The Sudan, both people and government, have contributed to the articulation of the post 2015 development agenda, and to the national and regional consultations that were conducted globally and in the Arab states and Africa regions. Through its membership in the United Nations, the Sudan have adopted Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in New York in September 2015 and is continuously engaging all stakeholders in peace for the betterment of their lives and to contribute to development of their country. And with technical assistance of two UN interagency missions, the Sudan have taken practical steps to implement Agenda 2030 and the SDGs through developing technical frames and tools and is working to integrate them into national plans at the federal and State2 levels, and in the urban and rural localities. 
 
The commitment to implement the new agenda has been supported by the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference (NDC), which continued for a year from October 2015 to October 2016. The NDC, which reflects the Sudanese ingenuity, have engaged the government, opposition parties and representatives of armed groups in a national dialogue on peace and development in the Sudan.  The recommendations of the Economic Committee of the NDC include commitment to the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. Also, the Freedom and Fundamental Rights Committee of the NDC have made a recommendation for inclusion of sustainable development in the constitution, and for the enactment of laws to achieve the objectives set out in the international treaties and conventions ratified by the Sudan.  
 
The NVR 2018 process is inclusive as it has engaged all national state- and non-state stakeholders: the line ministries and public institutions, the private sector, the parliament, the civil society and voluntary organizations, the community-based organizations, the non-governmental organizations, and the Sudanese people, especially youth and women.   While hoping for development partners to support the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs activities, the GoS stresses adherence to the provision of the national legislation and peace agreements, and observance of the religious, cultural and social values of the Sudanese people. 
 
This first VNR lays out the foundation and approach of implementing Agenda 2030 and the SDGs transformation framework in the Sudan. It illustrates the process of institutionalizing the new agenda and of integrating the precepts and dimensions of sustainable development into the national plans and strategies and NDC recommendations on peace and development. The review has been undertaken for the purpose of documenting diversified and rich experiences and practices on peace and development in the Sudan, and for sharing them with neighboring countries in Africa and the Arab regions, and with all other countries in the world.  
 
Though no attempt has been made to quantitively measure progress on sustainable development, this report states the difficulties of measuring the SDGs indicators because of shortage of timely and quality data and information, and lack of human resources in data collection and analyses.  Much of the data that are need to measure the SDGs indicators does not exist, therefore new data and information gathering strategies have to be devised. The VNR 2018 calls for building the capacity of the Central Bureau of Statistics as the custodian of data and information in the country, and for the implementation of policies and decisions to make the statistics system productive and efficient through adding value to the collection of primary data and greater user-producer interactions. Also, the VNR 2018 highlights the need to develop and promote the administrative records and build the skills and capacities of statisticians and researchers located in line ministries and in the private sector.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
Country context 
The Sudan is a large, culturally diverse and resources-rich country. It lies between latitudes 10o to 22o N and longitudes 22o to 38o E. With a total area of 1.86 million km2 Sudan is ranking third in Africa after Algeria and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Land is a gently sloping plain from the south to the north, with the exception of Jebel Marra Masssif, Red Sea Hills and Nuba Mountains. The mean annual temperatures vary between 26oC to 32oC across the country. The northern part is desert and semi-desert with average annual temperatures around 30oC and average annual rainfall of about 150mm. The central part is savannah with average annual temperatures around 27o C, and average annual rainfall of about 200mm. The ecological zones extend over a wide range from the desert in the extreme north to the savannah in the south. These zones are rich in biodiversity within diverse environmental systems making the country endowed with flora and fauna which are being threatened by natural factors, climate change3 and human activities. 
 
The country is bestowed with extensive lands suitable for agricultural cultivation, estimated at 175 million feddans (74 million hectares), out of which only 45 million feddans (19 million hectares) are currently under cultivation, representing only 25.7 percent utilization of the area suitable for agricultural production. The flat and fertile plains and rainfall support rain-fed and irrigated agriculture and animal husbandry, which are the major economic activities in the country and are traditional. Mechanized rainfed agriculture covers an estimated area of 6.5 million hectares. It has been a major source of food and cash crops, especially Sorghum and Sesame, and has led to large-scale forest clearance, loss of wildlife and severe land degradation. Besides Sesame and Sorghum, the main crops in Sudan include Millet, Wheat, Corn, Rice, Groundnuts, Cotton, Sunflower, Sugarcane, Fodders, Vegetables, Fruits, Watermelon Seeds, Hibiscus (Karkade), Guar and Gum4 Arabic. 
 
The animal resources (camels, cattle, goats and sheep) are estimated at 110 million, and are a very major source of food for the people and foreign currency for the country. They are managed under both nomadic and sedentary traditional pastoral systems.  Such a large number of livestock has resulted in overgrazing of rangelands thus triggering the process of desertification.  Nomads move with their herds from North to South according to the rainy season.  In many instances conflicts arise between the nomads and sedentary cultivators as a result of competition over natural resources, especially water and grazing land. The country is endowed with sizable reservoir of fish resources along the Red Sea coast, and Lake Nuba and Merawi reservoirs. These resources are under-utilized. Sudan is also rich in forest products including non-wood forest products produced in different parts of the country. 
 
Rainfall, surface and underground water resources are abundant in the country. The annual rainfall is estimated at about 442 billion cubic meters (bcm). Harnessing rainwater is not widely practiced and water harvesting is poorly developed. Sudan has around one million hectares of surface water, the most important of which is a 2,000 km-long stretch of the Nile and its tributaries. Wetlands cover 10 percent of the country. There are many seasonal water courses (khors) that run during the short rainy season. Their discharge volumes, flow durations and water quality have never been gauged. The total annual discharge of the relatively perennial rivers, outside the Nile basin, is 7.0bcm. The most important of these are the Gash, Baraka and Khor Arbaat rivers in the east, Wadi Azoom and Galol as well as many others in Darfur, and Khor Abu Habil, which drains the Nuba Mountains of Southern Kordofan. Underground water is estimated at 900bcm, most of which is in the Nubian Sandstone, Umrawaba and Gezira.  Around 80 percent of the population depend on underground water sources.  
 
The gentle flow of surface water has been utilized for investment in the development of irrigated agriculture (2 million feddans) and for generation of hydroelectric power. There are six dams in the Sudan: 
 
1. Sinnar dam on the Blue Nile with a capacity of 0.07bcm; 
2. Jebel Awlia dam on the White Nile with capacity of 3.0bcm; 
3. Khashm al-Girba dam on the Atbara with capacity of 0.8bcm; 
4. Roseires Dam on the Blue Nile (heightened in 2014) with capacity of 7.0bcm; 
5. Merowe Dam on the Nile. Built in 2009 with capacity of 12.0bcm 
6. The Upper Atbara/Setit Dam Complex with expected capacity of 2.7bcm. 
 
The population of Sudan is ethnically diverse and is estimated at around 43.2 million persons in 2018, compared to 31.0 million persons in 2008. These numbers indicate a population change of about 12.2 million persons in 10 years, which gives an average annual growth rate of 1.2 million persons during the period 2008 -2018. The total population is expected to increase rapidly to 56.4 million persons in 2030, and 95.4 million persons in 2063, when the SDGs and Agenda 2063 of the African Union, respectively, come to an end. Because of the diversity of the ethnic groups within Sudan, there are several local dialects in different parts of the country, while Arabic is the official national language, English is the most commonly taught foreign language and is taught in different levels of schooling starting from basic education. 
 
The country adopts a federal governance system, which supports the participation of people and community-based organizations in peace, stability and development of their States local communities and in national development programs. The federal national government and the National Assembly are seated in Khartoum, and the State government and State Legislative Councils are seated in the capital city in each of the 18 states; including Khartoum State.  Based on the outcomes and recommendations of the NDC, the federal national government is now headed by a Prime Minister, who is also the First Vice President. The State have also reshuffled their governments to conform with the recommendations of the NDC.  
 
All matters of national importance, such as sovereignty, defense, internal security, foreign affairs, currency and coinage, customs, foreign trade, educational planning, air and river transport, post and telegraph, national communication and public audit, are under the responsibility of the federal national government. The remaining matters fall under the responsibility of the State Government, which also exercises clearly defined functions related to the administration of the state. Each State Government has the authority to establish its own development priorities, and local administration according to the national policy, and to allocate a definite portion of the state revenue to localities5 to ensure good delivery of services for the prosperity and stability of its people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methodology 
The VNR 2018, which is the first for the Sudan has been conducted as a process and a related set of planned and interrelated activities. In line with the federal system of governance and the NDC recommendations, the VNR has been a national consultative process that have systematically engaged stakeholders and development partners through well planned Agenda 2030 and SDGs activities on institutional structure, interactive consultation and training workshops, expertis meetings, forums for policy dialogue with government officials and voluntary organization, and publicity and awareness campaigns (Figure 1).  
 
The process aims to establish the foundations for the future to 2030 and to provide guidance on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, to understand what the sustainable development framework is all about, what the political commitment entails, how the SDGs and targets match with the national priorities on peace and development, how will the new agenda support the development operations and plans to embrace the principles of sustainability, inclusivity and human rights, and what are the policy and practical actions and the means and tools for implementation of the agenda in the Sudan. 
 
The national consultative process started in 2016 in context of transitioning from the MDGs to the SDGs and is scheduled to continue through 2018. This period overlaps with the NDC period, which started in October 2015 and concluded in October 2016, based on which a prime minister has been appointed and new government of national coalition has been installed in October 2017. Therefore, the VNR 2018 national consultative process has been inspired and informed by the structure, purpose and recommendations of the NDC on the future of peace and development in the Sudan. 
 
The VNR 2018 is consultative and participatory process that is meant to establish the bases and foundations of participatory implementation and voluntary reporting on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan. It has been planned to engage state and non-state actors, namely, line ministries, State officials and representatives, community-based organizations, the private sector, the rural and urban localities as represented in the National Council (Parliament), high level eminent persons and experts, university professors and academicians, youth and women. 
The main thrust here is that peace 	Figure 2 Peace and Development and sustainable development are for all people in the Sudan, and the outcomes, 	therefore, 	must 	be achieved 	through 	constructive engagement of the people and the government at the federal and state levels.  
 
This people-centered approach is anchored on the conviction that home-grown solutions to peace and development challenges in the country are imperative. Sudanis experiences show that peace and stability provide the conducive 
environment for the implementation of development plans and activities, which in their turn are essential for peace and stability. They dovetail into each other for the achievement of peace and prosperity for people (Figure 2). And in order for peace and development to be lasting and sustainable they must originate and grow from within the country.  This conviction underlies the NDC and permeates the VNR 2018 process of open discussion and consultation on the ownership and implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan. It also furnishes the approach for smooth transition from humanitarian and relief assistance to sustainable development throughout the country, and especially in the states affected by conflict.  
 
Tripartite implementation strategy 
 
The VNR 2018 aims to link the NDC recommendations to Agenda to 2030 and the SDGs, to align and harmonize them with the goals, targets and indicators of sustainable development, and to support implementation of the NDC recommendations and the SDG targets jointly through development plans at the national, sector and state levels. 	The 	National 	Planning Frameworks is an existing planning structure and it constitutes the base for strategic planning in the country to year 2031. The NDC recommendations and Agenda 2030 and SDGs are being gradually meticulously integrated in the national planning frameworks.  We call this tripartite implementation strategy. This practically means linking the engagement in the political process of the NDC with the national planning frameworks at the national, sector and State levels and with Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. The strategy aims to harmonize planning and consolidate implementation and coordination for accelerating the achievement of the national development priorities on peace and development and Agenda 2030 and the SDGs.  It is evolving and molding as an integrative implementation strategy under the office of the Prime Minister.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The SDGs institutional framework 
The SDGs institutional framework in the Sudan covers leadership, coordination, oversight bodies and implementation structures (Figure 3). The institutional structures related to coordination, oversight and implementation are already in place and have integrated Agenda 2030 and the SDGs into their exiting mandates and functions. The High Level National Mechanism is a newly established body to provide overall leadership and guidance to the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan.    
 
Leadership 	Figure 3 SDGs Institutional Framework 
A High-Level National Mechanism (HLNM) has been established through presidential decree number 117 issued in 2016 to provide overall leadership and guidance for the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan. The HLNM is placed under the portfolio of the Prime Minister who is also the First Vice President, which provides a mechanism for regular meetings and follow up and reporting on the implementation of the sustainable development activities and achievements in the country. Besides high visibility, publicity and political support, placing of the HLNM at the prime-ministerial level will link implementation of the SDGs to the National Assembly and the national Audit Chamber for allocation of resources to strengthen the secretariat, which is the National Population Council, and to regularly provide monitoring and oversight.  
 
Besides the Prime Minster and the Minster of Security and Social Development, as Chair and Cochair, respectively, the HLNM consists of 15 prominent and high-level members at the minister, state-minister and undersecretary levels.  Also, the membership includes the Director General of the Central Bureau of Statistics, the Director General of the National Council for Strategic Planning, and the Director General of the National Population Council, who also acts as secretary of the HLNM. The terms of reference of the HLNM6 include the following: 
 
1. Follow up the development and implementation of a national program for the implementation of sustainable development 
2. Ensure that the principles and dimensions of sustainable development are integrated in the five-year plans at the sector and state levels, and in all development projects 
3. Oversee the domestication of the SDGs targets and indicators at all levels of governance 
4. Supervise the availability of timely and accurate data and information for measuring achievements and progress on the sustainable development goals 
5. Provide financial and technical resources for coordination of the implementation activities 
6. Raise awareness and publicity at the federal and state levels, and in the localities and communities  
 
Coordination 
The National Population Council (NPC) has been assigned the role of coordinating the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, and to function as secretariat for the HLNM. Coordination is absolutely essential, as Agenda 2030 and the SDGs are multidimensional and they involve a wide-range of state and non-state stakeholders and development partners. Therefore, coordination is needed to synergize implementation activities, to ensure integration of the dimensions and principles of sustainable development, to document best practices and lessons of experience, to identify gaps and propose interventions, to avoid duplication of efforts, to harness and manage resources more efficiently, and to comprehensively review progress on the implementation of the SDGs.  
 
Coordination is a quite challenging task on which the NPC has developed good practices and experiences during the MDGs period. It includes a national network of focal persons, and thematic technical committees and work groups of experts and professionals. A system of focal persons in line ministries, States, NGOs, the private sector, and experts in academia and centers of excellence is currently in place, and it has been extensively used for knowledge sharing, for data and information gathering, to prepare written contributions, to participate in workshops and consultations, and to officially facilitate correspondence with the implementing agencies.  The work groups are also a functioning body of experts and professionals who assist the NPC to review technical frameworks and to conduct thematic studies on topics related to the national development priorities and to the SDGs.   
 
Six interactive consultation workshops with line ministries and their respective stakeholders (private sector, NGOs and CBOs) and development partners, and four meetings with experts and university professors, and two forums for policy dialogue have been undertaken by the National Population Council in 2016, 2017 and 2018. The workshops have covered the SDGs framework as a tool for bridging the gaps between science and actions, and for promoting integrative planning, which for the Sudan, means harmonizing policies and actions and breaking the tradition of planning and implementing activities in silos. For integrative planning to be a true engine of change and transformation, the policies and actions must collectively pursue the prosperity of all people now and in the future.   
 
Also, the workshops and meetings have been convened to study and discuss the linkages and interactions, and to identify the national development priorities, the accelerators of change and transformation, and the means of implementation (financial and human resources, partnerships, technology and innovations, data and information, etc.). The identification of the most important and highly effective factors that can together accelerate the implementation of the new agenda in The Sudan is informed by the interrelatedness of the SDGs, which are not stand-alone goals.  Each goal aims to achieve high quality outcomes that will also impact, directly and indirectly, on the other goals.  
 
The NPC has coordinated the preparations of the VNR 2018 process and activities through engaging experts to prepare high quality reports on: (a) peace and stability, (b) agriculture transformation, and (c) social transformation. A national workshop has been convened for each of these three accelerators, with the engagement of all stakeholders and development partners. The VNR activities have been informed and supported by two United Nations Interagency Missions (UNDP, ILO, FAO, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDESA). The Ministry of International Cooperation and the NPC have jointly coordinated the missions, and the UNDP Country Office provided financial support for the missions and for the VNR activities. The NPC has prepared a National Framework 2016-2030 for the implementation of the SDGs, which is yet to be approved by the HLNM. The NPC is preparing a monitoring and evaluation framework, and a national framework for the SDGs indicators engaging users and producers of data and information.   
 
The need to enhance the coordination capacity of the NPC through providing finance and availing human skills and resources is obvious.  There is need to build the capacity of the NPC on monitoring and evaluation, results-based management, report writing and on the use of advanced technical tools for coordination, research and analyses. Also, in view of the severe shortage of data and statics for the SDGs, it is imperative to invest in the capacity development of the Central Bureau of Statistics and in the capacity of the research and statistics units located in line ministries and other stakeholders. Capacity development should also include training on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, especially among the focal points in line ministries and States and media personnel7.  
 
Oversight 
The National Assembly (NA), the Council of States and the National Audit Chamber (NAC) are institutional bodies that play an important oversight role on the implementation of the national development plans and strategies and implementation of the NDC recommendations. The three bodies are integrating Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the implementation and oversight activities in the Sudan.  
 
The NA, which consists of 359 members, provides oversight, review and monitoring of the performance of all implementation structures. It issues and amends legislations and draft new ones with focus on leaving no one behind and causing no harm to anybody. The oversight activities of the NA will help the Sudan to implement the SDGs, especially SDG 16: promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, providing access to justice, and building accountable and inclusive institutions. Also, the NA undertakes budget reviews and allocates financial resources to line ministries and government institutions and ensures availability of resources for implementation.  It examines the final accounts of the country and reports of the NAC and evaluates the compatibility with allocations and system requirements of the economy taking into account the SDGs principles.  
 
The NA operates through 14 thematic committees, and an additional committee on the Assembly and members affairs. Each committee is concerned with legislation, planning, policies and measures related to its thematic area of focus. The 14 committees have been aligned against the SDGs as shown in table 1.  
 
The Council of States (CS) represent all 18 states in the country and takes the lead in the field of national legislation on the system of decentralized governance and other major issues of interest and significance to the states.  This is in line with attaining development and rendering public services with equality and equity, thereby enhancing decentralization of power and decision making and supporting the engagement of people in the development activities of their state. According to the Constitution, services are rendered through states governance, which is the nearest level to the people.  Because development and services do not materialize except by money, the Constitution laid down guideline principles for fair division of wealth on the basis of:- 
1. Sharing of resources and wealth on fair basis SDGs in Sudan: Oversight bodies crucial for 2. Enabling all levels of success.  
governance to carry out The National Audit Chamber in Sudan organized a constitutional and legal conference on the role of oversight bodies in the duties achievement of the SDGs on 20 May 2017. The 
3. Fair sharing of financial conference provided an opportunity for resources between other parliamentarians and state auditors and states of the Sudan government officials to exchange experiences with 
4. Sharing of wealth and public Dr. Guenther Bachmann, Secretary General of the resources on the German Council for Sustainable Development, Mr. understanding that all Gijs de Vries from London School of Economics, and regions of the Sudan are Mr. Francis Beekman of the General Secretariat of entitled to development African Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions 
5. Abiding strictly by delegation (AFROSAI), and Abdulrahman Ghandour from of powers and decentralized UNDP. The conference has been hailed as unique decision making with regard and is an example to be emulated in Africa to development and public 
services and all other affairs  of governance in so far as fair distribution of wealth and resources are concerned. 
 
These constitutional provisions are in line with SDG10: reduce inequality and disparities within the country. There is need to build the capacity of the CS on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, and to conduct research on the determinants and causes of inequality and disparities among the States and to prepare informed policies and actions to ameliorate and address them. There is need for strengthening of the decentralized government systems to support state-led development through well-structured legal framework, infrastructure, and human capital.    
 
TABLE 1 
ALIGNING THE MANDATES AND ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY COMMITTEES WITH THE SDGS   
National Assembly Committee 
Related SDGs 
Peace and national reconciliation 
SDG16, SDG17 
Economic affairs 
SDG8, SDG16, SDG17 
Agriculture and animal affairs 
SDG2, SDG1, SDG8, SDG 15, SDG16, SDG17 
Education, instruction and scientific research 
SDG4, SDG16, SDG17 
Culture, youth and sports 
SDG4, SDG16, SDG17 
Energy and mining 
SDG7, SDG8, SDG11, SDG16, SDG17 
Family, women and child affairs 
SDG5, SDG1, SDG2, SDG3, SDG4, SDG10, SDG16, SDG17 
Health and community development 
SDG3, SDG11, SDG16, SDG17 
Human rights 
SDG11, SDG16, SDG17 
Industry, investment and foreign trade 
SDG12, SDG16, SDG17 
Labor, administration and public grievance  
SDG8, SDG16, SDG17 
Legislation and justice committee 
SDG16, SDG17 
Foreign affairs 
SDG17, SDG16 
Security and national defense 
SDG16, SDG17 
 
 
 
Implementation structures 
 
The implementation structure of the national development plans and strategies and of the SDGs consists of the line ministries, public corporations and institutions, State governments and State ministries, the private sector, NGOs and CBOs. All these entities adopt variable implementation processes with the engagement of stakeholders and with technical and financial support from development partners. Their activities variably contribute to the welfare and prosperity of people, and in the implementation processes, they use variable financial, human skills and technologies, and natural resources, and they variably contribute to sustainability, human rights and the right to development. The most common elements in the implementation process includes planning, implementing, mobilizing resources, monitoring system, coordination and reporting steps: 
 
1. Planning:  which covers project and program preparations, identification of the transformational priorities, policies and activities. Identify the planning targets and expected outcomes. Decide on the timing frame for planning and the extent of engagement and participation among different ministries and stakeholders  
2. Implementing: which means developing programs and budgets, and designing strategies for their implementation with partnerships (government, private sector and civil society organizations) 
3. Mobilizing resources: Determine the means of implementation (the sources of funds, human resources, technology, innovation, skills, etc.) and develop strategies for resource mobilization 
4. Monitoring system:  which helps quantify progress towards the targets for better policymaking. The quality of monitoring system will depend on the quality and accuracy of data and information  
5. Coordination: Success of planning to achieve expected outcomes will be determined by the efficiency of coordination activities for synergy, harmonization and addressing constraints and challenges    
6. Reporting: which is progress in implementation (VNR 2018) and progress towards achievement of the goals and targets 
 
Each of these steps involves a wide range of activities and decisions, all of which must be informed by the principles of human rights, leaving no one behind, sustainability, achieving justice and equality, empowering people to participate, etc.  There are many advantages and opportunities to gain from using Agenda 2030 and the SDGs to inform and support national development planning frameworks and the implementation of the NDC recommendations in the Sudan, and this requires studying and understanding linkages and interactions of sustainable development in the Sudan.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Linkages and interactions of SD in Sudan 
The future aspirations and evolving development challenges in The Sudan require adoption of a transformative approach that brings the dimensions and principles of sustainable development to the forefront of conducting public and private development activities. This can be illuminated through adopting an integrative approach, whereby integration can be used as a tool to understand complex development linkages and interactions, to illuminate development challenges, to show results and outcomes, and to provide solutions. How can development planners and decision makers in the Sudan integrate the dimensions and principles of sustainable development in the activities, plans, polices and institutional structures? How to translate integration into coherent policies and actions for sustainable development?  One way for answering these questions is to look into the linkages and interactions of sustainable development in the country. 
 
Figure 5 provides an exposition of the linkages and interactions of sustainable development in the Sudan, structured around the 5 Ps: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnerships. This exposition is a snapshot image and one-time view of a wide range of interconnections and crosscutting elements of development planning in the country. Its main purpose is to provide modules for a conceptual understanding of the linkages and interactions in the main areas of development planning.  No attempt has been made to quantify the modules or measure the linkages and interactions. Solid arrows in the figure show positive linkages and interactions that are important for accelerating achievement of the SDGs. The dotted arrows indicate the bottlenecks and negative feedbacks that must be addressed to achieve sustainability.   
 
People: they matter for sustainable development and are the main force for change and transformation. The quality of their health and survival (SDG3) and level of lifelong education (SDG4) are important development outcomes of investment in the health and education sectors. They determine productivity and economic growth, and the quality of social protection, social security and social welfare. Their cultural institutions, social and intergenerational relations, norms and value systems are equally important for the sustainable development process in the Sudan.  
Planet: Land, water, energy and minerals are the most important natural resources on which the Sudan economy is based. The types of land, water and energy, and the competition and changes over time in their use, are crucial for long-term planning, decision-making and implementation of the SDGs. The Sudan is endowed with land of variable qualities and resources (SDG15), and with is a water-rich country (SDG6). The Sudan is endowed with various minerals and traditional and modern sources of energy (SDG7), including biomass, solar, fossil fuels, gas, wind, and electricity. Investment in land, water and energy resources and distribution will enhance the quality the sustainable development outcomes for the prosperity of people (SDG14, and protection of planet. However, people and all living species in the Sudan are exposed to variable impacts of climate change, such as exceptionally high temperature, frequent droughts, floods, considerable variations in the amount of rainfall. The contribution of human activities in the Sudan to the global greenhouse gas emission and climate change is minimal. 
 
 

 
Prosperity: The sectors of the economy and society (economic sector and social sectors) provide the basic rationale and philosophy for prosperity: how to achieve it, what kind of policies and planning tools to ensure its distribution among people, how to identify the sectoral linkages and interactions to harmonize and integrate plans and strategies, and avail alternative options for policy and decision makers (SDG1, SDG2, SDG8, SDG9, SDG11, SDG12 and SDG14). The economic and social sectors in the Sudan are implementers of development programs and activities for the achievement of prosperity. Each sector contributes to the achievement of prosperity in different ways. And in the implementation processes of development activities, each sector uses land, water, energy, financial and human resources, in combination with various types of technologies and infrastructure, to produce goods and deliver services to people. The sustainable development framework provides the tools and means for understanding, studying and measuring the linkages and interaction.  
Policies, governance and strategic planning (SDG5 SDG10) provide the overall philosophy and guidance for plans, actions and interventions in the economic and social sectors. They also determine the nature of decision-making and management of the systems. Indeed, policies, governance and strategic planning constitute an important pillar for achieving inclusivity, promoting equality (SDG5), and addressing inequality (SDG10). They improve the efficiency, accountability, monitoring and evaluation of the development activities in the country. 
Peace and security: Peace and security and inclusive societies (SDG16) are a prerequisite for the sustainable development process and for the achievement of sustainability. For the Sudan, peace and development go hand-in-hand. Peace and security programs and development programs reinforce each other to achieve stability in the country, especially in conflict areas and boarder States. Development is a process for prosperity and for peace and stability. Societies and communities will live in peace and stability when their needs for food, water, energy, shelter, health and education are met. Social cohesion, social protection and social integration, are important pillars of peace and stability, and for achieving inclusive and sustainable development.  
Partnerships: While the government takes responsibility for the design of short and long-term strategic development plans for the whole country, it shares their implementation with the private sector, community-based organizations (CBOs), non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and with development partners. The implementation of development activities and projects in the Sudan is increasingly engaging domestic and foreign partners. Domestic partnerships are spread across all economic and social development sectors. They include public-private partnerships engaged in development business in all of the economic and social sectors. There are various finance and operation models of public private partnerships in infrastructure development, food processing and distribution, agriculture, among others. The government partnership with a wide range CBOs and NGOs is usually at a small scale and mostly focused on the services sectors. All domestic partnerships have been affected significantly by the sanctions and the debt burden, which limited their financial capacities and dealings to implement projects and to acquire skills and technology from abroad.  
Foreign partnerships span countries and corporations at regional and global levels. These partnerships include bilateral and multilateral relations on investment in energy, trade, labor, water, education, health, and environment, agriculture among others. Notwithstanding the two decades of sanctions, these partnerships are growing rapidly in number and scale of operations. They include management of cross border movements, human trafficking, smuggling, illicit financial flows, crime, drugs, etc.   
   
   
Integrating the SDGs in the national planning frameworks 
The Sudanis history on development planning goes back to the 10-Year Plan (1960-1970) for Economic and Social Development, which was the first attempt for consolidating economic and social development activities in a national plan for improving the standard of living of all people in the country. It was a plan for freedom from the exploitation of natural resources and human capital that continued for more than seven decades of colonialization. Though the 10-Year plan had not been carried through completion, because of political uprising in 1964, it succeeded in linking development to human freedom.  Freedom to build the country on ownership and management of the natural resources and develop national human capital to meet the basic needs of people to live in freedom.    
Since then development planning became a common practice in the country. All the national development plans that were undertaken during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s aimed to improve the standard of living of people, and all of them were not carried through completion, because of political unrest, frequent regime change and the civil war.  They were highly influenced by the external forces of socialism and capitalism that shaped politics and planning in the country for decades.   
This historical background is necessary to be made to show that development planning have often been formulated and implemented by the national governments in the Sudan for the purpose of meeting the rights of people to develop and live in dignity, though the national plans did not explicitly mention freedom, dignity and the right to development. However, the achievements were thin on the ground because planning was central and the implementation of development activities have been influenced by internal conflict and interference of the international powers in the internal politics of the Sudan. 
With the formulation and implementation of the Comprehensive National Strategy (CNS) 19922002 development planning began to be more strategic and focused. This was the first plan that was carried through completion, which means the country have entered into stable national planning based on self-reliance and activation of the dormant forces of people to contribute to the betterment of their own lives and to the development of their country. Planning became a national framework for human centered development and the rights of people to development.  The CNS succeeded in transitioning from bureaucratic planning to strategic planning. It has been successful in internalizing planning and development finance, and in engaging all people in planning for development, and integrating their social values and cultures in the national development frameworks.   
Strategic planning institutions have been established to formulate and implement national development plans, with all sectors and institutions agreeing to adopt a comprehensive vision. These developments have paved the way for the formulation of a Quarter Century Strategy (QCS) 2007-2031 that targets all people in the country. The QCS is based on a long-term planning vision anchored on justice, freedom, shura and democracy, human rights, dignity, full participation and unity. Besides the social values, sustainable peace and its dividends, namely maintenance of social peace and security, have been considered the bases of planning.  
Through the QCS, the implementation of the development activities and programs has been in successive short-term periods (2007-2011, 2012-20116, and 2017-20218), which indicates stability in the formulation and implementation of successive short-term plans with a vision for the future.   This has been supported by adopting a federal governance system that aims to make development activities and delivery of services close to the citizens and with the citizens. Each of the 18 states have a Wali (governor), a State Council and State-ministers, which means that people have the right to exercise governance and development of their States. 
By so doing planning have moved from being central to being State-led and local.   This have created space for people to engage effectively in the decisions to plan and to implement development activities, and to mobilize their State resources for development. The states are now competing with each other on the mobilization of resources and the engagement of people in development activities and programs, which is very healthy for exercising of the right to development in a vast and ethnically diverse country. The rights of people to develop and to engage into development is now being exercised at the State and down to locality level.  
The way forward on the rights of people to development is to address disparities between the States, to harmonize State policies and to integrate the principles of sustainable development into the States planning structures and frameworks, and to engage people in planning for the sustainable development of their localities. There is need to fight corruption and the misuse of governance to deny people their right to development. Also, the way forward is to implement the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference at the federal and State levels, and to prepare people for the presidential and parliamentary elections in 2020.  
These are the driving engines of sustainable development and human rights in the Sudan, which the international community must respect and facilitate through genuine partnership for development and the removal of all obstacles, especially full removal of the sanctions, integration of the Sudan in the regional and international trade systems, and allowing the Sudan to sustain, manage and swap the debt burden. These obstacles impede the people in the Sudan to exercise their full rights to development.  
The Sudan is currently implementing the third (2017 -2021) planning cycle within the overall framework of the QCS. This third cycle coincides with the preparations for the implementation of NDC commitments and Agenda 2030 and the SDGs targets in the Sudan. The integration of the SDGs in the national planning framework has been designed through the National Program for Sustainable Development 2016 -2030. 
National program for sustainable development 2016 -2030 
The Government of Sudan has adopted Agenda 2030 and the SDGs global planning framework for the achievement of sustainable development. The 17 goals and 169 targets are a global common denominator for a wide-range of activities that aim to integrate the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. Their domestication in the Sudan is being achieved through integration of these three dimensions in the planning frameworks at the national and state levels, and in the sector plans and strategies.  
 
The National Program for Sustainable Development (NPSD) 2016 n 2030 has been formulated by the NPC under the auspices of the HLNM. It has been prepared through national consultation workshops that engaged key officials in line ministries, community-based organizations and the private sector, experts on strategic planning, universities and centers of excellence. The consultations were done with State representatives during their annual meetings under the umbrella of the NPC. The NPC have organized meetings with high-level government officials for two UN interagency missions undertaken in 2016 and 2017, and two national workshops.  
 
The consultation activities have covered advocacy and awareness on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, the transition from the MDGS to the SDGs, the interlinkages of the sustainable development dimensions in the Sudan, and the tools for integrating sustainable development in the national development frameworks, especially in the QCS (2007-2031) and the sector plans (2017-2021).   
 
The NPSD 2016-2030 consists of a general framework for the integration of the SDGs principles and targets into the national planning frameworks, harmony of the national policies, plans and institutions, data preparations for measuring the indicators, and mobilization of the means and tools of implementation. The NPSD priorities for the short period 2016-2020 are: 
 
1. Complete the MDGs unfinished agenda, especially the targets related to poverty, and health, education 
2. SDG targets to be achieved9 by 2020.  
3. Address income and social inequalities within the country, especially reduce the disparities between the States  
4. Mobilize domestic and foreign means and tools of implementation, especially financial resources, capacity development and data and information gathering for the SDGs indicators 
 
Framework for SDGs implementation activities  
The NPSD includes a national implementation framework and matrices for the implementation of the SDGs activities. The national implementation framework is structured around four pillars: (a) integration of the sustainable development principles and dimensions in the national planning frameworks (b) harmonization of the legislations, policies and plans, and institutional reform and strengthening, (c) preparations of data and information and measuring the indicators, and (d) resources mobilization  
 
The operational pillars of the implementation framework (Figure 6) aim to build national capacity at all levels for Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan. The four pillars are interlinked, and each pillar consists of capacity building components that are also intertwined. They are generic and they virtually serve the national planning frameworks, the NDC recommendations and the SDGs targets and indicators.   
 
Figure 5: Pillars of the Implementation Framework for the SDGs 

 
The framework includes 5 matrices for implementation sub-programs on:  
Sub-program 1: 	Coordination and institutional structure (governance) 
Sub-program 2: 
Publicity and awareness 
Sub-program 3: 
Harmonization and integration of the SDGs in the National Planning Frameworks 
Sub-program 4 
Capacity development 
Sub-program 5 
Conferences and forums  
 
Each sub-program includes a matrix showing the activities to be undertaken, and the estimated resources that are needed for implementation. The activities cover all stakeholders, especially engagement of the private sector, national voluntary organizations, community-based organizations and institutions of excellence. The SDGs targets have been assigned to the line ministries for implementation, follow up and monitoring tasks, as shown in Annex table 1. 
 
Best practice: Health in All Policies and the SDGs 
Sudanis experience on Health in All Policies (HiAP) demonstrates how the pillars of the implementation framework above mentioned are intertwined.   The Public Health Institute undertook stakeholder assessment for the implementation of HiAP approach in the Sudan. The 

assessment commenced with a review of the National Health Policy 20072016, which recognizes the importance of the socioeconomic determinants of health and the role of health in addressing poverty and achieving equity. Health is multifaced nature and health issues need intersectoral collaboration, but the health policy doesnit provide guidance on how this should be undertaken. In order to address this issue, the Federal Ministry of Health initiated dialogue with all health stakeholders, including line ministries responsible for improving the social determinants of health (water, housing, energy, sanitation, education, etc.).   
 
All national policies have been assessed, and the results show that stakeholders work in silos and the institutional structures are inefficient 
Sudan is committed to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and implementation of the SDGs and HiAP will reinforce each other. The SDGs provide an additional impetus for working with different sectors of government and society to address the determinants through policies and legislation towards improving health and preventing harm. Further, the horizontal mechanisms being developed through the HiAP Road Map will allow sectors to have timely knowledge of other sectorsi policies and law proposals and assess their possible impacts on health, environment, employment etc. The Road Map is also supporting the introduction of prospective, integrated impact assessments into the legislation process. Through these proposals HiAP is facilitating and paving the way for implementation of the SDGs. The general commitment from different ministries to consider equity when developing their policies will also help achieve the important SDG concept of \0xECleaving no one behind. 
 
Ministry of Health, Sudan Health in All Policies Experience  

and lack coordination and sharing of information.   Based on the results of the assessment, the Federal Ministry of Health have produced a new National Health Policy 2017-2030, in tandem with the SDGs.  A Road Map for HiAP have been developed with the aim of improving health outcomes and achieving universal health coverage and equity for all people and across all States. Most important is that the Road Map introduced new planning values: 
 
1. Equity:  All sectors should give as much advantage and consideration to health issues as is given to other issues  
2. Shared responsibility: All sectors have a shared responsibility to promote and safeguard health  
3. Collaborative effort: All sectors should cooperate together to promote health and health equity  
4. Accountability: All sectors have an assigned responsibility towards the health of the population  
5. Transparency: All sectors should be operating in such as a way that it is easy for each sector to see what actions are performed in order to assesses the potential impacts of the actions on health and health equity  
6. Sustainability: All sectors should ensure that efforts meet the health needs of present and future generations 
Based on these values, national priorities in health have been identified and implementation roles assigned to stakeholders, especially the line ministries. The HiAP implementation includes a governance structure, including a HiAP unit at the Public Health Institute to monitor implementation of the Road Map and prepare and submit a health and well-being report to the National Health Coordination Council.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SDGs Accelerators 
There is a high potential for the Sudan to accelerate the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs and to successfully overcome the bottlenecks and constraints it has faced during the MDGs era (2000-2015). With a limited time period for the achievement of the SDGs, the Sudan will strategically focus on the factors and forces that can effect rapid change and transformation on peace and development.  Identifying the accelerators of change and transformation and linking them to the national priorities will provide strategic direction to development policies and plans in the Sudan. Therefore, it is important for the national development planning frameworks to provide the means for people to live and survive and meanwhile effect rapid change towards peace and stability and high-quality life. 
 
SDGs accelerators10 are the factors that will drive the implementation and achievement of 
Agenda 2030 and sustainable development in the Sudan. The focus on accelerators in the VNR 2018 has been pursued for the purpose of:  
 
1. Drawing the attention and concern of leaders and key officials to the most important and most critical and strategic areas where change and transformation can be accelerated to achieve sustainable peace, stability and prosperity.   
2. Using the accelerators as a framework for identifying the national development priorities, and for integrating the SDGs accelerators into the national development plans with the aim of enhancing planning and decision making for improving the quality of life of all people in the country.  
3. Harnessing the tools and means of implementation (financial and human resources, investments, partnerships, technologies, etc.), and developing strategies for the engagement and participation of all stakeholders and partners. Especially when the means of implementation and resources are scarce, it will be essential to develop partnerships and resources mobilization strategies, and to use the resources wisely and where they are mostly needed to make useful and more productive change in the quality of life of people. 
 
Based on the analyses of linkages and interactions, three accelerators have been identified through national consultation workshops on the most strategic factors that will help the Sudan to implement and achieve the sustainable development agenda:   
 
1. Peace dividend 
2. agriculture transformation 
3. Social transformation 
 
Peace dividend  
Peace and stability are increasingly prevailing in the Sudan, after decades of conflicts that have debilitated the national capacities to develop. Internally displaced people who were estimated at 5 million in 2005, have rapidly declined to less than 2 million in 2018 and are expected to reduce to the minimum before the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled to take place in 2020. The people who were displaced in Darfur, South Kordofan and the Blue Nile have returned to their homes and communities.  These new emerging peace and stability trends are creating an environment for conducive and meaningful post-conflict development initiatives for transforming people from recipients of humanitarian assistance and relief to active participants in peace and sustainable development for the betterment of their own lives and their communities.  
The peace dividends will rapidly accelerate the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, which 	provides 	advanced 
conceptualization of peace and The people and Government of Sudan will need to build development. These are people- institutions for peace and development and shift resources centered agenda that reflect the and attention from war to investing in the future. With the determination to foster peaceful, just three peace agreements and ongoing efforts for a lasting and inclusive societies which are free and comprehensive peace agreement in Darfur, Sudan has its greatest opportunity in a generation to concentrate on from fear and violence. There can be improving the lives of Sudanese and consolidate and 
no sustainable development without sustain peace. Support from the international development peace and no peace without community, particularly drawing from the accumulated sustainable development. international experience on post-conflict recovery and Sustainable development is peace building, will enhance the prospects for sustained impossible in the absence of peace, peace and economic developments. as building peace and human rights and accountable and security creates additional expenditure obligations. inclusive institutions. Peace, Justice  
and Sustainable Development, as Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2012 illustrated in the figure 6 below, are linked to each other in a virtuous cycle. Investing in peace, justice and stability (social, psychological, cultural, political, etc.) is an accelerator of sustainable development. People will be free from all kinds of fear and violence, fear from crime, abuse, exploitation and human trafficking, among others.   
Figure 6: Conceptualizing peace for SDGs implmentation in Sudan 

Peace will reduce the deprivation of people from development and prosperity in multiple ways: live in stable families and communities, access to basic services (water, food, health, education and shelter), access to security and justice, etc. Therefore, investment in peace for sustainable development means investment in the multiple needs of people.   The peace dividends will accrue in multiple social, economic, political, security areas. The virtuous cycle of dividends is important for sustaining peace and for implementing the SDGs. Rehabilitation and integration activities (water, housing, health, education, justice, security and settlement and integration of families and communities) are priorities for peace building and prosperity.  
Activities of the Sudan Government on peace building 
Peace is an affirmed government strategy and is the first and foremost national priority. It is the responsibility of government and the entire society to advance peace in all dimensions. For the Sudan, itis now crystal clear that conflict and violence have crippled the societies and denied the whole country the opportunity to prosper and develop. Since independence in 1956 the country has gone through plethora of tries and initiatives for the sake of making peace, which resulted in valuable skills in negotiations and reconciliations. The status of justice, human rights and development have been promoted, and politically, the Sudan have been witnessing a great deal of changes that pour in the way of reforming and chaining towards stability and democracy.  
The Sudan is currently a post conflict state as armed conflicts are rapidly vanishing, and peace is rapidly prevailing especially in the war-torn areas in Darfur, Kordofan and the Blue Nile States. Post conflict situations are both critical and volatile, while failure is certainly not an option. The Sudan is seriously active to sustain peace, which is a pre-requisite to a successful implementation of the national development plans of goal 16 and all of the SDGs. 
 
Main Peace Agreements in Sudan 
1. Round Table Conference: Sudanis government and South Sudanis political opposition (March 1956). 
2. Addis Ababa Agreement: Sudan government and General Josef Lago (March 1972). 
3. Abuja Agreement: Sudan government and Sudan liberation movement army (SLM/A)(April 1993). 
4. Khartoum Peace Agreement: Reik Macharis 
SPLM breakaway faction and Sudan 
Government (1997) 
5. Machakos Protocol: Sudan government and SPLM (November 2002) 
6. Naivasha Agreement:  Sudan government and SPLM (September 2003) 
7. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA):  Sudan government and SPLM (January 2005) 
8. Abuja Agreement: Government of Sudan and Sudan Liberation Army -Minni Minnawi (May 2006).  
9. East Sudan Peace Agreement: Sudan Government and representatives of 
10. Eastern rebel groups (2006). 
11. Doha Agreement: Sudan government and the Liberation and Justice Movement (July 2011). 
A post-conflict state means realizing peace, 	stability 	and 	attaining 	of sustainable socio-economic development. But the end of conflict brings with it the challenge of establishing the institutions and strategies for making peace durable and sustainable.  
 
The prolonged internal conflict in the Sudan is not necessarily to be considered all unfavourable.  Going through exhausting and costly experience have led to the acknowledgement of the importance of national unity, integrity as a way to fight corruption, to achieve liberty and freedom, to prevail justice and the rule of law. Human rights, development, the importance of national resources, the loss of human capital caused by war, accountability, transparency and above all, the prominence of democracy being the base for a peaceful, just and developed state.  
Transformation, which Agenda 2030 and the SDGs call for, can be achieved with considering peace hand-in-hand with development. Peace and development in the Sudan are intertwined. They go hand- in-hand and are equally high priority for the achievement of long-lasting stability and sustainable development outcomes by year 2030 and beyond. The Sudan is pioneer on linking peace and development and has accumulated valuable lessons of experience for its own future development pathways, and for the benefit of its neighbours in Africa and the Arab World.  
 
The National Dialogue Conference 
The National Dialogue Conference (NDC), which also included community dialogue, on peace and development, and complete reform of the public sector and public policies, continued for a year from October 2015 to October 2016, and is supported through a presidential commitment to implement all of its outcomes.  The engagement in the national dialogue has covered government officials, opposition parties, community leaders and repel leaders and fighters. The main objectives of the NDC were:  
1- Constitutional and political reform that would result in a national consent to build a state of justice, good governance and suitable policies. 
2- A national constitution and legislations to support freedoms and social justice. 
3- Independent government structures/systems to guarantee rights of freedoms and social justice 
4- A transparent free and fair elections under the supervision of a politically neutral electoral commission that is financially and administratively independent 
And in order to set up a conducive environment to encourage people to join the national dialogue, a high coordination committee issued certain demands that were submitted to the president: 
1- Releasing all political detainees  
2- Ensuring and guaranteeing all kinds of freedoms: (political, expression, publishing) 
3- Avoiding the use of hate speech among participants 
4- Guaranteeing personal security for armed groups willing to participate in the dialogue 5- A lasting Ceasefire. 
The dialogue has been conducted through 6 committees on: 
1. peace and unity, which reached total agreement on 36 recommendations, 
2. economics, which reached total agreement on 653 recommendations,  
3. identity, which reached total agreement on 69 recommendations  
4. external relations, which total agreement on 39 recommendations,  5. basic freedoms, which reached total agreement on 84 recommendations, and 6. governance, which reached total agreement on 100 recommendations.  
The total number of agreements is 981 recommendations achieved by all committees. A mapping of the NDC recommendations against Agenda 2030 and the SDGs targets show the extent of agreement of the outcomes of the national dialogue with the new agenda and the international commitments of the country. At the outset it is important to note that the national dialogue recommended implementation of the SDGs in the country and their integration in the national constitution.  Implementation of the recommendation of the national dialogue will lead to the achievement of the SDGs in the Sudan.  
The dialogue succeeded in building trust and establishing a national transparent platform to discuss all issues and concerns that challenge peace and development in the country. The implementation of the recommendations of the dialogue have been taken seriously by the Government at the national and state levels. Implementation matrices have prepared and allocated to ministries for integrating the recommendations NDC into the existing planning structures and frameworks, and for regular monitoring, reporting and accountability through the Council of Ministers. 
Sudanese academia and the quest for peace 
Education institutions in the Sudan are increasingly becoming accountable to the need for reducing conflict and spreading tolerance and peace culture. Children and youth affected by years of conflict need a serious process of education, peace culture and rehabilitation to reform and integrate them within normal and healed societies. Two universities have contributed significantly to the quest for peace. Ahfad University- Trauma Center is playing a muchappreciated role: treating women affected by war. The University of Khartoum, through its Peace Research Institute (PRI), contributed to rich studies on peace and research engaging in national public policies and issues and in collaboration with the Center for Peace Studies at the University of Nayala, and the Center for Peace and Development Studies at the University of Diling. PRI has formed a referential think-thank for uniting experts, intellectuals and interested academia, and engaging them in academic relations with like-minded international institutions.   
One of the most important projects conducted by PRI is the National Anti-War Campaign (NAWC) which inaugurated the Peace Research Institute in the 21st of September 2015. The campaign aimed to advocate for peace culture and to spread awareness that would create and galvanize public opinion against war. The NAWC included a program on Arts for Peace. Different kinds of Arts have been used to promote culture of peace in the society. Also, it included Media for Peace program, with focus on the capacity building of the people working in the media field, and how they can use their knowledge and skills to spread the culture of peace in the country.  
The NAWC conducted a pilot research about the Developmental Burden of Armed Conflicts in Sudan, which is the first of its kind to measure the cost of war in the country. It comes within the framework of the attention and interaction with the University of Khartoum pressing national issues facing the country. The research has focused on measuring the extent of depletion of financial, institutional and human resources over the past decades.  
Role of the local communities in peace building 
Local communityis willingness and consensus are crucial for ensuring all processes of peace and conflict resolution. It draws the path for peace, where civilians are collaborating and contributing to the stability of their communities. The system of Native Administration, which is popular in the Sudan, forms a very effective institution of local governance. It plays an important role in peace building through customary laws that are usually accepted and respected by all members of the community. The purpose of the Native Administration is threefold: to manage land allocation and use, to deliver justice and settle disputes, and to represent the state. 
The Native Administration exits side-by-side with the Ajaweed Council (Al Joodia), which is an indigenous conflict resolution mechanism and is the most important social institutions that provide oversight and mediation for disputed parties. The benefits of Al Joodia go beyond the range of the local traditional conflicts to consolidate reconciliation conferences sponsored by the state. The government established local authorities called Reconciliation and Peaceful Coexistence Mechanism (RPCM) working on peace building in the community with civil efforts such as the Peace Council in Blue Nile State, and other reconciliation Mechanisms in West and South Kordofan as well as the States of Darfur.  
Shataia Reconciliation Conference held in 2016 is considered as one of the most important and successful traditional peaceful coexistence conferences. The initiative gathered all stakeholders interested in peacemaking, (government, local communities and civil societies). Great efforts were made by the local community, as people of Shataia has stressed their intention to overcome the past, and to work on renouncing tribalism, war and fighting. They insisted upon the need for peaceful coexistence and participation of civilians to actually promote peace process and push it forward. Furthermore, two choices and supports were offered during the conference for either a voluntary return of displaced persons back to their villages, or reconstruction of camps into new villages, and providing essential services and programs for integration. 
Role of women in peace building 
The role of women in peace building is a powerfully emerging trend in the country. Women, who constitute half of the population, suffered the most from conflict, separation and disintegration of their families, and endured the sufferings of their children from malnutrition, poor health and diseases, and illiteracy. These conditions, among other reasons, have inspired women to engage in peace building and to push for inclusion of gender issues in peace negotiations. Consultations with Sudanese women have led to the inclusion of gender issues in the Joint Assessment Mission. Women groups from Darfur played a pivotal role in the Doha rounds of negotiations on peace in Darfur. They also raised issues on womenis participation in decision making. Consequently, out of 41 members of Darfur Regional Authority 10 were women. A large number of women have joined the security forces, especially as police officers. The increasing participation of women in the security forces will make peace building and post-conflict activities participatory and inclusive. 
Trafficking in persons 
The presence of a large number of refugees, illegal migrants and vulnerable population groups makes the Sudan a transit, source and destination of human trafficking. This is facilitated by the existence of a good network of roads and internal transportation systems for rapid movement across the country to the Mediterranean and Europe.  Research on human trafficking show that most of the routes and networks operate in Eastern Sudan, and it engage vulnerable refugees and illegal migrants who sneak through the borders with Eritrea and Ethiopia. Human trafficking is a violation of human rights and it threatens peace and stability in the country. In order to address this issue, Sudan passed Anti-Trafficking Act in 2014 and established a National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. Two states, Kassala and Gedarif issued AntiTrafficking laws in 2010 and 2013, respectively. Also, the government established a Rapid Emergency Taskforce and Response Unit to deal with trafficking crimes in Eastern Sudan. 
Agriculture Transformation  
Agriculture transformation is the engine of SDGs implementation in the Sudan. With a wealth of natural resources, especially land, fertile soil, water, and natural pastures, the Sudanis comparative advantage is in agriculture (crops and animal husbandry) which is mostly a traditional and underdeveloped sector. The Sudan has been recognized for its huge and diversified natural resources, which if well utilized the country shall have the prospects of achieving sustainable development and prosperity for its people.  
 
Because of its agriculture potentials, the Sudan has been identified as one of the top countries capable of contributing effectively to the regional and global food security. However, these potentials need to be prioritized for investment and financial resources, technology and innovations. There is need for increasing investment in productivity and the value chain of agriculture production, and for targeting investment in agriculture industries and exportable agriculture goods, harnessing the participation of people and community-based organizations in small scale agriculture, and engaging the private sector in profitable agriculture businesses.  
 
Transformation of agriculture will accelerate the implementation of the SDGs in the Sudan in multiple ways and with tangible ripple effects, especially ending poverty (SDG1), fighting hunger and malnutrition (SDG2), improving health (SDG3) and education (SDG4) increasing decent work, employment opportunities and economic growth (SDG8), reducing inequality (SDG10), promoting peace and the settlement of people in stable societies (SDG16), among others. These are SDGs where tangible progress can be made within the short period of Agenda 2030. Achieving transformation in agriculture in the Sudan is now addressing the imperative for the following reasons:  
 
1. Agriculture is the road to achieving stability, security and fear from want and hunger 
2. Need to improve production efficiency and competitive capacities. This may be realized through the use of modern technologies utilizing the comparative advantages of the different regions of the country within a framework of an integrated development program  
3. Agriculture can mobilize all economic activities related to trade, industry and transport, thereby contributing to diversification of the economy and availing employment opportunities  
4. The states need to intensify their development activities in agriculture, improve conflict management around resources thereby leading to durable peace, stability and strong federal system of governance 
5. Food security is the responsibility of the state and It will not be achieved except through agricultural transformation  
6. Migration from rural to urban areas and particularly to Khartoum, the national capital, will not be curbed except through agricultural development  
7. Sudan must honor its commitments as a member of the international community to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) without leaving any one behind 
 
SWOT analyses for agriculture transformation 
A diagnosis of the current situation in the agricultural sector is made using the SWOT analysis to explore the Strengths and Weaknesses in the performance of the sector, the Opportunities for development and the Threats involved. The SWOT analyses will help in agriculture transformation for the implementation of the SDGs in the Sudan. The diagram below shows the strengths and comparative advantages, the weaknesses that need to be understood and fully addressed, the opportunities for transformation and further development, and the threats that need to be addressed through strategic policies and actions. 
 
 
Transforming Agriculture for Achievement of the SDGs 
 

Fertile land suitable for agriculture cultivation, estimated at 175 million feddans (74 million hectares) 
 
Fresh water resources from rainfall, rivers and 
underground aquifers 
 
Animal resource (110 million heads) as well as a sizable reservoir of fish resources along the Red Sea shores, Lake Nuba and Merawi 
reservoir 
 
Infrastructure and strategic geographic location to support increased marketing of agricultural and livestock products in the domestic and regional markets  
 
A federal system of government which encourages the participation of local communities in 
development  
 
Available research and training institutions all over the country which can provide trained manpower 
 
Land issues, mainly tenure, are a stumbling block to improving agricultural 
performance 
 
Low levels of productivity to all factors of production 
 
Producers trapped in traditional systems of production with weak technical, managerial and financial capacities 
 
Low investment in agriculture and weak economic policies leading to unstable prices, exchange rates and inflation 
 
Weak coordination of policies among various 
ministries and institutions 
 
Weak capacity to produce agricultural inputs locally, and inadequate incentives to encourage local production of agricultural inputs 
particularly seeds 
 
Inadequate statistics to support planning and 
decision making 
A strong and vast natural resource base - land and 
water 
 
Population base in rural areas with indigenous knowledge and experience in 
agriculture 
 
Increasing demand for jobs, employment and investment 
opportunities 
 
Increasing demand for food 
and agriculture products  
 
Business opportunities for small and large-scale 
agriculture 
 
Proximity to COMESA countries and to the markets in the Arab states and Europe 
 
Diverse partnerships in agriculture, especially in crop production, animal husbandry, forestry, and horticulture 
 
  
 
Deterioration of natural resources and negative impact on the settlement of livestock producers and the development of the national herd.  
 
Insecurity and tribal conflicts 
over resources 
 
Structural weakness in financial policies and institutions incapable of providing funds to smallholders or rural 
infrastructure 
 
High dependence of animal resources on pastoral and transhuman systems of production renders the provision of services and the transfer of technology needed for improvement difficult 
 
Climatic change resulting in fluctuations of production 
and productivity 
 
Trade barriers established by developed countries to protect their producers limit access to their markets 
 	 	 	 
Key success factors for agricultural transformation  
The realization of agricultural transformation in the Sudan will depend on success factors for the mobilization of the agricultural activities and the creation of suitable environment for the realization of the potential of the agricultural sector: 
1. Government commitment to annually allocate 10 percent of the national budget to agriculture 
2. Creating the environment conducive to sustainable development of agricultural productivity and production through the implementation of macro and sectoral policies which promote investment, developing infrastructure for water harvesting and irrigation storage capacities of the Nile waters, building feeder roads, establishing livestock routes and providing marketing infrastructure 
3. Building the capacities of producers through reforming their institutions. Increasing their productive and managerial capacities, making use of successful international experiences in this area  
4. Resolving the land tenure issues which discourage optimal use of large areas in the irrigated and rainfed sectors  
5. Improving the agricultural support services including the development of the agricultural research, technology transfer and extension services, agricultural education, establishment and upgrading of markets, strengthening of information and communication technologies  
6. Developing and modernizing of agricultural systems with a view to increasing efficient utilization of resources through increasing crop intensity, improving marketing efficiency, value addition through processing and introduction of new systems of livestock and fishery production, including irrigated farms and wildlife reserves  
7. Protection of agricultural producers through adoption of measures of risk aversion and expansion of agricultural insurance services  
8. Creation of Commodity Councils representing stakeholders in crops and livestock to ensure the participation of the stakeholders including the producers in the promotion and development of crops and commodities.  
9. Protecting natural resources through the development of forests. pastures and range lands, wildlife reserves and re-establishment of the vegetative cover and the development of the Gum Arabic Belt and the combat of desertification  
10. Building the capacities of the industrial sector to manufacture agricultural inputs, satisfy agro-industries with their requirements of raw materials, link the production-processingmarketing chain and utilize the ideal capacities in the agro-industries  
11. Protecting consumers and promoting exports, by implementing the laws and procedures which ensure food safely and control of the quality of plant and livestock products, whether processed locally or imported, in accordance with the accredited international standards. 
12. Engaging people and community-based organizations and the private sector in strategic partnerships with a view to realizing the economies of scale, benefiting from new technologies, and getting access to international markets and financial institutions.  
 
Strengthening the role of the private sector in agricultural transformation 
The achievement of the agricultural transformation necessitates a rapid change of the agricultural from a traditional sector characterized by low productivity and production into a modern, dynamic, commercial sector responding effectively to local and global needs and changes. This transformation requires efficient and optimal distribution of roles between the government and private sector. The government to focus on the policies and plans that will create conducive environment through the provision of incentives for investment in the agricultural sector and removal of obstacles limiting effective participation. The capacities of the private sector and the society as a whole will be engaged more effectively in large- and smallscale agriculture businesses. However, this will not happen unless the existing problems hampering the private sector are overcome. These problems are: 
 
1. Weak administrative capacities and shortage of skilled labor 
2. Low contribution of the private sector in financing of the projects targeting the local and international markets 
3. Lack of awareness of the private sector of the ways and requirements of modern marketing of agricultural commodities and dependence on traditional market 
4. Weak capacities of the private sector to monitor the rapid development of regional and international markets and their demand for agricultural commodities in terms of quantity, quality and timing 
 
In order to empower the private sector to play an effective role, the following actions must be taken: 
 
1. Remove administrative and financial restrictions obstructing intra-state and export trade 
2. Ensure free, equitable and transparent competition in government procurement and contracts 
3. Resolve land ownership, land use problems and conflicts over land as quickly as possible 
4. Avail basic information on the lands available for investment including the privileges and the conditions of land lease 
5. Review existing laws and regulations which discourage private investment 
6. Offer the private sector incentives to invest in research and development 
7. Strengthen relations and coordination between the private sector and the commercial offices in Sudanese embassies with a view to providing the private sector with information and promoting agricultural investment 
8. Strengthen relations with foreign entities concerned with agriculture in the Sudan (bilateral relations and regional and international organizations) 
9. Privatize government-owned production enterprises and prevent government from competing with private sector in the areas of production and agricultural finance 
10. Promote agricultural insurance and risk management schemes 
   
Fast track accelerators for achieving agricultural transformation 
1. Promising modern technologies in agriculture in Sudan: 
There are promising and encouraging opportunities now to raise productivity remarkably through the modern technologies that have been implemented in Sudan in recent years. The most important of these is the implementation of the Zero-tillage Technology (conservation agriculture) applied in the rain-fed sector and resulted in achieving high and unprecedented increase in productivity in all crops grown reaching three to five times higher than the productivity achieved in conventional systems11. One of the positive developments in the irrigated sector is the improvement in the productivity of different crops, especially wheat, which showed a clear improved productivity, indicating improved adaptation of wheat to the Sudan climatic conditions (resilience). Also, the adoption of modern irrigation systems in the irrigated sector has led to a marked improvement in the productivity of different crops. 
 
2. Benefits of the Renaissance Dam on the irrigated sector: 
As one of the benefits of the Renaissance Dam in Ethiopia on irrigated agriculture all water of the Blue Nile will be stored at the Dam in Ethiopia near the border with Sudan, the flow of the Blue Nile and the main Nile will be stable all year round at a sufficient level for irrigation. This will allow for a high level of crop intensification in the agricultural irrigated schemes along the Blue Nile and main Nile, including the large national schemes i.e. Gezira. This will allow for maximum utilization of the irrigated agricultural land. 
 
3. Sudan Initiative for Achieving Food Security in the Arab Countries:  
The Sudan Initiative for Achieving Food Security in the Arab Countries was prompted by the global food crisis in 2007/08 which severely impacted the Arab food importing countries, especially those that lack the natural resource base for food production, such as the GCC countries. The initiative was presented by the President of Sudan and adopted by the Arab League in its summit in Riyadh in 2013. The initiative stands as regional cooperation framework between Arab countries where Sudan provides natural resources and other Arab countries provide direct investment for food production to contribute to realizing food security in the region. In addition to the production, processing and export of cereals (mainly wheat and rice) sugar, vegetable oils, red meat, milk and fodder, the program is also associated with investment in infrastructure supporting these activities, mainly in roads, railways, energy and storage facilities.  
 
The plan for implementation dictated the development of 3.4 million hectares, irrigated and rain-fed to produce 14.92 million tons of the suggested crops with a total investment of U$ 9.94 billion. A considerable portion of production is set to supply the local markets. The initiative shall also provide employment opportunities in the rural areas of the Sudan in addition to facilitating technology transfer, hence increasing the efficiency of Sudanis agricultural sector. Furthermore, the high level of investment in infrastructure will have a crucial impact on flourishing economic activity in the rural areas and in the country as a whole and contribute to enhancing incomes.  All of these factors combined are expected to contribute immensely to the eradication of hunger and the strengthening of food security in the country. 
 
4. Encourage Foreign Direct Investment in agriculture: 
Recent introduction of foreign direct investment in agriculture in the Sudan especially by Arab investors showed remarkable indications of success in production and marketing of important crops as well as livestock. Encouraging this trend will enhance the development of agriculture in different regions of the country. 
 
5. Develop an irrigated system of production in western Sudan:  
Development of an irrigated system of production in the western regions depending on underground water especially in Kordofan and Darfur to complement the rainy season, which is the only production season in these regions, will be an important development in achieving agricultural transformation. For a long-time dependence of these regions only on the rainy season made them disaster prone areas especially with the observable cycles of drought witnessed in many years. Developing an additional irrigated production season will result in stability of agricultural production in these areas throughout the year. An authority for assessment of underground water in western Sudan and development of irrigated sector is proposed here. 
 
6. Develop organic agriculture for export 
In view of the existing huge potentialities of the Sudan in organic farming and the increasing international demand for organic food products emphasis on organizing of production and marketing of organic crops and livestock products will result in significant development of exports from the Sudan.  
 
7. Take advantage of opportunities from WTO 
Introduce arrangements to make use of the opportunities given by the WTO agreement in relation to agriculture in the LDC. This can be done through the application of the agriculture laws which were passed recently namely the bills: 
 
a) Rural development and food security. 
b) Reduction of poverty. 
c) Amend the law of strategic reserve to include distribution of food at reasonable prices and setting the stabilization prices of the main food crops. 
d) Provide targeted subsidy for the productive poor in the less developed areas. 
e) Make use of the special safeguards (SSG) legislation relating to custom duties. 
f) Use of the seasonal custom duty for select commodities particularly the perishables during the peak of local production.  
 
8. Program for agriculture transformation 
Transformation of agriculture will be developed into a program of objectives, policies and actions under each subsector: traditional rainfed agriculture, mechanized rainfed agriculture, irrigated agriculture, livestock and fisheries, and natural resources (See Annex Table 2).  
 
Expected outcomes 
 
The overall strategic objective of transformation is to transition agriculture from a sector dominated by subsistence production to a modem sector responsive to market signals and with substantial contributions to the implementation of the SDGs, and to achieve the following specific outcomes: 
 
1. Increased productivity and efficiency and increased agriculture GDP growth to 6 percent annually and achieve sustainable economic growth and high per capita income  
2. Increased employment opportunities, development of rural areas and slowing down migration to towns so as to minimize rural-urban migration 
3. High and sustainable food security to eliminate poverty, hunger and malnutrition 
4. Increased export of crops and livestock, increased contribution of agriculture to the balance of trade, and improved competitiveness of the agricultural products in the regional and global markets  
5. Balanced development and growth in all states to achieve equality between states with the view to encouraging settlement in the rural areas, and to reduce marginalization complaints and conflicts 
6. Developed and protected natural resources to ensure their renewal and sustainability 
 
 
Social transformation 
The Sudan is undergoing profound social and cultural transformations that will impinge on the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. Everywhere in the country, in rural and urban areas, the social and cultural institutions and the social fabric of societies and communities are molding and changing. The factors of change are many and are intertwined: high and pervasive poverty, increasing population, rapid urbanization, spreading ICT, increasing education, improving girlis education, empowering women and youth, etc. The social systems are changing from \0xECsocial affairs to \0xECsocial development, where people and communities are gradually changing from recipients of charities and cash transfers to participants in development and producers of goods and services. The transformation to social development approach will accelerate poverty alleviation, economic growth, food security, in the country.   
 
Ending poverty for SDGs acceleration 
  
Ending poverty is a very major accelerator for the achievement of the SDGs in the Sudan. Poverty   is a challenge to the welfare and prosperity of the people and protection of natural resources, especially land, water and forests. Addressing poverty is a national development priority in the country. All the national planning frameworks for 2017-2020, clearly indicate the contribution of development activities in areas such as health, education, and social protection, agriculture, food security, to ending poverty. Also, the States have diverse development projects and programs that directly target the poor and vulnerable people and aim to end poverty and to address its adverse social impacts on the welfare of people and on the environment.  
Though officially and publicly recognized, the prevalence, incidence and dimensions of poverty are largely not well studied because of lack of accurate and timely data. Income poverty, which is the most well-known, does not provide accurate measure of the depth and breadth of the challenge.  Its use to inform planning and support decision making is limited. There is a general belief that poverty in the Sudan is due to shortage of capabilities more than lack of resources, which is a hypothesis that must be tested with accurate and timely data. 
The results of the National Baseline Household Budget Surveys 2014 have been used to measure the incidence of poverty at 36.1, compared 46.5 percent in 200912 and. The surveys indicate variations of poverty incidence by State: the lowest incidence (12.2%) in the Northern States and the highest (67.2%) in Central Darfur State. This variation indicates where policy interventions are highly needed to reduce the incidence of poverty. Obviously, Central Darfur, South Kordofan and West Darfur are top priority states for addressing poverty. With 1 of every two persons in poverty the Red Sea and South Darfur come next in priority for poverty interventions.  
 

The poverty incidence is highly susceptible to changes in the economic conditions, which have recently worsened due to shortage of energy and high inflation rate. The value of the Sudanese Pound has been officially set at 18 to one US Dollar in in 2018, compared to 6 in 2014.  The inflation rate soured to 52.4 percent in 2018 compared to an average of 32.2 in 2017. The debt burden is high and has rapidly increased from about 45 billion US$ in 2013 to 56.5 billion US$ in 2018, mainly because of the debt arrears.  The country is in debt distress and is eligible for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPIC) initiative.   There is need to continue engaging with external creditors to secure support for debt relief and seek the support of the IMF for cooperation on payments.  
Social protection 
Social protection policies and programs are important accelerators of social development in the Sudan. They include Social Insurance, e.g. pensions (to ensure a minimum income in old age), health insurance (to protect the well-being of households in the face of adverse events), Social Assistance through targeted programs (to increase the access of vulnerable groups to basic services) as well as labor market policies and programs (to promote employment, productivity, decent work, and micro-finance). These programs complement the delivery of basic health and education services, financial services, the provision of utilities and economic infrastructure, and other policies and programs aimed at reducing poverty and managing risks. 
 
An important and primary social protection mechanism in Sudan is Zakat, which is an Islamic measure for wealth distribution and building of productive capabilities and is playing an important role as a source of social assistance for the poor. This is further complemented by increasing government pro-poor expenditure.  
 
One of the social support schemes adopted by the Ministry Security and Social Development is the Social Initiative Program (SIP) that consists of eight components. The programs aiming at provision of an integrated package of services for 500,000 families from the poorest households. Besides, the project also aims at provision of a diverse range of health services, education and income generating activities for the poor households. However, social protection schemes in Sudan are challenged by the fiscal policies undertaken by government, including suspension of subsidies on key commodities coupled with the pressures on the foreign reserve position of the country, which have aggravated the situation of the poor. 
 
Education 
 
Education is an important accelerator of development and social change. The government policies are geared towards the provision of free and compulsory basic education for all. This commitment is reflected in the Interim National Constitution as well as in the Quarter-Century strategy 2007-2031. Besides, the National Plan for Education for All was developed in 2003, with detailed activities, programs and estimated budget. However, considerable efforts are still needed in order to ensure significant improvement in basic education to ensure quality education for all. In addition, there is also a Five-Year Plan 2017-2021 which is an integral part of the Quarter-Century Strategy 2007-2031. Both plans provide a roadmap for the further development of education for making solid progress towards achieving inclusive education. The establishment of a directorate for girl's education, as stipulated in the Girls Education Policy, at both federal and state levels represents one of the important policy tools to reduce gender gaps in education.  
 
National education trends have served as the driver of human development progress in Sudan over the past three decades. Combining gross enrolment ratios at all school levels and adult literacy, the education index for Sudan has grown at nearly twice the rate of other HDI components. Gains in primary and tertiary enrolment are largely behind the education improvements. Despite of the positive gains made in the education sector, still around 3.1 million children aged 5-13 years remain out of school, of whom 52 per cent are girls. Furthermore, around two-thirds of the existing schools do not have improved sanitation facilities and a quarter of them do not have improved drinking water facilities, which negatively impacts childrenis attendance and enrolment, particularly for girls. 
 
Higher education witnessed significant expansion. In 1990 there was a limited number of institutions (5 universities, 2 private colleges and 12 technical colleges). The number of higher education institutions rose to 30 government universities, 6 private universities, 44 colleges and higher institutes and 20 technical colleges. Accordingly, the intake capacity of higher education institutions reached more than 500 thousand students, representing 10 percent of the population in the age group 17-23 years. Therefore, one of the important causes of the expansion in education has been tertiary-level enrolment. At tertiary education level, it is evident that there is a higher rate of enrolment of girls than boys. 
 
Population health 
Improving population health is undoubtedly a very important accelerator of the SDGs implementation in the Sudan. Overall measures of health indicate that peopleis health in the Sudan is way below the world average; reflecting high potential for health development. Life expectancy at birth, which measures the expected years of life to be lived by a newborn baby in the country, is 64.76 for 2015-2020 period, compared to 71.96 world average for the same period, which shows 7.20 years difference. Another important measure of population health is infant mortality, which is the number of infant deaths for 1000 liveborn children. The infant mortality rate for the Sudan is estimated at 44 compared to a world average of 31 for the 20152020 period. The national surveys show considerable disparities in infant and child mortality among the 18 States, which points to the existence of health inequalities that must be addressed through comprehensive policies and program interventions.  
The Federal Ministry of Health formulated a comprehensive and transformational national health policy (2017 -2030) that aims to attain universal health coverage and improve the standard of health and wellbeing for all people through addressing health inequalities and adopting peoplecentred and Health in All Policies approach thereby achieving sustainable developmental goals and contributing to the overall social and economic development of the country. The policy is transformational in several ways: from out-of-pocket to prepaid finance health system with protection of the vulnerable people; from government based to multi-stakeholder engagement; from Ministry of Health Policy to a national health policy; from curative and disease-oriented policy to health prevention and promotion of wellbeing. The transformational activities will accelerate the achievement of the sustainable development goals, especially SDG3 and SDG10, and will promote human resources development in the country.  
The demographic dividend 
 
The changing age structure of the population and the resulting increase in the workforce will be a major force for development transformation and change in the country. The demographic dividend started in 2005 and is expected to continue to year2035 and beyond. During this stage fertility is expected to slowly decline from 5.25 in 2005 to 3.35 in 2035. This slow decline will lead to high increase of the population to about 62.3 million persons in 2035 compared to about 32 million in 2005. This result indicates that the population size will almost double during this stage of the demographic dividend.  
 
The population growth will be accompanied profound age structural changes.  Children below age 15 will increase to about 21.4 million in 2035 compared to 13.8 million in 2005. The workforce aged 20 to 64 is expected to reach 32 million in 2035 in contrast to 13,9 million in 2005. Almost half of the workforce will be youth aged 20 to 34. This pattern of change in the age structure of the population indicates that during the SDGs period to 2030, the Sudan will have to meet the social needs of increasing number of children and youth, and to provide employment opportunities for a rapidly increasing workforce.  Therefore, economic and social development policies must focus on education and health for children and youth, and on job creation and strategies for employment and technological innovations. Such strategies will promote human resources development, productivity and capabilities for addressing poverty and hunger.  
 
The increase in workforce will provide opportunities for expanding the social protection systems to the great majority of people in the country. Particularly much of the workface will be in the urban areas, where such systems are usually more successfully managed. However, the coverage of social protection will expand to rural areas through new and innovative strategies. These opportunities should be accompanied with human resources development, especially training and skills development programs and activities. 
 
The dividend is not an automatic process as it requires the right mix of policies and investments. The type and timing of policies will matter to realizing a demographic dividend. Policies that foster women's education are critical, just as well as those policies designed to lower fertility and child mortality.  Policies also need to ensure that the working age share is linked to structural transformation and economic takeoff. A key question we face is how can we ensure that the age structure of the population is a much more important determinant of its economic growth than the actual number of people. We also need to figure out how we leverage and harness the rapidly increasing workforce, which is not an obstacle to  economic growth and development transformation. 
 
Best Practice: Population and sustainable development 
 
Global consultations on the post 2015 development agenda and the ICPD beyond 2014 have prompted Sudan to conduct an appraisal of its 2012 National Population Policy (NPP) and to prepare a compressive program 2016-2031 for its implementation.  The NPP, which aims to address population issues and concerns for the improvement of the quality of life of all people, was formulated through a nation-wide consultation with line-ministries and departments, States and development partners, and with intellectuals in diverse fields internally and abroad.  
Based on the principles of human rights, the right of couples to decide freely on birth spacing, freedom of movement, gender equality, and inter- and intra- generational equity, the NPP is anchored on the family as a unit of society for reproduction. The policy focused on the demographic dividend and on the integration population dynamics in national, sector and State development policies and strategies. Five strategic programs have been formulated and their implementation is currently being carried in collaboration with stakeholders and through financial support from the UNFPA. The strategic programs cover 
1. Institutional strengthening,  
2. Capacity and skills development 
3. Integration of population dynamics in development  
4. Empowerment and participation, and 
5. Partnerships for population and development.  
 
Rapid urbanization 
 
Rapid urbanization is major force of development transformation in the Sudan.  The well-known rural predominance of the population is rapidly changing to urbanization and modern living styles. Urban dwellers have increased from over 10 million in 2005 to 13.4 million in 2015 are expected to exceed 21 million in 2030. Rapid urbanization indicates that the Sudan is gradually transitioning from predominant rural human settlement to increasing urban settlements. Currently of every 100 persons in the country 34 live in urban areas and 66 in rural areas, in contrast to 30:70 in 200813. This ratio will increase to 39:61 in 2030 and further to 50:50 in 2050.  
 
National surveys14 on the aspirations of urban dwellers show their priorities in this order: (1) better housing and good living environments, (2) good education; (3) better health care; (4) affordable and nutritious food; (5) access to adequate and safe water and sanitation; (6) honest government and local authority; (7) better streets, public transport and mobility; and (8) better job opportunities. In addition to those, urban dwellers in Greater Khartoum identified a wellplanned city and town and access to land and security of tenure among their top priorities. 
 
Rapid urbanization presents opportunities and challenges for the SDGs implementation in Sudan. The opportunities will be in the form of the development or urban markets, creation of employment opportunities for youth, availing opportunities for businesses and investment, rapid development of the urban based private sector, among. Also, there are advantages of reducing per head cost of provision of services such as water, electricity, etc., because of human concentration and density in urban areas. All these factors will promote rapid growth of urban gross domestic product. However, there is need to manage the wide range of challenges of rapid urbanization, especially high volume of municipal waste, urban air pollution, urban congestion of traffic, and pressure on basic services such as water and sanitation, sprawling of slums, which results from high population density.   
 
Children 
Half of the population in the Sudan are children below age 18 and are in need for care, protection, nurturing and development. Children are estimated at 20.9 million in 2018 and are expected to reach 24.7 million in 2025 and 27.1 million in 2030. This rapid growth at 2.4 percent annually is associated with rapid progression of children from birth to early childhood, to late childhood and to adolescence. Therefore, during the SDGs period the Sudan will have a large number of children and the number of adolescent children aged 12 to 18 will be exponentially increasing15.  
 
The childrenis need for care and protection in the Sudan is impacted by changes in their demographics and changes in the living conditions of their families and communities. Conflict and poverty are responsible for most of the deterioration of the situation of children, especially in the war affected States in Greater Darfur and Kordofan, and in the Red Sea, Gedarif and Kassala States, where poverty is high. The impact of these factors on the situation of children is visible in the capital city Khartoum, where children and their mothers have moved to live in the streets and poor housing conditions thereby exposing themselves to a wide range of risks and hazards.  
Children are vulnerable to drop out from schools, recruitment by warring factions, smuggling and human trafficking, rape, labor exploitation in the informal market, and to harmful and traditional practices such as female genital mutilation (31.5% of girls aged 0 -14) and early marriage (38%). Also, an increasing number of children across all 18 states are in contact with the law as victims, witnesses and alleged offenders.  
 
Despite the progress made in the improvement of child survival, development and protection of children, the agenda for ensuring the well-being of young children and their mothers remain to be fulfilled. At least 29 percent of children are affected by diarrhea, while stunting continues to show an upward trend from 32.5 percent in 1987 to 38.2 percent in 2014, while the levels of acute malnutrition remain high (16.3%) above the WHO emergency threshold in 11 out of the 18 states. 
The situation of children has prompted government to take action and formulate the 2010 Child Act, and to put in place an institutional structure to provide justice and protection for all children. At the top of this structure is the National Council for Child Welfare, the Child Court, and the Child and Family Protection Units, which operate throughout the country under the Ministry of Interior, providing child-friendly services for children in contact with the law. This institutional structure is in urban centers, and there is need to extend care and protection services to rural and nomadic children so as to achieve complete coverage. 
 
The 2010 Child Act has been studied for alignment with SDGs targets and indicators. The results of the study show that the 87 clauses of the Child Act cover 11 of the SDGs, and that full implementation of the Child Act will lead to 65 percent achievement of the sustainable development goals in the Sudan. Targeting children through investment in their care, protection and development (health, education, water and sanitation), especially those in the most vulnerable situation, will lead to high level outcomes and improved quality of life for children and to have their rights inclusively fulfilled in an inclusive and protective environment. Investment in the welfare of children is needed to reduce infant and child mortality and improve maternal health and morbidity.  
 
Also, it is essential to improve the living conditions of families so as to eradicate child poverty. This could be through targeted policy measures as free food and medicines for children, reducing school fees, and customsi exemption of imported products and commodities for children.  Equally important is for all stakeholders and development partners engaged in the children agenda to continue to play a prominent role in child welfare.  Finally, and achieving peace and stability in the war affected states is important for the improvement of child welfare in these states and for transitioning from humanitarian assistance to development.       
  
Gender equality and the empowerment of women 
According to the Interim Constitution of 2005 Amendment 2017 \0xECThe State shall guarantee equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil, political, social, cultural and economic rights, including the right to equal pay for equal work and other related benefits. This constitutional provision is based on the fact that gender is a social construct, and gender disparities are mostly attributed to man-made social actions, policies and decisions undertaken at the individual, family, community and national levels. One of the primary objectives of development policy in the Sudan is to address gender disparities and achieve social equity and justice in areas such as education, health, employment, wages and remuneration, representation in leadership positions, planning and decision making, and representation in parliament and 
politics.  
 
Women have made significant progress in all spheres of public life in the Sudan. Womenis education has improved tremendously at all levels of schooling, primarily because of the rapid increase in the number of schools for girls at the primary and secondary levels of education and increase in the institutions of higher education. Overall, the Sudan has achieved parity in primary schools, particularly in urban areas and in 12 States (South Darfur, North Darfur, River Nile, South Kordofan, Khartoum, Northern, White Nile, Kassala, Blue Nile, Red Sea, Gezira and Sinnar). Girlsi education at the primary level still requires more attention in the remaining 6 States.  
 
Girls outnumber boys at the secondary level of education in the country as whole, in rural and urban areas, and in 12 States: River Nile, South Kordofan, Khartoum, Northern, White Nile, Kassala, Blue Nile, Red Sea, Gezira, Sinnar, Gadarif and East Darfur.  
 
The increase in girlsi education is a recent trend that will gain momentum during the SDGs period. Especially the human capital will witness rapid increase in educated women.  The improvement in womenis education is positively correlated with womenis employment in the non-agriculture sector, which has improved. According to the civil service records, employed women have outnumbered employed men, and the labour laws stipulate that women and men have equal opportunities for jobs. The employment rules make equal provision for wages and according to responsibilities and performance. However, womenis employment in the labour market still falls behind men, who dominate wage employment in the non-agriculture sector, and that rural women are at disadvantage compared to urban women.  
 
Employment in the non-agriculture sector is urban-based. Of every 4 persons employed in the non-agriculture sector, 3 were in urban areas and only 1 in rural areas. Undoubtedly, rapid urbanization is an important factor in the concentration of non-agriculture employment in urban areas and the transference of jobs from rural to urban centres. 
 
The Sudan is experiencing increasing womenis participation in leadership positions. For example, the participation of women in the national parliament has improved significantly overtime. It increased from 9.7% in 1990 to 25% in 2010 and 30% in 2015. These changes have occurred as a result of improvements in the implementation of laws and legislations. Womenis participation in executive decision-making and planning positions has also significantly improved. They occupy senior executive positions, such as advisors to the president, Federal and State ministers, vice presidents of universities and deans of colleges, and ambassadors.  
 
Indeed, the Sudan is pioneer on defining empowerment and on its implementation as a policy tool for actions and participation in development, and for contributing to the improvement of human rights and to the quality of life and welfare of the people. The most important achievements related to empowerment are in the area of establishing institutional structures, policies and laws that have led to the improvement of womenis welfare: 
 
1. Integration of gender issues and concerns in national plans, strategies and policies, such as the Quarter Century Strategy (2007-2031), the first and second five-year National Development Plans (2007-2011, and 2012-2017), and the National Population Policy (2012-2031) 
2. Integration of women and girls in national sector policies on health, education, the family, older persons, persons with disabilities.  
3. Formulation of a National Plan for the Advancement of Women 1998-2002, which covered 12 themes of Beijing Program of Work on Women 
4. Establishment of a directorate for girl's education, as stipulated in the Girls Education Policy 
5. National Policy for Womenis Empowerment approved by the Council of Ministers in 2007. National Program for the Implementation of the Policy 
6. National Strategy for Combating Violence Against Women (2009-2011, 2012-2016) 
7. The Interim National Constitution of the Republic of the Sudan 2005, According to the constitution the State shall: 
a. \0xECProtect motherhood and women from injustice, promote gender equality and the role of women in family, and empower them in public life 
b. \0xECGuarantee equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil, political, social, cultural and economic rights, including the right to equal pay for equal work and other related benefits. 
c. \0xECPromote woman rights through affirmative action 
d. \0xECcombat harmful customs and traditions which undermine the dignity and the status of women 
e. \0xECProvide maternity and child care and medical care for pregnant women 
8. Establishment of the Gender and the Family Unit within the Ministry of Security and Social Development at the Federal and State levels, Gender Advisors, Gender Unit at the Ministry of Justice, womenis centers for peace and human rights 
9. Effective participation of women in conflict resolution and peace building in Darfur, Kordofan and the Blue Nile States  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Way forward 
This voluntary review of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs lays down the foundations for a national implementation process that will continue to the end of 2018. While the new agenda is at infancy, the Sudan is transitioning to peace and is earnestly implementing the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference and setting the conditions and conducive environment for presidential and parliamentary elections in 2020. Therefore, it is critical at this point to establish the implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs on solid bases that would adequately respond to the current and rapidly evolving situation in the country.  During the period to the end of 2018 the National Population Council will undertake the following activities: 
1. Revise the National Program 2016-2030 for the implementation of agenda 2030 and the SDGs. The revision will be informed by the key messages and outcomes of the VNR 2018, and will subsequently be submitted to the HLNM for approval and endorsement  
2. The Quarter-Century Strategy (2007-2031) will be reviewed to respond to both of the recommendations of the NDC and the outcomes of the VNR2018. This revision will form the bases of the new government program following the election in 2020. The QCS review will also furnish the base for the cycle of 2020-2025 national planning frameworks at the sector and State levels 
3. Continue on the advocacy and awareness campaign through engaging the local media and social networks. This campaign will need development of media material for the information on the SDGs to reach people in their localities and to enlighten their understanding of the need for transformation and implementation of the principles of sustainable development, especially inclusivity, sustainability and human rights 
4. Agenda 2030 and the SDGs framework is quite demanding for timely, accurate and reliable data and information.  Data and information have been identified in this report as a main challenge for the implementation of agenda 2030 and the SDGs in Sudan. This short period of the review process will cover preparation of a national framework for SDGs data and indicators. The framework will be developed with the engagement of all stakeholders, especially the private sector, youth and the NGOs. It will be submitted to the HLNM for approval and endorsement for implementation at the sector and state levels 
5. There is shortage of human capacities on sustainable development, especially among government officials in line ministries. A strategy will be developed to train officials in government, the private sector and NGOs on sustainable development. The strategy will be based on the assessment of the need for training, and review of institutions of excellence and universities that have training programs on matters related to the SDGs 
6. Consultation visits will be conducted with the States, for advocacy and to gain the support of State Leaders and Legislatures for implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs at the State and locality levels. The consultation visits will identify synergies and harmony of State policies and legislature with SDGs principles of sustainability, inclusivity and human rights  
7. Development of a strategy for resource mobilization for coordination and implementation of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the country. Priority will be given to mobilization of domestic resources, partnerships, technology transfer, and data revolution. This activity will include meetings with development partners to identify their roles in implementing the new agenda in the Sudan 
8. Early preparations for the voluntary review in 2019. The NVR 2019 will include SDGs indicators disaggregated by population structures (children, youth, girls, women, working age population, older persons, persons with disabilities) place of residence, state and other socioeconomic factors that are appropriate for national development planning in the country   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annex Table 1 
Assigning SDGs and target to Federal Ministries  
Ministry 
SDGs and targets (in brackets) 
Foreign Affairs 
SDG4 (4.c)/SDG6 (6.a)/SDG7 (7.a)/SDG10 (10.6) 
SDG16 (16.4,16.8,16. a) 
SDG17 (17.2,17.3,17.4,17.5,17.6, 17.9, 17.10,17.15,17.16) 
Interior 
SDG3 (3.5, 3.6,3. a)/SDG4 (4.a)/SDG5 (5.1,5.2,5.3,5.5,5. b,5.c) 
SDG8 (8.7,8.8,8.9)/SDG10 (10.7)/SDG11 (11.2) 
SDG16 (16.1, 16.2,16.9, 
Justice 
SDG5 (5.1,5.2,5.3,5.5,5. b,5.c)/SDG8 (8.7, 8.8)/SDG10 (10.3) SDG14 (14.c)/SDG16 (16.3, 16.4.16.5,16. b) 
Council of ministers  
SDG10 (10.7,10.c)/SDG16 (16.6,16.7,16.8,16. a) SDG17 (17.9, 17.14, 17.15, 17.18, 17.19) 
Media and communication 
SDG5 (5.b, 5.c) 
Finance and economic planning 
SDG1 (1.1,1.2,1.4, 1.a,1. b)/SDG3 (3.c)/SDG5 (5.1,5.4,5.5,5. a) 
SDG8 (8.1,8.2,8.3,8.4,8.5,8.10,8. a) 
SDG10 (10.1,10.4,10.5,10.6, 10.b, 10.c) 
SDG12 (12.1, 12.6,12.7, 12.a,12.c,) 
SDG17 (17.1,17.4,17.13, 17.15 
Agriculture and forestry 
SDG1 (1.1)/SDG2 (2.1. 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.a,2. b,2.c) 
SDG3 (3.9)/SDG5 (5.1,5.4,5.5, 5.a,5.c)/SDG6 (6.4,6.6) 
SDG9 (9.1,9.3,9.4,9. b)/SDG12 (12.1,12.2,12.3,) 
SDG15 (15.1,15.2,15.3,15.6, 15.b, 
Security and social development 
SDG1 (1.1,1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5,1. a, 1.b)/SDG2 (2.1,2.2) 
SDG3 (3.1,3.2,.4,3.5)/SDG4 (4.1,4.2,4.3,4.4,4.5, 4.7, 4.a) 
SDG5 (5.1,5.2,5.3,5.4,5.5,5.6,5. a,5. b,5.c) 
SDG8 (8.3,8.5,8.6,8.7,8.8) 
SDG10 (10.2,10.3,10.4)/SDG11 (11.2,11.5,11.7,11. a) SDG13 (13.1,13.2,13.c) 
Industry 
SDG1 (1.1, 1.2)/SDG5 (5.1,5.5,5. b) 
SDG8 (8.4)/SDG9 (9.2,9.3,9.4,9.5,9. b) 
Foreign trade 
SDG1 (1.1)/SDG2 (2.b, 2.c)/SDG8 (8.a)/SDG10 (10.a) SDG17 (17.10, 17.11,17.12 
Investment 
SDG1(1.1)/SDG10 (10.b)/SDG17 (17.5) 
Tourism, antiquities and wildlife 
SDG1(1.1)/ SDG8 (8.2,8.9,)/ 
SDG12 (12.1,12. b)/ SDG15 (15.7, 15.c) 
Health 
SDG1 (1.2,1.3, 1.4,1. b)/SDG2 (2.1,2.2) 
SDG3 (3.1, 3.2,3.3,3.4,3.7,3. a,3. b, 3.c) 
SDG6 (6.1,6.2,6.3,6.4)/SDG11 (11.5 
Education 
SDG1 (1.2, 1.4,1. b)/SDG2 (2.1,2.2) 
Annex Table 1 
Assigning SDGs and target to Federal Ministries  
Ministry 
SDGs and targets (in brackets) 

SDG4 ((4.1,4.2, 4.3, 4.4,4.5,4.6, 4.7,4. a)  
Higher education and scientific research 
SDG3 (3.b,3.c,3. d)/SDG4 (4.3,4.4,4. b,4.c)/SDG (9.5) SDG13 (13.3)/SDG14 (14.5,14. a) 
Labor and administrative reform  
SDG1(1.1,1.2,1. b)/SDG3 (3.c)/SDG4 (4.4) 
SDG8 (8.2, 8.3,8.5,8.6,8.7, 8.8,8. b)/SDG10 (10.4) 
Human resources development 
SDG13 (13.3) 
 Youth and sports 
SDG4 (4.3,4.4,4.5,4.7)/SDG8 (8.3,8.5,8.6,8. b) 
Culture 
SDG8 (8.9)/SDG11 (11.4 
Environment, natural resources and physical development 
SDG1 (1.5, 1.2, 1.b)/SDG3 (3.9)/SDG5 (5.1,5.5,5. a,5.c) 
SDG6 (6.1,6.2,6.3,6.4,6.6,6. a)/SDG8 (8.4,)/SDG9 (9.4) 
SDG11 (11.1,11.3,11.5,11.6,11.7,11. a,11. b,11.c) 
SDG12(12.2,12.4,12.5,12.8,) 
SDG13 (13.1,13.2,13.3, 13.a, 13.b) 
SDG14 (14.1.14.2.14.3,14.4,14.5,14.6,14.7,14. a,14. b,14.c) 
SDG15 (15.1, 15.4,15.5,15.815.9,15. a)/SDG17 (17.7) 
Animal resources and fisheries 
SDG1 (1.1, 1.2)/SDG2 (2.1,2.2,2.3,2.4,2.5,2. a,2. b) SDG14 (14.14.4,14.6,14. b) 
Transport, roads and bridges 
SDG7 (7.b)/SDG9 (9.1,9.4, 9.a)/SDG11 (11.2 
Energy and Gaz 
SDG7 (7.1,7.2,7.3,7. a,7. b)/SDG12 (12.8,12.c, 
Mining 
SDG1 (1.1)/SDG8 (8.1,8.2) 
International cooperation 
SDG7 (7.a)/SDG17 (17.6, 17.16, 17.17) 
Communication and information technology 
SDG9 (9.c)/SDG16 (16.10)/SDG17 (17.8 
Water resources and electricity  
SDG3 (3.3,3.9)/SDG6 (6.1,6.2,6.3, 6.4,6.5,6.6,6. a,6. b) SDG15 (15.1) 
 Defense 
SDG5 (5.1,5.2)/SDG8 (8.7)/SDG16 (16.1,16.2, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Table 2 
Objectives, policies and actions for transforming agriculture subsectors in the Sudan and linkages to the SDGs 
Transformation sub-sector 
Transformation objectives 
Policies and actions for transformation 
Traditional Rainfed agriculture 
\0xEF Sustainable increase in productivity and in producer income (SDG2) 
\0xEF Increase employment opportunities in rural areas (SDG8) 
\0xEF Promote services for rural women (SDG5) 
\0xEF Reduce migration from rural areas to towns (SDG11) 
\0xEF Protect 	natural 	resources 
(SDG15) 
\0xEF Promote exports (SDG17) 
\0xEF Reform land tenure 
\0xEF Accelerate water harvesting programs in the whole sector 
\0xEF Restructuring of the agricultural Bank and Animal Resources Bank and others finance institution to provide credit for the small producers 
\0xEF Early warning system to predict droughts and cater for expected conflict over limited natural resources 
\0xEF Priority to the traditional rainfed sector in research, extension and technology transfer 
\0xEF Increased 	spending 	on 	rural 
infrastructure 
\0xEF Empowering 	rural 	societies 	to 
participate in decision making 
\0xEF Support market information networks 
\0xEF Remove monopoly in marketing agricultural commodities 
\0xEF Provide drinking water. 
Mechanized rainfed 
\0xEF Sustainable increase in crop productivity (SDG2) 
\0xEF Stop irrational horizontal expansion (SDG2) 
\0xEF Control and reduce environmental degradation 
(SDG15) 
\0xEF Implementation of the Zero-tillage Technology in the whole sector 
\0xEF Reform land tenure 
\0xEF Accelerate water harvesting programs in the whole sector 
\0xEF Define the economic size for each scheme and the appropriate crop mix rotation 
\0xEF Strengthen research, extension and technology transfer 
\0xEF Strengthen integration between mechanized farming, forestry and livestock grazing 
\0xEF Enforce laws relating to protection of environment 
\0xEF Improve rural social services (water, education, health care\0xD6etc.) and rural infrastructure 

Annex Table 2 
Objectives, policies and actions for transforming agriculture subsectors in the Sudan and linkages to the SDGs 
Transformation sub-sector 
Transformation objectives 
Policies and actions for transformation 


(feeder, roads, electricity\0xD6etc.) to encourage living in mechanized farming area 
Irrigated agriculture 
\0xEF Efficient use of Sudan share in the Nile water (SDG6) 
\0xEF Rational use of the underground water in all basins (SDG6) 
\0xEF Increase crop intensification in all irrigated agriculture taking advantage of the stability of water flow of the Blue Nile and main Nile resulting from the Renaissance Dam (SDG2, SDG6) 
\0xEF Integrated management of underground and sewage water (SDG6) 
\0xEF Effective management of the environment to protect water-sheds and avoid silting in dam basins and canals (SDG6, SDG15) 
\0xEF Sustained high productivity of crops in a technical and economic context (SDG2) 
\0xEF Adopt the value-added system for the produced crops and livestock (SDG2) 
\0xEF Basic revision of the crop mix for main crops based on the technical recommendation of the 
agricultural research authorities 
\0xEF Freedom to farmers to determine their own crop rotation based on sound technical information 
\0xEF Rehabilitation of irrigation canals and water control devices 
\0xEF Design a program of transformation and reform for all irrigated schemes 
\0xEF Encourage contract farming in irrigated schemes to attend the required efficiency in production 
\0xEF Support 	stable 	credit 	finance system 
\0xEF Reform land tenure 
\0xEF Privatize commercial activities in the large irrigated schemes 
\0xEF Undertake institutional reform in the large irrigated schemes 
\0xEF Promote processing of important crops to increase agro-industries 
for export and local consumption 
 
	Livestock 	and 
fisheries 
\0xEF Efficient use of the natural resources and increase capacity to face recurrent risks (e.g. drought) (SDG15) 
\0xEF Rational use of the pasture resources (SDG15) 
\0xEF Land tenure reform to control grazing intensity 
\0xEF Re-planning of the traditional rainfed and mechanized farming to accommodate grazing 
\0xEF Encourage small meat and milk producers 

Annex Table 2 
Objectives, policies and actions for transforming agriculture subsectors in the Sudan and linkages to the SDGs 
Transformation sub-sector 
Transformation objectives 
Policies and actions for transformation 

\0xEF 
\0xEF 
\0xEF 
\0xEF 
\0xEF 
 
Achieve growth income to producers
SDG8) 
Improve livestock 
(SDG2) 
Improve the quality of national herd (SDG Control infectious 
(SDG2) 
Achieve optimal utilization of existing fisheries 
of 	high 
   (SDG1, marketing 
the 
2) diseases 
(SDG2) 
\0xEF Introduce intensive production technology and improve pasture management through local 
participation 
\0xEF Improve pasture and fodder production and encourage complimentary feeding from local resources 
\0xEF Adopt improved technologies for diseases control to promote export of meat and live animals 
\0xEF Provide comprehensive livestock extension services, particularly pasture improvement and 
marketing information 
\0xEF Develop modern systems of livestock production especially ranches  
\0xEF Facilitate marketing and credit finance for small producers 
\0xEF Improve livestock and production research to produce desirable breeds and products resulting in improved competitiveness in foreign markets 
\0xEF Improve inspection and quality control techniques to meet global standards 
\0xEF Remove monopoly in livestock and livestock products market 
\0xEF Develop and upscale aquaculture in different states as a pilot to achieve a rapid development of fish production 
Natural resources 
\0xEF 
Rehabilitation deteriorated (SDG15) 
of forests 
\0xEF Complete and enact the land-use map 
\0xEF Prepare land-use maps for marginal areas 
Annex Table 2 
Objectives, policies and actions for transforming agriculture subsectors in the Sudan and linkages to the SDGs 
Transformation sub-sector 
Transformation objectives 
Policies and actions for transformation 

\0xEF Reduction of areas amenable to desertification (SDG15) 
\0xEF Increase forest contribution through encouraging nonwood forest products to increase the value of forest and pasture products 
(SDG15) 
\0xEF Land tenure reform protection of areas amenable to desertification 
\0xEF Long-term credit to gum Arabic producers and popular forest programs 
\0xEF Remove monopoly in gum Arabic market 
\0xEF Funds from the federal and state government to rehabilitate deteriorated forest and to 
rehabilitate forest nurseries 
\0xEF Strength forest extension 
\0xEF Raise capacity building and awareness in the area of fulfilling the traditional agreements and regulations of tree-felling and recultivation, particularly in marginal areas 
\0xEF Reach the target of the 25% of the total area of the country to be under forest 
\0xEF Implement the law providing for 5% and 10% of the irrigated and rainfed areas, respectively, to be forested 
\0xEF Strengthen the capacities of the civil society organizations to contribute to natural resources and environmental protection 
 
 
 
1 National Council for Strategic Planning (NCSP)   
2 The Sudan is administratively divided into 18 States and 186 Localities 
3 Sudanis contribution to climate change is minimal and its suffrage from the impacts of climate change in the form of rising temperature, droughts and floods, is maximal.   
4 Sudan is the largest producer of Gum Arabic in the world. This sector is highly impacted by climate changes 
5 There are 186 localities in the 18 states. 
6 The HLNM met twice in 2016 and 2017 under the leadership of the Second Vice President and once in 2018 under office of the Prime Minister and the First Vice President. 
 
7 The media in the Sudan is actively engaged in raising awareness and publicity on Agenda 2030 and the SDGs in the Sudan. All media activities are being coordinated and implemented by the Media Section of the National Population Council.  
8 The third planning cycle will end in 2020 to conform with the current presidential period 
9 These are targets 
(2.5),(3.6),(4.b),(8.6),(8.b),(11.b),(13.a),(14.2),(14.4),(14.5),(14.6),(15.1),(15.2),(15.5),(15.8),(15.9),(17.8). 
 
10 This concept gained currency during consultations with the UN interagency team visit to Sudan.  
11 Rasheed, N.; Burhan H. O. Al-Heeti A. and Marzoug, O. (2004) AAAID Introducing Zero-Tillage Farming System to Replace the Traditional Farming Systems in the Rain-fed Sector in Sudan Journal of Agricultural Investment (JAI) 
12 This incidence is way-off the rate for neighbors: Ethiopia 29.6 percent for 2010, Uganda 24.5 percent for 2009 and 19.5 percent for 2012, and Egypt 25.2 percent for 2011. 
13 This ratio is based on the Population and Housing Census 2008 
14 The Sudanese Urban Dwellers Survey September-October 2014 
15 Not counting refugee children and their mothers from Southern Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Chad, Central African Republic, Syria and Yemen, who are in need for care, protection and development. 
 
