
1.	Introduction

Ireland is proud to have played a significant role in the development and adoption

of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development as co-facilitator, together with Kenya, of the 2030 intergovernmental negotiations. As a country we want to continue to show leadership as the Sustainable Development Goals [SDGs] are implemented, both at home and across the world.

While Ireland adopted its first National Sustainable Development Strategy more than two decades ago, the SDGs require a step change in the integration of national social, economic and environmental policy. In addition, the SDGs underline the linkages between sustainable development in Ireland and our global engagement, particularly through the work of our overseas development programme, Irish Aid.

Ireland recognises the transformative ambition of the SDGs and considers that the 2030 Agenda, taken together with the Paris Agreement, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, provides a framework for achieving a sustainable, prosperous and peaceful future for the world and its peoples. While the SDGs represent a global response to global challenges, Ireland also considers them to be nationally relevant and capable of having a transformative, positive impact on quality of life throughout Ireland.

In implementing the SDGs, Ireland will be guided by the following principles:

u That every person is entitled to a life of dignity in which they can fulfil their full potential; and

u That the economic, social and environmental requirements of such a life are fundamentally linked and interdependent on each other.

In putting these principles into practice, Ireland pledges that no one will be left behind and that we will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first.

Ireland has adopted a \0xEBwhole-of-Governmenti approach to the SDGs, and adopted its first SDG National Implementation Plan in March 2018. The SDG National Implementation Plan includes an ambitious \0xEB2030 Visioni for Ireland to fully achieve the SDGs at home and to support their implementation around the world.

The SDG National Implementation Plan builds on Irelandis current national Sustainable Development Strategy Our Sustainable Future and Irelandis Policy for International Development One World, One Future, and commits Ireland to mainstreaming the SDGs across national policy. Further details of the SDG National Implementation Plan are provided in Chapter 2 of this Voluntary National Review [VNR].

Ireland also recognises that, while governments hold primary responsibility for

achieving the SDGs, the responsibility for achieving the SDGs does not lie exclusively with governments. The SDGs belong to everyone, in every community, in every country across the world. Therefore, Ireland strongly believes that partnerships between governments, civil society organisations, businesses and communities will be essential to achieving the SDGs.





6 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 1  Introduction









Irelandis Starting Position for Implementing the SDGs

Ireland is well placed to achieve the SDGs. The recovery is now entering a more mature phase. The short-term outlook remains favourable with GDP forecast to grow by 5.6% this year and 4.0% next year. The recovery in output should continue to support job creation with the level of employment expected to exceed its pre-crisis peak this year. Indeed, the economy is approaching a situation that could reasonably be classified as full-employment. In parallel, Irelandis level of public indebtedness continues to improve but remains high, and the Government will continue to implement prudent budgetary policies designed to further reduce public debt levels. In addition, Ireland has the youngest population in Europe [by median age], with the highest share of population aged less than 15 years old and the lowest share of over 65 years old in the European Union [EU] and the proportion of the population in the 25-34 who have attained upper-secondary and/or higher-education is significantly above the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD] average.

Ireland enjoys peaceful and democratic conditions at home, and has a longstanding commitment to a just, stable, peaceful multilateral global system, underpinned by our membership of the United Nations [UN], the EU, the Council of Europe, the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe [OSCE], and the OECD, and International Financial Institutions including the IMF and World Bank Group. As an EU Member State, Ireland operates within a well-developed legal and policy framework in relation to environmental protection, and the EUis treaties reflect the Unionis commitment to achieving sustainable economic growth, gender equality, social cohesion, and sustainable development. Many of the policies and initiatives through which Ireland will implement the SDGs will be developed within an EU context, and Ireland will contribute to the development of the Unionis own SDG response.

Multiple international assessments reflect Irelandis positive starting position while noting that challenges to fully achieving the SDGs remain. Ireland is currently ranked 8th Human Development Index, 13th in the 2018 World Happiness Report, 15th in the OECD Better Life Index, and 19th in the 2017 SDG Index.

Ireland is performing well in relation to SDG 1: No Poverty, SDG 2: Zero Hunger, SDG

3: Good Health and Well-being, SDG 4: Quality Education, SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth, SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure, and SDG 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions. Performance against other SDGs, though in many areas positive, is more mixed, and specific challenges exist in relation to housing, levels of obesity, achieving sustainable consumption and production, biodiversity and habitat destruction, mitigating and adapting to climate change, addressing entrenched inequalities and mainstreaming a gender perspective into policy. Detailed discussion of Irelandis performance under all 17 SDGs is discussed in Chapter 4, and further information is provided in the accompanying statistical annex.












Voluntary National Review 2018	7

Chapter 1? Introduction









Ireland also benefits from an active civil society which, together with the private sector, has engaged with the SDGs since their adoption. Both civil society groups and the private sector in Ireland are involved with projects related to achieving the SDGs and/or raising awareness of the SDGs among the general public. Public awareness of the SDGs in Ireland is increasing but, at 36%, remains below the EU average. Increasing SDG awareness in Ireland is a strategic priority under the SDG National Implementation Plan. Further details of Irish stakeholder engagement arrangements and SDG awareness raising measures are included in Chapter 2 of this VNR.

Separately to preparing this VNR, Ireland has facilitated the compilation of SDG-related observations from national stakeholders into a document which has been made available online through the HLPF website alongside Irelandis official VNR at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org

A high-level summary of feedback received from national stakeholders at a VNR consultation workshop is also included in Annex III of this VNR.















































8 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture









2. National Policy and Institutional Architecture


Policy Background

In March 2018 Ireland adopted its first SDG National Implementation Plan for the period 2018-2020. This will be the first in a series of Implementation Plans, each of which will serve to integrate the SDGs into national policy.

The SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020 sets out Irelandis overall framework for implementing the SDGs, characterised by a \0xEBwhole-of-Governmenti approach. Political oversight is provided by the Government, while the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment has overall responsibility for promoting the SDGs, and for overseeing their coherent implementation across Government. A robust SDG implementation and reporting framework has been established, involving
all 17 Government Departments.

Strategic priorities of the Plan include:

u Awareness: Increase public awareness of the SDGs, their relevance to Ireland and national efforts to achieve them.

u Participation: Provide stakeholders with meaningful opportunities to contribute to national follow-up and review processes regarding the Goals, and with opportunities to further the development of the national implementation framework.

u Support: Support and encourage communities and organisations to make their own contributions to achieving the Goals, and to foster public participation.

u Policy Alignment: Support and promote policies and initiatives across Government which contribute towards meeting the Goals at home and abroad, and identify opportunities for enhancing policy coherence.

A key commitment under the SDG National Implementation Plan involves mainstreaming the SDGs across national policies, so that when relevant sectoral policies are developed or reviewed, Irelandis commitments under the SDGs will be taken into account. While this will be an incremental process, national polices which already refer to the SDGs include the National Strategy for Women and Girls, the National Biodiversity Action Plan, the National Plan on Corporate Social Responsibility, the National Planning Framework and the [upcoming] Clean Air Strategy.

Irelandis current national Sustainable Development Strategy, Our Sustainable Future, is an important component of Irelandis framework for implementing the SDGs, as is Irelandis Foreign Policy, The Global Island, which reinforces our commitment to contribute to international peace, security, human rights and sustainable development, and Irelandis Policy for International Development, One World, One Future, which sets out a vision of a sustainable and just world, where people are empowered to overcome poverty and hunger, and fully realise their rights and potential.







Voluntary National Review 2018	9

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









Our Sustainable Future sets out Irelandis eight national themes and principles for achieving sustainable development. These themes reflect the traditional economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainability, and are closely aligned with the SDGs. While some of the 17 SDGs are more closely aligned with individual national themes than others, Irelandis implementation of every Goal will be informed by these themes and principles as a whole, in recognition of the fact that the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development cannot be advanced in isolation from each other. Table 2.1 sets how the SDGs align with Irelandis national themes for sustainable development. However, in order to further integrate the SDGs into national policy, Ireland will prepare and adopt a new sustainable development strategy by the end of 2020, which will directly incorporate the SDGs.

Table 2.1: Our Sustainable Future Themes and Principles for Sustainable Development

Theme
Principle
SDGs



Promote an innovative,




competitive and low-carbon
?
?
?
Economy
economy with the aim of achieving









smart, sustainable and inclusive




growth.





?


Satisfaction
Prices should reflect the real



of human
costs to society of production



needs by
and consumption activities and
?
?
?
the efficient
polluters should pay for the



use of
damage they cause to human



resources
health and the environment.
?








The needs of current generations




should be addressed without
?
?
?

compromising the ability of future




generations to meet their needs.



Equity




between




generations





Resources should be used within
?
?
?

the capacity for regeneration.













10 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture










Theme
Principle
SDGs



Women have a vital role in
?
?
?

environmental management



Gender
and development and their



equity
full participation is therefore
?
?
?

essential to advance sustainable









development.








Respect for
The abundance of wildlife



ecological
and extent of habitats should
?
?
?
integrity
be maintained, improved and








and
restored where necessary,



biodiversity
through sustainable management.





?
?



?
?
?
Social
Social inclusion should be




promoted to ensure an improved



equity





quality of life for all.
?
?
?












?
?

Respect
The quality of landscapes, the




heritage of the man-made



for cultural





environment and historic and



heritage /

?



cultural resources should be



diversity





maintained and improved.








Equity
Promote human rights and
?
?
?





between
fundamental freedoms,



countries
by combating all forms of



and
discrimination and contributing
?
?
?
regions
to the reduction of poverty.










?
?




Voluntary National Review 2018	11

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









In developing the SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020, Ireland has also mapped its sectoral policies against the 17 SDGs and all 169 related targets, in order to identify which national policies are most relevant to which SDGs and their associated targets, and the extent of interlinkages between different national policies which can contribute to the achievement of multiple SDGs. The resulting SDG Policy Map, which is publicly available, will substantially enhance the ability of stakeholders to track Irelandis implementation of specific SDGs and associated targets, and to assess Irelandis response to the SDGs for potential policy gaps.

The Policy Map is intended to be a living document and will be updated as necessary on an ongoing basis. A copy of the current version is included in Annex IV of this VNR.

Translating the SDGs into a National Context

Meaningful implementation of the SDGs at the national level requires that each country, guided by the level of global ambition reflected in the Goals, defines what constitutes successful achievement of the SDGs in light of its national circumstances. Therefore Ireland has included a 2030 Vision as part of the SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020, setting out an ambitious set of high-level commitments which address the 17 SDGs and taking account of the social, economic and environmental dimensions of the 2030 Agenda.

This 2030 Vision will be reviewed as part of the development of each new SDG Implementation Plan, to ensure that it remains challenging and ambitious in light of Irelandis ongoing development. A copy of the 2030 Vision is included in Annex II of this review.

Many of the measures through which Ireland will achieve the SDGs will take place within the context of Project Ireland 2040, which is the Governmentis overarching policy initiative to make Ireland a better country for all our people, a country that reflects the best of who we are and what we aspire to be. Project Ireland 2040 is made up of the National Planning Framework to 2040 [NPF] and the National Development Plan 2018-2027 [NDP]. Further details about Project Ireland 2040 are set out in Text Box 2.1 below.

The NDP is referenced in relation to several of the SDGs in Chapter 4 of this VNR. The NDP represents a new approach to public capital investment in Ireland. It is about reforming how public investment is planned and delivered. This will be achieved through a decisive shift to integrated regional investment plans, stronger coordination of sectoral strategies and more rigorous selection and appraisal of projects to secure value-for-money.

















12 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture









A new funding model for Exchequer funded public investment is being put in place to ensure that resources are allocated to projects and programmes that support the achievement of the objectives set out in the new NPF.

To this end, the NDP features a number of major new innovations in terms of how public capital investment is allocated by Government:

u It takes a long-term [10 year] strategic approach to investment, with funding allocations closely aligned with the 10 National Strategic Outcomes of the NPF.

u It provides for a sustained increase in public capital investment as a share of national income, to meet infrastructural needs.

u All Government Departmentsi capital programmes are now fully funded for a five-year period, which will facilitate Departments in planning their investment programmes over the medium term.

u Longer-term key Strategic Investment Priorities identified by Departments are funded beyond this five-year period, to their completion or to 2027 if funding for more than 10 years is involved.

u Four new Funds have been established, with a combined allocation of \0xC44 billion, to be allocated on a competitive basis for projects which meet the criteria of the funds n targeting urban and rural renewal, climate action and \0xEBdisruptive technologiesi respectively.

u The Plan provides for the establishment of a new National Regeneration and Development Agency, to maximise the potential use of under-utilised land banks in cities and towns.





































Voluntary National Review 2018	13

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









Text box 2.1

Building Irelandis Future

Project Ireland 2040 is the Governmentis overarching policy initiative to make Ireland a better country for all our people, a country that reflects the best of who we are and what we aspire to be.

Project Ireland 2040 is informed by the Programme for a Partnership Government 2016, which recognises that economic and social progress go hand in hand, as well as by the National Planning Framework to 2040 and the National Development Plan 2018-2027.

Project Ireland 2040 includes a set of social objectives and values that are also consistent with prudent economic decision-making and securing a high-quality environment. It prioritises the well-being of all of our people, wherever they live and whatever their background.

Well-being, equality and opportunity represent the core, interdependent themes of Project Ireland 2040. Without equality there cannot be well-being: without opportunity there cannot be equality.

The objective of Project Ireland 2040 is to provide a comprehensive social, economic and cultural infrastructure for all our people to flourish, so that together we can create a better society. A society in which every person counts, and in which all our people are served by the advances of science and technology n a creative and just society in which the human dimension is always paramount.

By 2040 an additional one million people are expected to be living in Ireland, and an additional two-thirds of a million people will work here. These are huge increases: more people will be travelling to work, school and universities, more buildings will be needed to accommodate them, clean water will be needed for homes, farms and industry, more and better care facilities will be required for the elderly.

An ageing population and smaller family size mean that Ireland will need an additional half a million homes to accommodate this growth. Without proper planning, growth will be haphazard and uneven. Without the required infrastructure, Irelandis potential for economic growth will stall.




















14 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture










Project Ireland 2040 seeks to achieve ten strategic outcomes, building around the overarching themes of well-being, equality and opportunity. These ten shared priorities will ensure a consistent approach between planning objectives under the National Planning Framework and investment commitments under the National Development Plan. They are:

1. Compact Growth

2. Enhanced Regional Accessibility

3. Strengthened Rural Economies and Communities

4. Sustainable Mobility

5. A Strong Economy, supported by Enterprise, Innovation and Skills

6. High-Quality International Connectivity

7. Enhanced Amenity and Heritage

8. Transition to a Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Society

9. Sustainable Management of Water and other Environmental Resources

10. Access to Quality Childcare, Education and Health Services



Supporting the SDGs Globally

Through development cooperation, Ireland has helped to shape the world over the past 50 years. We have contributed to the reduction of global poverty, and brought about transformative change in responding to crises, resolving conflicts and supporting transition to recovery. Irelandis history informs where we come from and what we do. From our experience of famine to our world-leading nutrition industry, from conflict to peace, from Irish culture and post-colonial experience, to Irelandis support for multilateralism as a small island state.

Our International Development Policy One World One Future, is central to delivering on our vision of a peaceful, sustainable, and just world, as articulated in Irelandis Foreign Policy for a Changing World The Global Island.

Anchored in our values, this vision is closely aligned to the 2030 Agenda. Designed to reduce poverty, hunger and humanitarian need our official programme for overseas development assistance aims to reduce hunger and build resilience; ensure inclusive and sustainable economic growth; and promote better governance, human rights and accountability.

Our international development work extends far beyond our financial contribution. Using our voice and influence, brokering institutional partnerships and supporting knowledge transfer are all part of our response to current global challenges. We are strongly committed to partnerships with countries and people most in need. We recognise the intrinsic link between our values to contribute to a more fair, just and sustainable world, and our shared prosperity and access to the benefits of sustainable and inclusive economic growth.

Around 70% of Irish development cooperation is delivered by Irish Aid, the Government of Irelandis international development programme with the balance managed by other Government Departments. Our funding is channelled through a range of partnerships



Voluntary National Review 2018	15

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









including civil society, multilateral institutions, and partner governments. Increasingly, our programme reflects the contribution of a broader range of Irish institutions and people from both the public and private sector.

Ireland has a reputation for delivering a high-quality, untied, focused and coherent international development cooperation programme. In 2014 the Brookings Institute rated Irelandis development cooperation programme as the outstanding aid programme among other international donors. Our bilateral aid programme is complemented by the provision of Official Development Assistance [ODA] through multilateral channels, including Multilateral Development Banks [MDBs].

The 2016 Programme for Partnership Government reiterated the Governmentis strong commitment to the International Development Cooperation programme, recognising the crucial importance of Irelandis ODA and humanitarian response. It stated that the Government would continue to make progress towards achieving the UN target of 0.7% of Gross National Income for ODA, as resources allow.

A new policy for international development will be produced in 2018. Our ambition will be to continue to lead and participate in collective global aspirations for a better world, as reflected in the SDGs. Our vision of this world is anchored in our values, working towards a world that is more equal, peaceful and sustainable. This new policy will focus on the protection of human rights, and of the people and of the natural world that we live in and depend on to achieve this vision. Within this, we will strive to fulfil the ambition set out in the SDGs 2030 Agenda of leaving no one behind.

By supporting long-term development and providing humanitarian assistance in over 80 countries, Ireland is helping to build better futures for some of the worldis poorest people and communities by reducing vulnerability and increasing opportunity. Irish people, including many volunteers, are also making a unique contribution to the global SDGs, often working with partners to inspire new ways of thinking to ensure that no one is left behind. The knowledge and cultural exchange resulting from these experiences benefits not only our partner countries, but also Ireland and Irish people too.

Mainstreaming Gender Equality

Embedding gender equality in decision-making is one of six high-level objectives of the National Strategy for Women and Girls 2017-2020. Among a set of measures to support gender mainstreaming in national policy development and implementation, all Government Departments are required to consider the gender impact in the development of new strategies and the review of existing strategies and to ensure that the design and review of funding and grant schemes includes measures to ensure gender equality.

Governance Arrangements

Ireland has adopted robust governance arrangements in relation to the SDGs, in order to ensure that; the SDGs continue to enjoy high levels of political engagement; there is clear assignment of responsibilities for the SDGs across government; and \0xEBwhole-of-governmenti SDG coordination is facilitated.





16 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture









Overall political oversight for national SDG implementation is provided through the Cabinet, with each Government Minister having specific responsibility for implementing individual SDG targets related to their Ministerial functions. For this reason, each of the 169 SDG targets has been assigned to a lead Government Department. The choice to assign Ministerial responsibility for each target was taken to ensure that individual Departments take ownership of those SDGs most relevant to their work and to provide additional clarity to stakeholders.

The Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment has specific responsibility for promoting the SDGs, and for overseeing their coherent implementation across Government. The Minister was also responsible for preparing Irelandis SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020 and this Voluntary National Review. To carry out these tasks, the Minister established the National Sustainable Development Unit within his Department in 2017.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade is responsible for taking forward commitments, along with other relevant Departments, regarding foreign policy and international development as they relate to the SDGs.

To support these Ministerial functions, Ireland established structures at official level to facilitate implementation.

A Senior Officialsi Group [SOG] on the SDGs, made up of Assistant Secretaries from all Government Departments, has been established to provide strategic coordination and to report, as required, to Cabinet. This Group is chaired by the Department of the Taoiseach [Prime Minister], with support from the National Sustainable Development Unit. It is assisted by an SDG Interdepartmental Working Group [IDWG], again comprised of representatives from all Government Departments. The IDWG is responsible for developing national policy in relation to SDG implementation, preparing Irelandis VNRs and other SDG reports, and developing national arrangements of stakeholder engagement.

While Irelandis political and administrative systems are relatively centralised by international standards, local government has a crucial role to play in translating national policies into tangible practical actions that can help to deliver the SDGs at the local and community level. Increasing local government engagement with the SDGs is an important task during the lifetime of the SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020.

Stakeholder Engagement

Stakeholder engagement is an important part of policy development and implementation in Ireland and key stakeholders were consulted as part of the preparation of the SDG National Implementation Plan 2018-2020.

Ireland has established a national SDG Stakeholder Forum to inform further development of the national SDG framework and to provide a mechanism for key stakeholders to be engaged on an ongoing basis in national implementation of the Goals. The first meeting of the Forum was in June 2018.

The Forum comprises representatives from, among others, the NGO community and other civil society groups, the private sector, the trade union movement, the agricultural




Voluntary National Review 2018	17

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









sector, youth, academia, the education sector, Government Departments, and the Local Government sector. The Forum is convened and chaired by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment.

The Forum is intended to provide a mechanism for all stakeholders to discuss national implementation and reporting processes, share examples of best practice in implementing the SDGs, discuss challenges to achieving the SDGs, and to be informed of SDG relevant events and processes taking place internationally.

While this knowledge exchange and dialogue within the Stakeholder Forum is extremely important, the Irish Government wants to go further in developing a partnership approach to implementing the SDGs. As a first step in this process, the Stakeholder Forum will asked to develop proposals for raising public awareness of the SDGs and fostering public engagement with initiatives to achieve the Goals. This participative approach

to stakeholder engagement draws on the experience of Irelandis Corporate Social Responsibility [CSR] Forum. While the range of stakeholders will be significantly wider in relation to the SDGs, and this can be expected to present challenges to the \0xECbedding in of the new Forum, Ireland considers that enhancing stakeholder participation over the lifetime of the National Implementation Plan is a priority.

Figure 2.1 illustrates the proposed structure of the national SDG Stakeholder Forum

Figure 2.1: SDG Stakeholder Forum Sector Representatives




Communities

Youth	Agriculture





Academia
Trade

Unions



SDG Stakeholder Forum
Government
NGOs
Departments







Local
Education
Authorities




Private

Sector







18 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 2  National Policy and Institutional Architecture









Communications Activities

As noted in Chapter 1, when last measured in 2017, the level of public awareness of

the SDGs in Ireland stood at 36%. This is below the EU average of 41%, and Government considers this lack of national awareness regarding the Goals to be an impediment to their successful implementation.

Therefore, during the lifespan of the first SDG National Implementation Plan, a national SDG communications strategy will be developed. Work is also underway on the development of a national SDG online platform that can function as a \0xEBone stop shopi for the public in relation to SDG information and learning. Following the establishment of the National Stakeholder Forum, Ireland will seek to select a number of national organisations, from across the multi-stakeholder network, to act as \0xEBSDG Championsi. These \0xEBSDG Championsi will be asked to leverage their public profiles to raise awareness of the SDGs and draw on their own experiences to demonstrate the relevance of the SDGs to daily life in Ireland. The National Stakeholder Forum will be consulted as part of this process.

The Education Sector will also be a particular focus area for raising awareness of, and promoting engagement with the SDGs. The National Strategy on Education for Sustainable Development 2014-2020 aims to ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, skills and values [the \0xEBwhyi] that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future. The Strategy is currently undergoing a mid-term review, which will enhance the links between the Strategy and the SDGs.

The Development Education Strategy 2017-2023 will also be a key enabler in this respect. Development education is a lifelong educational process which aims to increase public awareness and understanding of the rapidly changing, interdependent and unequal world in which we live.

Data and the Role of National Statistics Office

The Central Statistics Office [CSO] is Irelandis national statistical office and is tasked to impartially collect, analyse and make available statistics about Irelandis people, society and economy.

The identification and management of national data needed to meet Irelandis SDG reporting requirements will be undertaken by the CSO, in consultation with the SDG Interdepartmental Working Group.

In addition to Irelandis formal periodic SDG reporting, the CSO and Irelandis National Mapping Agency, Ordnance Survey Ireland [OSi], have launched a website for exploring, downloading and combining publicly available national SDG data using geographic information systems.










Voluntary National Review 2018	19

Chapter 2? National Policy and Institutional Architecture









Text Box 2.2


Mapping SDG Data

The CSO and Irelandis National Mapping Agency, Ordnance Survey Ireland [OSi], in November 2017 launched a website for exploring, downloading and combining publicly available national SDG data using geographic information systems to make it easily accessible to the general public. An innovative feature of the site is the combination statistics and geography to create a set of \0xEBMap Layersi. These \0xEBMap Layersi can be used by both users and developers, and allow the public to create their own geospatial SDG visualisation.

The website [www.irelandsdg.geohive.ie] is a powerful learning and communication resource, which Ireland was initially invited to develop by the United Nations Statistical Division [UNSD] as part of a UNSD research exercise. Ireland was one of only seven countries invited to take part in the initial phase of the exercise, and remains committed to its ongoing development as additional countries are invited to participate.

With this project, Ireland has become one of the countries furthest ahead in SDG mapping. The project builds on Irelandis substantial achievement in open data.






















Taken from http://data-irelandsdg.opendata.arcgis.com/


















20 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 3  Methodology and process for preparation of the Voluntary National Review








3. Methodology and process for preparation of the Voluntary
National Review

Following the decision to submit a VNR to the 2018 session of the HLPF, sectoral inputs in relation to the 17 SDGs were provided by Government Departments through the SDG IDWG, and the draft structure of the VNR was approved by the SOG in early 2018.

The first draft of this VNR was prepared by the National Sustainable Development Unit in the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment during the course of Q1 2018. The draft VNR was then considered by the IDWG.

Following consideration by the IDWG, a Stakeholder Consultation Workshop was conducted in May 2018. The IDWG then considered a further draft of the VNR, in light of the feedback received through this stakeholder consultation. A high-level summary of feedback received through the Stakeholder Consultation Workshop is included in Annex III of this VNR.

At this stage the draft VNR was submitted to the SOG on the SDGs and then onward to Government for final approval.

In structuring the VNR, Ireland has utilised the VNR guidelines provided by UNDESA and considers these guidelines to be of particular use for countries taking part in the VNR process for the first time.

Ireland considers its preparation of this first VNR to have been a valuable exercise in relation to raising awareness of the SDGs across Government. While preparing the VNR shortly after the adoption of the first SDG National Implementation Plan was beneficial in terms of maintaining momentum and engagement across Government, the relatively short timeframe for the completion of both processes placed limitations on the scope for stakeholder consultation. In preparing its second VNR [scheduled for delivery at the 2022 session of the HLPF], Ireland will initiate the drafting process earlier in order to facilitate more wide-ranging consultation. This approach will also be reflected in the preparation of Irelandis periodic reporting at the national level. The establishment of the Stakeholder Forum will assist considerably in this regard.

Ireland will produce national reports on its implementation of the SDGs every two years, beginning in 2018. For those years in which Ireland has also committed to presenting a VNR to the HLPF, a single report will be presented at both the national and global level. Irelandis full SDG reporting schedule to 2030 is set out in Table 3.1 below.














Voluntary National Review 2018	21

Chapter 3? Methodology and process for preparation of the Voluntary National Review








Table 3.1: Irelandis SDG Reporting Schedule 2018 - 2020

Year
National Reports
VNRs at HLPF

1st Voluntary National Review delivered to the
2018	1st National SDG Report
UN

2020
2nd National SDG Report
n/a

2nd Voluntary National Review delivered to the
2022	3rd National SDG Report
UN

2024
4th National SDG Report
n/a

3rd Voluntary National Review delivered to the
2026	5th National SDG Report
UN


2028
6th National SDG Report
n/a

4th Voluntary National Review delivered to the
2030	7th National SDG Report
UN*

*Depending on the modalities of the HLPF in 2030, the presentation of Irelandis 4th VNR may be switched to 2029.


The statistical annex accompanying this VNR is based on data provided to the National Sustainable Development Unit by the CSO, using the EU SDG indicator set. The choice of the EU SDG indicator set is discussed further in the introduction to the statistical annex. While these EU indicators are used as the official measure of progress in this VNR, in order to provide for a more comprehensive overview of conditions in Ireland in 2017, reference is also made to OECD and national indicators as appropriate when discussing the 17 SDGs in Chapter 4.



























22 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets








4.	Goals and Targets


Goal 1: No Poverty

Rates of poverty in Ireland can be measured using a number of distinct metrics at

both the national and EU level. Looking first at the EU poverty indicators the percentage of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion in Ireland was above the EU average in 2015 at 26% [and in 2016 at 24.2%] but has declined steadily from its recent peak during the recession in 2012. The percentage of people at risk of income poverty after social transfers in Ireland in 2015 was marginally below the EU average [and remained so in 2016]. The percentage of severely materially deprived people in Ireland in 2015, at 7.5%, was below the EU average [and remained so in 2016 when the Irish rate fell to 6.5%], and this percentage has also been reducing since the most recent peak in 2013. The percentage of people living in households with very low work intensity was the highest in the EU

in 2015 but has again been decreasing steadily from its recessionary peak in 2011. The housing cost overburden rate in Ireland was significantly below the EU average in 2015 and the percentage of the Irish population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation, or rot in window frames or floor was also below the EU average. It should be noted that in relation to housing related EU SDG indicators, the data does not appear to capture the significant issues related to pressure on housing supply and homelessness currently experienced in Ireland. These issues are discussed in detail under SDG 11.

At the national level, poverty data in Ireland is collected by the CSO using the Survey on Income and Living Conditions [SILC] which is conducted annually. The measures most commonly used by the CSO to calculate the number of people in poverty in Ireland are at-risk-of poverty, material deprivation and consistent poverty.

At-risk-of-poverty is a measure of relative poverty or income poverty. It is measured by setting a relative income poverty line, in Ireland, at-risk-of-poverty is measured by calculating the median income and setting the line at 60% of the median.

Material deprivation takes account of access to resources other than income, through the mechanism of a deprivation index of items and activities that are generally taken to be the norm in a particular society. In Ireland, 11 basic items are used to construct the deprivation index, and individuals who experience two or more of the eleven listed items are considered to be experiencing enforced deprivation.

Consistent poverty looks at those persons who are defined as being at risk of poverty and experiencing enforced deprivation

Using these national metrics, the most recent available data [for 2016] indicates that the at risk of poverty rate in Ireland is 16.5%, the rate of material deprivation is 21.0% and the consistent poverty rate is 8.3%. The social impact of the post downturn saw both the rate of material deprivation and consistent poverty rise significantly and then fall as the economy recovered. The material deprivation rate rose from 17.1% in 2009 to a peak of 30.5% in 2013, and has consistently fallen since then to its current rate of 21.0%. Similarly, consistent poverty peaked at 9.1% in 2013.




Voluntary National Review 2018	23

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









It should be noted that all the indicators referenced above rely on 2016 data at the latest, which does not take account of the continuing economic recovery and employment growth measures throughout 2017 and 2018. Therefore it can be expected the figures for those years, when they become available, will show some further improvement.

Ireland has a comprehensive social protection system providing support for individuals and families across the various stages of the life-cycle, and addressing contingencies such as unemployment, disability, and the assumption of caring responsibilities [SDG 1.3]. The poverty reduction effect of social transfers in Ireland remains strong. In 2015, social transfers [excluding pensions] reduced the at-risk-of-poverty rate from 34.9% to 16.9% [by 18 percentage points in absolute terms]. This represents a poverty reduction effect of 51.6%, amongst the best in the EU.

Ireland has had national poverty reduction targets in place since 1997. The

National Action Plan for Social Inclusion 2007-2016 [NAPinclusion] is a wide-ranging and comprehensive programme of action to address poverty and social exclusion. It adopted a new strategic framework to facilitate greater coordination across Government Departments at local and national levels. It was based on a lifecycle stage approach with goals set for each group: children; people of working age; older people and people with disabilities; and communities. The Plan included a wide range of specific actions to be taken by various Government Departments, including targets for the levels of social welfare payments. It was updated for the period 2015-2017, with a greater focus on modernising the social protection system, improving effectiveness and efficiency of social transfers and strengthening active inclusion policies.

A key element of NAPinclusion is the national social target for poverty reduction [NSTPR] [SDG 1.2], which sets out the Governmentis ambition for reducing and ultimately eliminating poverty. The headline target was to reduce consistent poverty to 4% by 2016 [interim target] and to two% or less by 2020, from the 2010 baseline rate of 6.3%. In addition, there are sub-targets in relation to children and for Irelandis contribution to the Europe 2020 poverty target. However, the social impact of the economic downturn meant that the consistent poverty figure rose over the period 2010-2013. Given that the 2016 data showed that consistent poverty [while improving year-on-year] stood at 8.3%, this means that 2016 interim target of 4% has not been met.

The successor to the current NAPinclusion is being developed at present. It is proposed that the new plan will be for the 4 year period 2018-2021, consistent with that of the Europe 2020 Strategy. It is also expected that poverty data for 2020 will be available from the CSO SILC in late 2021. This will allow any future strategy to be informed by progress towards the national poverty targets at that time. The primary focus of the plan will be the reduction of consistent poverty: improved/supported incomes to reduce the percentage of the population at-risk-of-poverty [below 60% of the median income] and increased access to quality services to reduce the percentage of the population experiencing deprivation [deprived of two or more of the 11 basic deprivation items] and reduce the risk of poverty development [intergenerational poverty].









24 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









At the time of the adoption of NAPinclusion in 2007, a target floor was set n that the value of the lowest social welfare payment would be maintained at least at \0xC4185.80 per week, in 2007 terms, over the course of the Plan, subject to available resources. As a result of the extent of the fiscal correction after 2009, this target was narrowly missed in some years n by 2014, the real value of the relevant payment was 3% below the 2007 level. However, it has been possible to restore this reduction in recent Budgets, and the real value of the payment in 2018 will be above the 2007 level. The setting of targets for future development in the real value of welfare payments will be considered in the context of the successor plan to NAPinclusion.

The proportion of young people not in employment, education or training in Ireland was close to the EU average of about 11% prior to the recession. By 2011, however, about 19% of the young adult population was in this situation, compared with 13% in the EU. To date [by 2017] the recovery has seen the Irish figure fall to 10.9%, identical to the EU figure for that year.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

Ireland is well recognised internationally for its commitment to the reduction of poverty and vulnerability, and our focus on least developed countries and those most in need. Our current international development policy One World One Future commits us to target those most excluded, demanding a greater focus on the dynamics of power and exclusion that underlie poverty and inequality.

Ireland uses its position in global fora including at the EU and UN to advance its priority focus on using ODA for countries and people most in need, targeting women and marginalised groups in particular. We strongly believe that addressing the underlying structural causes and the multi-dimensional nature of poverty will provide a stronger foundation for sustainable development.

Sub-Saharan Africa remains the priority region for Irelandis bilateral aid programme where we target programme areas with the potential to have the greatest impact on poor peopleis lives. Our contribution to reducing the proportion of the worldis population below the international poverty line has been achieved through programmes supporting access to quality essential services, building resilience of poor communities, targeting women and marginalised groups, supporting civil society space and democratic processes, as well as through increasing investment in social protection and inclusive economic growth. In addition, Ireland has contributed to improved disaggregation of data on poverty reduction. For example, Ireland supports Paris 21, a partnership for statistics for development, which was founded by the UN, the European Commission and the OECD [SDG 1.1].

















Voluntary National Review 2018	25

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Ireland works in partnership with governments and civil society organisations to achieve national poverty reduction targets both at national and sub-national levels. Through this approach, Ireland has made a contribution to substantial reductions in the proportion of people living below the poverty line, particularly in our seven key partner countries in Sub-Saharan Africa1. Ireland also supports national statistics organisations and key statistical surveys such as the most recent Demographic Health Survey in Ethiopia. In particular, we are working with international and national stakeholders towards better availability of sex-disaggregated data [SDG 1.2].

Irelandis support to nationally appropriate social protection systems is evidenced through direct engagement in six of its eight key partner countries. Ireland supports partner governments to put in place social protection programmes for their most vulnerable citizens, and in 2017 was the largest contributor to the International Labour Organisationis social protection flagship programme [SDG 1.3].

Ireland supports the work of the International Land Coalition to build the capacity of local and national civil society organisations to effectively lobby for equality in land governance and tenure. Some impact is evident within Irish Aid partner countries; for example, four new land bills were recently introduced in Malawi [SDG 1.4].

Every year hundreds of millions of people are affected by disasters and emergencies. It is the women and men, girls and boys living in the poorest countries who are the worst affected and least able to recover. In response, Ireland acts quickly to save lives, alleviate suffering and help maintain human dignity during and in the aftermath of humanitarian crises. We support efforts to plan ahead, predict and intervene before a situation deteriorates to crisis point by investing in disaster risk reduction programmes to diminish the effects of persistent food shortages, and to prevent widespread famine while working to address the root causes of vulnerability in regions and countries particularly vulnerable to chronic food and nutrition insecurity [SDG 1.5].


























1 Ethiopia, Malawi, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia. Vietnam is also a key partner country.

In addition, Ireland has a sizeable development cooperation programme in Lesotho, Liberia, South Africa and
Zimbabwe.



26 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Textbox 4.1



























Case Study: Malawi

Increasing Access to Social Protection in Balaka, Malawi.

Balaka is a very vulnerable district in Malawi; it has one of the countryis highest rates of HIV infection, it is a drought prone area, and, in the last two years, crops have failed. The Governmentis Social Cash Transfer programme supported by Irish Aid and other partners provides regular support to the most vulnerable households in the district, including the elderly and homes caring for orphans.

The women in Balaka [pictured] discussed the challenges that they are facing in their community and high on the list was the food shortages. As their income from crops has been damaged, many are now depending on the social cash transfer programme. The predictability and regularity of the transfers allows women to plan and invest, helping them avoid having to sell their limited assets and to build their resilience.

\0xECThe [cash] transfers have allowed us to meet our day to day needs and in some months to make some savings. Through the Village Savings and Loan scheme, we are now able to save and borrow money easily and we in turn invest that money in small businesses, said Mirriam Wilson.

\0xECWith the transfers we at times are able to buy meat and cooking oil, thereby contributing towards our nutritional well-being  . Odeta Lafaelo was happy to say that the social cash transfer has improved her life: \0xECAs long as I am able to send my children to school I am very grateful.









Voluntary National Review 2018	27

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 2: Zero Hunger

Agriculture is Irelandis largest indigenous sector, and eradicating hunger and malnutrition are longstanding priorities of our development cooperation programme. As such, Irelandis engagement with SDG 2 is high both domestically and internationally.

In 2016, Ireland had the highest level of Government support to agricultural research and development per capita within the EU. In relation to the environmental impacts of agriculture, Irelandis gross nitrogen balance on agricultural land was below the EU average [based on 2013 data] which also has positive impact on nitrate levels in groundwater [see SDG 6]. Ammonia emissions from Irish agriculture [measure in kg per hectare] are marginally above the EU average. Ireland had the second lowest percentage of land under organic farming among EU Member States. In 2016, Irish farming incomes, measured by way of agricultural factor income per annual work unit [AWU] were above the EU average.

In common with other EU Member States, malnutrition in Ireland is primarily associated with overnutrition as opposed to undernutrition. Obesity rates in Ireland are above the EU average based on 2014 data. Childhood obesity rates are not included in the EU SDG indicator set. National data published in 2017 indicates that childhood overweight and obesity rates are stabilising in Ireland, but at a high level of approximately 20%.

The Healthy Ireland Survey and the Childhood Obesity Surveillance Initiative [COSI] both measure obesity rates in Ireland. Irelandis national response to overnutrition and obesity is set out in A Healthy Weight for Ireland n Obesity Policy and Action Plan 2016-2025 [SDG 2.2], This Plan sets a target for the prevalence of obesity in Ireland over the planis lifetime, specific short term [five-year] targets are included in the plan, and progress will be measured every two years. A whole-of-Government Strategy for Young Children [0-5] and their families, to be published in 2018, will also support SDG 2.2.

While less nationally prevalent than obesity, food poverty is also experienced in Ireland, with 9.2% of the population experiencing food poverty in 2016. For children under five years of age in 2016, some 10.2% experienced food poverty in 2016. This rate was higher in lone parent families with children at 23.5%.

Published in 2015, Food Wise 2025 sets out a ten year plan for the agri-food sector. And includes an ambitious set of projections to be achieved under the lifetime of the Plan, including:

u 85% increase in exports to \0xC419 billion;

u 70% increase in value added to \0xC413 billion;

u 60% increase in primary production to \0xC410 billion; and

u The creation of 23,000 additional jobs all along the supply chain from producer level to high end value added product development.












28 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









At the same time, Food Wise 2025 recognises that a significant increase in food production cannot be considered in isolation from its environmental impact, in particular regarding concerns associated with the depletion of natural resources and the potential impact on climate change. To address this, future food production systems must be as focused on managing and sustaining Irelandis natural resources as they are on increasing production. This approach is summed up as Environmental protection and economic competitiveness

are equal and complementary: one will not be achieved at the expense of the other [SDG 2.3]. Improving the environmental impact of agriculture is also addressed through the National Biodiversity Action Plan 2017-2021 and the Rural Development Plan 2014-2020.

Ireland has adopted National Genetic Conservations Strategies for both plants and animals [SDG 2.5], and both the National Biodiversity Action Plan 2017-2021 and the Rural Development Plan 2014-2020 support these strategies by, respectively, conserving and restoring biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside and encouraging conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources associated with food and agriculture.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

The eradication of hunger and under-nutrition has long been a cornerstone of Irelandis international development cooperation programme. Ireland recognises the central role of nutrition in achieving sustainable development and that improvements in nutrition are necessary for progress on global health, education, poverty, female empowerment, and inequality. Simultaneously, poverty and inequality, water, sanitation and hygiene, education, food systems, climate change, social protection, and agriculture all have an important impact on nutrition outcomes.

Ireland is a founding supporter of the Scaling Up Nutrition [SUN] Movement which focuses on maternal, infant and child nutrition, and increasing political will and investment to address under-nutrition in early childhood. In addition to directing resources to child wasting and child stunting, we also focus on micro-nutrients through a comprehensive range of approaches to fortification.

In line with the multi-sector/multi-stakeholder approach that SUN embodies, Irish Aid addresses hunger and under-nutrition across other priorities of humanitarian and development funding, supporting Irish Aidis continued delivery against the commitment made by the Taoiseach to double our nutrition-relevant spend by 2020. In addition, the unprecedented level and duration of humanitarian crises is demanding a renewed focus on the need to improve linkages between humanitarian and development work. We are examining the central role of nutrition in resilience, including the links between stunting and wasting and the resultant policy and programming implications. Ireland is also working to leverage private sector engagement on nutrition, as a critical piece of the multi-stakeholder approach and a contribution to sustained eradication of hunger and malnutrition [SDG 2.1/2].

On agriculture, Ireland is focused on the role of smallholders, particular women, within sustainable food systems. We support research and learning on nutrition sensitive and climate resilient agricultural technologies and techniques. Regarding our engagement with global partners, while on the Executive Board of the International Fund for Agriculture Development in 2017 [IFAD], Ireland was active in ensuring that the revision of IFADis Performance Based Allocation System [PISA] delivered increasing resources, in the form of grants and loans, to low-income and fragile countries [SDG 2.3].




Voluntary National Review 2018	29

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Ireland is a founding member of the Agriculture Markets Development Trust in Tanzania which focuses on increasing incomes and employment opportunities for poor women, men, and young people in agricultural value chains. The Trust works with the private sector, government and civil society organisations to promote changes to market systems leading to broad, sustained impact on the lives of poor smallholder farmers. With a focus on maize, sunflower and pulses it has helped deliver improved access to markets and better prices for produce for smallholder farmers. Additionally, in 2017, Ireland launched the Ireland-Kenya Agri-Food Strategy

[2017-2021] which seeks to strengthen support for the Kenyan Agri-food sector and expand opportunities for Irish Agri-food and Agri-business companies to invest in Kenya. A primary goal of the Strategy is to increase agricultural output and family incomes in Kenya [SDG 2.3].

Ireland is investing in a number of programmes seeking to promote and expand sustainable agricultural practices in our Partner Countries. In Malawi, Ireland is supporting a multi-donor World Bank programme focusing on the expansion of Conversation Agriculture to strengthen the natural resource base in agricultural lands. Similar projects are also being supported in Ethiopia and Zambia, working with various Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers [CGIAR] centres and local civil society, to integrate agroforestry practices within farming systems for greater climate resilience [SDG 2.4].

Also in Malawi, and in partnership with the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics [ICRISAT], Ireland is making significant progress in developing the availability of quality legume seeds across the country. This partnership brings together key government, civil society, and private sector actors under a national legume platform to advance the production of legumes such as groundnut, pigeon-pea chickpea and other nutritious crops, delivering both economic and nutritional impacts. Similar progress has been made in partnership with International Potato Research Institute [CIP] advancing the production and consumption of Irish and Orange Fleshed Sweet Potato. In Ethiopia, Ireland is working in partnership with the Agriculture Transformation Agency to expand community-based seed production initiatives in several regions focusing on improved seeds that are high-producing and resistant to pests and diseases [SDG 2.5].

Ireland currently is a member of the World Food Programme Executive board and will focus on nutrition as one of its main themes for the duration of its membership. In 2017 Ireland provided extra budgetary funding to the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the UN to achieve better production capacity and enhanced resilience for returning internally displaced persons in northeast Nigeria; for the improvement of food and nutrition security of the communities affected by the crisis in the Central African Republic; and for the sustainable management of Fall Armyworm [FAW] which poses a serious threat to food security for small holder farmers heavily reliant on crops most vulnerable to FAW attacks.

















30 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

EU indicators for this Goal suggest that Ireland is making good progress under SGG 3.

In 2015, life expectancy at birth for females and males was marginally above the EU average. In terms of self-perceived health, in 2015 Ireland had the highest proportion of population who rated their health status as good or very good among EU Member States, and the proportion who rated their health as bad or very bad was below the EU average. Irelandis overall level of smoking prevalence was below the EU average in 2014, with almost 80% of the population classified as non-smokers by Eurostat. Within the overall level of smoking prevalence, the level of occasional smokers in Ireland was above the EU average. Irelandis death rate due to chronic diseases was below the EU average in 2015 for both females and males. Suicide rates in 2015 were also below the EU average in Ireland, again for both females and males. Self-reported unmet need for medical care in Ireland was below the EU average in 2015. However, while the Irish rate continued to decrease in 2016, it was above the EU average in that year. In addition, it should be noted that the rate increased during the economic downturn beginning in 2008 and while it has subsequently decreased steadily each year since 2013, it remains above the 2008 level.

This EU data can be supplemented by OECD information. According to the OECD Health at a Glance 2017, Ireland also has the highest proportion of the population who rated their health status as good or very good among EU OECD members. This is also the case for people with the highest income level but not for people in the lowest income level who are rated fifth highest on this measure. Irelandis life expectancy in 2015 was 81.5 years which is above the OECD average of 80.6 years. This represents an improvement of over 10 years since 1970. The overall age standardised mortality in Ireland is similar to the OECD average. The rate is lower in Ireland than the OECD average for circulatory system diseases and above the OECD average for cancer related diseases. Infant mortality in Ireland is below the OECD average.

In common with other advanced economies, health and social care services continue to face demographic pressures and a rising burden of chronic disease. The overall population has been rising steadily in the last decade and is projected to increase by 4.9% by 2021. The population is also ageing resulting in greater care requirements. Projections suggest that between 2011 and 2021, the population aged 65 and over will increase by 38%, while the number of people aged over 85 years is currently increasing by approximately 3.3% each year.

Coupled with these demographic pressures, the changing nature and complexity of care required is placing further pressures on the system. An ageing population and lifestyle factors are contributing to a sharp increase in the prevalence of chronic disease with multiple morbidities. Approximately 38% of Irish people over 50 years have one chronic disease and 11% have more than one. Chronic disease accounts for 80% of all primary care physician visits, 40% of hospital admissions, and 75% of hospital bed days.









Voluntary National Review 2018	31

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









In order to deal with the increasing burden of chronic disease in a sustainable manner there is a concerted effort to reduce the causative risk factors and to develop a model of care which is more integrated and continuous, person-centred, and delivered at the lowest level of complexity consistent with patient safety.

A key priority for Government is to constantly improve the health and well-being of people in Ireland: by keeping people healthy; providing the healthcare people need; delivering high-quality services and getting best value from health system resources.

Healthy Ireland [2013-2025] [SDG 3.3 and SDG 3.4] is the national framework for action to improve the health and well-being of the people of Ireland. Prevention, early intervention and empowering people to look after their own health and well-being are essential elements of our Healthy Ireland strategy. Healthy Ireland takes a whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach to improving health and well-being and the quality of peopleis lives. This is particularly important in tackling the rise of chronic disease in Ireland, addressing health inequalities and mental health issues.

Significant progress has been made in recent years in promoting population health and tackling a variety of public health challenges. The policy direction on these major challenges is now largely set out in published plans and policies including: Creating A Better Future Together: National Maternity Strategy 2016-2026 [SDG 3.1. and SDG

3.2], Tobacco Free Ireland [SDG 3.A], National Suicide Strategy [SDG 3.4], Obesity Policy and Action Plan [SDG 2.2 and SDG 3.4], National Physical Activity Plan, National Sexual Health Strategy [SDG 3.3., SDG 3.7 and SDG 5.6], National Substance Misuse Strategy [SDG 3.5], National Positive Ageing Strategy, Reducing Harm, Supporting Recovery n a health led response to drug and alcohol use in Ireland [SDG 3.5].

The implementation of these policies under the Healthy Ireland Framework is having a positive impact. Daily smoking rates in Ireland among adults is close to the OECD average, with 19% of adults being daily smokers compared with an OECD average of 18%. There has been a significant decrease in Ireland in daily smoking rates since 2000. There has been a decrease of more than 60% of the rate of regular smoking children aged 15 since 1997-98, now at 8% compared with the OECD average of 11.7%.

Ireland was among several countries in the OECD to experience large reductions in alcohol consumption between 2000 and 2015, dropping from 14.2 litres per capita aged 15+ to 10.9 litres. This is still high however compared with the OECD average of 9 litres. 16%

of children aged 15 in Ireland have reported being drunk at least twice in their life. This compares favourably with the OECD average of 22.3%.

Almost 73% of adults perform at least 150 minutes of moderate physical activity weekly in Ireland compared with 66.5% across OECD countries. 37% of Irish adults were measured as being overweight in 2015 with a further 23% classed as obese. Of the 18 OECD countries with measured data, the average for overweight was 34% and for obese was 23%.












32 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









People in Ireland were close to three times more likely to report depression than

people in countries with the lowest prevalence. This difference is in part driven by different attitudes and understandings around mental ill-health and depression. Lower stigma around depression may contribute to higher rates of self-reported illness, and higher rates of diagnosis. As with other countries, women had a higher prevalence of self-reported chronic depression than men. The suicide rate in Ireland was 10.9 per 100,000 population which was lower than the OECD average of 12.1. As with all other countries, men had a significantly higher rate of suicide than women.

In addition other key national strategies recently published also include an Healthy Ireland approach: Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures: the National Policy Framework for Children and Young People [SDG 3.2], National Strategy for Women and Girls [SDG 5], and the National Cancer Strategy [SDG 3.4].

Our national focus will now increasingly shift to driving, monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the policies outlined above. This will include initiatives in local authorities, workplaces, educational facilities and communities. Work will continue on developing further measures to limit the harm from alcohol, and to strengthen our tobacco control measures in line with the World Health Organisation [WHO] Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. In addition, a health and well-being approach will inform and support the development of new strategies in areas such as mental health.

In the mental health arena, Vision for Change [2006-2016] [SDG 3.4] was the policy document that saw major advances in the shift from institutional to community based care for those requiring mental care. The policy is now open for review and as part of the process a new Joint Committee on the Future of Mental Health Care has been established with a view to achieving agreement on the implementation of a single, long-term vision for mental health care and the direction of mental health policy in Ireland.

Food safety and hygiene standards are also essential for our health and well-being. Consumers must be provided with information to help them make informed choices about the food they intend to purchase e.g. nutritional information. We will continue to work with stakeholders to progress legislation and policies that support these objectives.

Ireland continues to develop policy and suitable legislative frameworks to support public health protection through: control of infectious diseases; national immunisation, vaccination and cancer screening programmes; appropriate national public health emergency planning [including pandemic influenza and implementation of the International Health regulations]; contributing to EU and WHO health protection policy development; and monitoring the implementation of all such policy and legislation.

As part of the process in developing a model of care which is more integrated and continuous, person-centred, and delivered at the lowest level of complexity consistent with patient safety, a parliamentary cross-party Committee on the Future of Healthcare sat for twelve months [2016-2017] with the objective \0xEBto consider how best to ensure that, in future, everyone has access to an affordable, universal, single-tier healthcare system, in which patients are treated promptly on the basis of need, rather than ability to payi [SDG 3.8]. The resulting Sl\0xB7intecare Report which was published in May 2017 lays out a high-level vision and strategy for reform of the Irish health system over a ten year period.





Voluntary National Review 2018	33

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









A government response to the Sl\0xB7intecare report and detailed implementation plan for the strategy is being developed.

At the 2017 Global Forum on Human Resources for Health in Dublin, a National Strategic Framework for Health and Social Care Workforce Planning was launched by the Minister for Health. The Framework aims to support the recruitment and retention of the right mix of workers across the health and social care system to meet planned and projected service need. One of the principles underpinning the Framework is that workforce planning solutions should be consistent with the articles of the WHO Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel.

Other important cross-sectoral policies in relation to Goal 3 include the Road Safety Strategy 2013-2020 [SDG 3.8] and the first National Clean Air Strategy [currently under development] [SDG 3.9].

Ireland is also committed to meeting SDG 3.9 as it relates to chemicals through the framework of EU regulations including the REACH, CLP, Detergents and Export-Import Regulations as well as the Seveso III Directive, all of which contributes to the overall sound management of chemicals. In relation to the REACH Regulation, Ireland contributes to the reduction in use of particular hazardous chemicals [SVHCs n substance of very high concern such as carcinogens or those that are persistent in the environment] through our engagement in Substance Evaluation as well as Risk management tasks under the SVHC 2020 Roadmap. In the workplace, the Health and Safety Authority focuses its efforts on REACH in particular on substances that have a direct effect on human health and target our efforts at identifying and risk managing substances that are CMRs [carcinogens, mutagens and toxic to reproduction as well as respiratory sensitisers].

In relation to road safety, 2017 was the safest year on Irelandis roads since road deaths were first recorded in 1959. 2017 saw a 15% drop in road deaths compared to 2016. A total of 158 people lost their lives on Irelandis roads in the year to 31 December 2017.

Irelandis forthcoming National Clean Air Strategy will include a thematic focus on the impact of air quality on health. As of 2014, Ireland enjoyed the second lowest exposure to air pollution by particulate matter [PM2.5] of all EU Member States.

Access to quality health services is also one of the 10 strategic outcome to be achieved under Irelandis National Development Plan [published in January 2018] Project Ireland 2040.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

Supporting better health for all is a core ambition of Irelandis policy for International Development. Ireland continues to invest to improve access to quality health services, and attain quality health outcomes for poor and marginalised citizens. As a supporter of the Universal Health Coverage [UHC] 2030 movement led by the WHO and World Bank, Ireland supports collective action to build health systems that can deliver quality health services to all who need them as illustrated in Figure 4.1. [SDG 3.8]. Equity of access is a fundamental priority for Ireland in order to address barriers to access and protect human rights to achieve SDG 3 and other Goals.







34 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Figure 4.1: Collective Action to Build Universal Health Coverage




























To improve both the quality of healthcare and access to services, Ireland also continues to prioritise human resources for health, working in partnership with the Irish Health Service Executive [HSE] and the Department of Health. At the 2017 Global Forum on Human Resources for Health, Ireland led global efforts to highlight the importance of substantially increasing health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of health workforce in developing countries. We now continue our efforts to respond to the 2017 Dublin Declaration, which calls for equitable access to health workers within strengthened health systems especially in rural and under-served areas [SDG 3C].

Ireland also continues to strengthen its focus on the intersection between health and gender with a particular focus on reducing the rate of maternal mortality, where the global annual reduction rate will need to triple to achieve the SDG target 3.1. Consistent with the \0xEBCairo Programme of Actioni, Ireland will support efforts that reduce maternal and infant mortality, and promote universal access to reproductive healthcare, including ante-natal care and family planning services [SDG 3.1, 3.7, 3.8].

Working in line with the Every Woman Every Child global movement that mobilises and intensifies international and national action, Ireland works with governments, multilaterals, the private sector and civil society to address the major health challenges facing women, children and adolescents around the world. Reducing child mortality also remains a major priority as one child in twelve still dies before their fifth birthday in Sub-Saharan Africa. Through partnership with the Gavi vaccine alliance, Ireland works with UN agencies and civil society to support routine immunisation, which has already prevented 9 million deaths [SDG 3.2, 3.8].

HIV and AIDS remains the leading cause of death in adolescents aged 10-19 years in Sub-Saharan Africa. Working closely with UNAIDS and as a founding member of the Global Fund to fight AIDS, TB and Malaria, Ireland actively supports the SDG ambition to end the



Voluntary National Review 2018	35

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









AIDS, TB and Malaria epidemics by 2030. The Global Fund mobilises and invests nearly US$4 billion a year to support programmes in over 100 countries to support communities most in need, including in all Irish Aid partner countries. To date, it has saved 22 million lives and supports 11 million people on antiretroviral therapy for HIV n more than half the global total [SDG 3.3].

Figure 4.2: Irish Aid Measures to Tackle AIDS in Africa























Building on the international reputation of our work on HIV and AIDS, we continue to invest in effective prevention by addressing inequality, gender-based violence and targeting of key and vulnerable populations, including adolescent girls and young women. Protecting young adolescent girls, who are particularly vulnerable to HIV infection, is also a top priority as 90% of new infections are among this age group. Ireland works with United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation [UNESCO] and UNAIDS to increase the provision of comprehensive sexuality education in Sub-Saharan Africa to improve knowledge and reduce high-risk behaviour [SDG 3.1].

As the 2014 Ebola epidemic in West Africa clearly showed, working with communities is essential to achieve better health and through multiple NGO-led initiatives [SDG 3.3, 3.7]. Ireland actively supports work within communities to promote health locally, while also promoting better WHO coordination at global level to respond to national and global health risks [SDG 3D].


















36 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 4: Quality Education

Based on EU indicators, Ireland performs strongly in relation to education and skills under this Goal. The rate of early leavers from education and training in Ireland was below the EU average in 2016 [as a % of the population aged 18-24 years old] and had decreased significantly since 2011. Participation in early childhood education was above the EU average for Irish children in 2015 and approaching 100%.Regarding underachievement in reading, maths and science, in 2015 Ireland had the third best outcomes among EU Member States. Additionally, in 2016 Ireland had the fourth highest EU level of tertiary educational attainment as a percentage of population aged 30 to 34. Irish employment rates for recent graduates [as a percentage of population aged 20 to 34] were only marginally above the EU average in 2016 but it should be noted that 2016 data does

not take account of the continuing economic recovery and employment growth measures throughout 2017 and 2018. Therefore it can be expected the figures for those years, when they become available, will show some further improvement. Rates of adult participation in learning in Ireland in 2015 were below the EU average.

Consideration of the OECD Better Life Index also supports the view that Ireland is performing well under SDG4. On average, people living in Ireland can expect to go through 18.7 years of education between the ages of 5 and 39, more than the OECD average of 17 years, and 80% of adults aged 25-64 have completed upper secondary education, higher than the OECD average of 74%. OECD indicators also reflect positively on the quality of education provided in Ireland, with the average student in Ireland scoring 509 in reading literacy, maths and sciences in the 2015 Programme for International Student Assessment reviews, above the OECD average of 486. In terms of social and gender inequality regarding education, Ireland also ranks highly compared to its OECD peers.

Education is compulsory for children in Ireland from the ages of six to sixteen or until students have completed three years of second-level education. State-funded education is available at all levels [SDG 4.1, SDG 4.3].

While the compulsory school age in Ireland is six and all forms of pre-primary education are optional, children from the age of four can be enrolled in infant classes in primary schools. Nearly 40% of four-year-olds and virtually all five-year-olds attend primary school, where early education is provided in infant classes. The free pre-school scheme was introduced in January 2010. Under the original terms of the scheme, all children aged between three years two months and four years seven months in September were entitled to one year of free pre-school education in the year prior to starting primary school. In 2016, the terms of scheme were extended to allow children to enrol in free pre-school from the age of three years of age and to remain there until they start primary school. While participation is voluntary, 95% of eligible children availed of the scheme in 2016/2017. From September 2018, the scheme will be extended further. From this date, all children will be entitled to two full years of free pre-school education[SDG 4.2].

The Action Plan for Education 2016-2019 set out the goal that the Irish Education and Training System should become the best in Europe within 10 years, which while challenging is achievable given our strong starting position. The publication of the Action Plan was the beginning of an annual process. More detailed actions, with quarterly delivery dates, are identified in updated annual plans.




Voluntary National Review 2018	37

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









These plans are based on the original five high-level goals:

1. Improve the learning experience and the success of learners

2. Improve the progress of learners at risk of educational disadvantage or learners with special educational needs

3. Help those delivering education services to continually improve

4. Build stronger bridges between education and the wider community

5. Improve national planning and support services

Progress is monitored through the publication of End of Year Review reports and quarterly progress reports.

The Action Plan for Education details clear curriculum change and other commitments that will secure the step-change needed to equip learners with the skills necessary to participate in the modern economy. It includes: actions to promote science, technology, engineering and mathematics, [STEM], at primary and post-primary levels; the introduction of a new leaving certificate computer science subject from September 2018; the development of a new primary mathematics curriculum that will support all children in the development of algorithmic and computational thinking, which form the basis of coding; and the implementation of a digital strategy in schools will seek to enrich the teaching, learning and assessment environment.

In addition, the higher and further education systems are responding strongly to the challenge of meeting Irelandis human capital needs. Graduate output increased by 7% over the past four years and there will be a further 3% increase in 2018. One thousand additional STEM graduates will graduate from the colleges in the next two years compared to 2016. Graduate employment is increasing, and employers report strong satisfaction levels with the quality of the graduates.

New opportunities are also being developed in regard to apprenticeships, and the curriculum for apprenticeships has been updated, and traineeships. Under Springboard+, 6.500 participants will have opportunities in the 2017/2018 academic year year to participate in upskilling their existing skills in areas such as ICT, advanced manufacturing, financial services, entrepreneurship and hospitality. The education system is responding robustly to the changing nature of expectations on young people [SDG 4.4].

Specific programmes exist with the Irish education sector to address disparities for disadvantaged and/or marginalised groups [SDG 4.5]. Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools [DEIS] the Action Plan for Educational Inclusion, was launched in May 2005 and, as DEIS Plan 2017, remains the Irish policy instrument to address educational disadvantage [see text box 4.2 for further details]. Additionally, in accordance with the Traveller Education Strategy, provision for Irish Travellers has been mainstreamed with previously segregated provision now funded as part of the mainstream system. A number of Traveller-specific supports remain in the system to assist with the transition to the mainstream system of pupils, previously provided for in segregated provision. The National Traveller and Roma Inclusion Strategy [NTRIS 2016-2020] also includes specific actions aimed at improving the educational experience of Irish Travellers and Roma.







38 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









In relation to SDG 4.6, the National Literacy and Numeracy Strategy n Literacy and Numeracy for Learning and Life 2011-2020 n sets out to raise standards in literacy and numeracy in early years and school settings. It recognised the importance of these key skills for all aspects of day-to-day life and learning. Five years on from its launch, the mid-term impact of the Strategy has been reviewed. It shows that standards in literacy and numeracy have risen. Irelandis students are ranked highly in international surveys, particularly in literacy. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain. Arising from the positive findings in the Interim Review, further ambitious targets are set and actions are identified to cover the period 2017-2020.

In relation to SDG 4.7, the National Strategy on Education for Sustainable Development in Ireland 2014-2020 provides a framework to support the contribution that the education sector is making and will continue to make towards a more sustainable future at a number of levels: individual, community, local, national and international. This Strategy was adopted under Our Sustainable Future, and a mid-term review has been completed in March 2018. The third Forum on Education for Sustainable Development was on 15 November 2017. Key points raised at the third Forum and in submissions received have been incorporated into the mid-term review of the strategy which is now complete.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade invests significantly in promoting public understanding of and engagement with global justice issues and supporting people to take action locally and globally in the creation of a more just, peaceful and sustainable world for all. Development education strengthens understanding of the global justice dimension of each of the SDGs, inspiring and enabling people to take action at local, national and global levels. The Irish Aid Development Education Strategy 2017-2023 provides a framework for development education across the primary, post-primary, higher education, youth and adult and community education sectors. Ireland supports a number of strategic partners as part of this Strategy, as well as providing annual funding to a wide range of civil society and community groups. Initiatives include teacher training, curriculum development and rollout, workshops, competitive events, and award schemes [SDG 4.7].





























Voluntary National Review 2018	39

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Textbox 4.2

Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools

Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools [DEIS] the Action Plan for Educational Inclusion, was launched in May 2005. The DEIS Plan 2017, which replaced this, sets out our vision for future intervention in the critical area of social inclusion

in education policy and remains the Irish policy instrument to address educational disadvantage. The Action Plan focuses on addressing and prioritising the educational needs of children and young people from disadvantaged communities, from pre-school through second-level education [3 to 18 years] and is one element of a continuum of interventions, which includes second-chance education and training, access measures to support increased participation by underrepresented groups in further and higher education and the ongoing development of provision for pupils with special educational needs. Its frame of reference is based on the definition of \0xEBeducational disadvantagei contained in the Education Act 1998: \0xEC\0xD6 the impediments to education arising from social or economic disadvantage which prevent students from deriving appropriate benefit from education in schools and it is grounded on the following principles:

u That every child and young person deserves an equal chance to access, participate in, and benefit from education;

u Every person should have the opportunity to reach his or her full educational potential for personal, social and economic reasons, and

u Education is a critical factor in promoting social inclusion and economic development.

The key objective of the Plan was to draw together the range of interventions at that time to tackle educational disadvantage and build on them within an overarching programme to provide a more integrated and effective range of educational inclusion supports to schools.

DEIS provides for a standardised system for identifying levels of disadvantage and an integrated School Support Programme.

825 schools were included in the programme in the 2016/17 school year. These comprise 640 primary schools [328 urban/town schools and 312 rural primary schools] and 185 second level schools. The total Department of Education and Skills spend on DEIS is in the region of \0xC4115 million in 2017. Additional funding is provided from Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection and from the Department of Children and Youth Affairs. The DEIS Plan 2017 allocated additional funding to allow for the addition of 79 new schools to the DEIS programme and to also allow for the introduction of a series of pilot projects aimed at introducing measures shown to work well in improving results for disadvantaged students. This will be supported by the newly introduced School Excellence Fund which will enable schools to apply for funding to implement innovative programmes which are context-specific and aimed at improving learning outcomes.










40 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets










Evaluations of the DEIS programme have found improvements over time in absenteeism rates within DEIS schools, the gap between DEIS and non-DEIS schools in the proportion of students completing junior and senior cycle, and [to a lesser degree] the gap in overall Junior Certificate grades between DEIS and non-DEIS schools. However, the continuing concentration of disadvantage in DEIS schools, especially certain urban primary schools, highlights the need for continued supports for such schools.


Supporting the SDG Globally

Ireland continues to support the provision of quality basic education through direct support in its Key Partner Countries, support to the Global Partnership for Education and United Nations Childrenis Emergency Fund [UNICEF], and through international and national NGOs. Equity is a priority and our support for education has a strong focus on girlsi education, including their progression to secondary level. Ireland addresses the social and economic barriers to girls participating in education through direct and indirect measures including gender responsive education planning, ensuring a safe school environment for girls, targeted scholarships, and reducing the risk of gender-based violence in education. Ireland also ensures that other poor, marginalised and vulnerable children have access to quality basic education services through strengthening education systems in remote and poorly served areas, supporting community school initiatives and social protection measures [SDG 4.1, 4.5, 4.c].

To improve quality, Ireland invests in teacher training, building the capacity of school management and strengthening community oversight, and demands for accountability. In addition, we aim to improve learning outcomes through innovative approaches which build on Irelandis experiences [e.g. the Young Scientist and Technology Exhibition] or utilise available technologies.

Through multiple NGO-led initiatives, Ireland supports early childhood development, care and pre-primary education; life skills education for adolescents and young people; and adult literacy and numeracy [SDG 4.2, 4.6].

Increasingly Ireland is supporting technical and vocational training to enable young people to develop skills leading to employment. We also support initiatives aimed at integrating persons with disabilities into technical and vocational training programmes [SDG 4.4, 4.5].

Through the Irish Aid Fellowship Training Programme and other country specific fellowship programmes Ireland supports mid-career professionals to undertake post-graduate studies in Ireland or their own countries [SDG 4B].

Ireland recognises that the continuity of education for children and young people affected by conflict and other crises is essential not only to their health and development but also to fostering inclusion, tolerance, human rights and social cohesion, and in the longer term to building peaceful and stable societies. At the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit Ireland committed \0xECto providing support for greater educational and livelihood opportunities for displaced people, particularly those affected by the Syria crisis, as a contribution to their dignity and self-reliance, and to enable displaced people to make their valuable contributions to the societies in which they live. Ireland supports education in emergencies



Voluntary National Review 2018	41

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









and protracted crises through core funding to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees [UNHCR] and the UNICEF, as well as through our earmarked funding for specific country and regional responses. In addition, through our support for NGOs we assist thousands of internally displaced and refugee children and adolescents, in particular girls, to access quality education and psychosocial support.

Textbox 4.3





















Zambia Case Study: Campaign for Female Education

Ireland partners with the Campaign for Female Education [CAMFED] in Zambia to support girls in rural areas to continue their education through junior and senior secondary levels. As well as providing financial support, CAMFED ensures that the girls have a safe learning environment and train teachers and community mentors to recognise signs of abuse and on the processes to follow up.

Mwiya [second left front row] lives in Shangombo one of the poorest and very remote districts in Zambia. Her father died when she was ten and in Grade 3. Her mother died 6 years later and she remained with her grandmother, who had many other orphans to care for and was also unwell. Through Irish Aid support to CAMFED, Mwiya received bursary support to finish her high school, get technical training and start a business. In her own words: \0xECWhen I was in Grade 8 in Shangombo District,

I was selected for sponsorship on the CAMFED programme. I knew this was the beginning of better things to come. I worked very hard because I wanted to be able to support my grandmother.

After completing her secondary education Mwiya, studied business skills with support from the CAMFED and with a grant of K350 [\0xC429] started a business selling hair extensions. With profits from this business and continuing support from CAMFED Mwiya enrolled in a bricklaying course. She continues: \0xEC On my return to Shangomobo I was awarded a contract to build two classroom blocks at the local primary school from which I earned K4,500 [\0xC4375]. The district leadership was very impressed with our work, especially when he learnt that I was a female bricklayer. Since then other opportunities have come my way and I have employed two male helpers because this is a male dominated field. I am very excited. I will soon be signing a K1 million [\0xC483,000] contract!.



42 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Based on EU data, the overall percentage of Irish women [aged 15-74] who have experienced physical or sexual violence within the prior 12 months was in line with the EU average at 8%, though there is variation between different age cohorts. It should also be noted that this EU data dates from 2012 and may not be sufficiently current. Irelandis gender employment gap was above the EU average in 2016 [and 2017] but has reduced from its pre-recession 2008 level. Irelandis performance under this indicator improved during the recession and worsened as the economy recovered but appears to have stabilised in recent years. Irelandis gender pay gap [in unadjusted form] was below the EU average in 2014, and again demonstrates a pattern of improvement followed by disimprovement in line with recession and economic recovery. It should be noted that 2015 and 2016 data is not available for Ireland within the Eurostat data set and therefore more recent years EU wide comparisons are not possible here. The percentage of Irish women outside the labour force due to caring responsibilities [referred to as the \0xEBinactive population due to caring responsibilities] was above the EU average in 2016 [and 2017] and was the second highest within the EU. The percentage for Irish women was also approximately 5 times that for men. While the disparities in the distribution of caring responsibilities between women and men are significant from the perspective of gender equality, it should be noted that their discussion here should not be regarded as dismissing the important and valuable contribution which carers make to society. The number of seats held by women in Irelandis parliament was below the EU average in 2017 but increased at the last national elections [see below for further details]. The percentage of positions held by women in senior management in 2017 in Ireland was also below the EU average but has been increasing steadily since 2012.


Ireland has a comprehensive policy and legal framework to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. Nonetheless as indicated above, particular challenges remain in respect to womenis representation in leadership and decision-making, gender gaps in employment and income levels, the prevalence of violence against women, evidence of gender segregation in education and occupations, and responding to the diversity of women.

The EU Gender Equality Index 2017 ranks Ireland eighth in the EU for its progress towards gender equality. The Index was developed by the European Institute for Gender Equality [EIGE] and provides an easily interpretable measure of gender equality in the EU, between Member States and across time, over six core domains of work, money, knowledge, time, power and health.

An all-of-government set of priorities in relation to gender equality, to be advanced over the next four years, is set out in the National Strategy for Women and Girls 2017-2020, and was developed following extensive consultation with stakeholders and the general public.

The vision of the Strategy is of \0xECan Ireland where all women enjoy equality with men and can achieve their full potential, while enjoying a safe and fulfilling life. In promoting equal treatment and the empowerment of women and girls, the National Strategy is inclusive of individuals whose sex characteristics, gender identity or gender expression is female.





Voluntary National Review 2018	43

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









For the 2017-2020 period, the overall goal of the Strategy is to change attitudes and practices preventing womenis and girlsi full participation in education, employment and public life, at all levels, and to improve services for women and girls, with priority given to the needs of those experiencing, or at risk of experiencing, the poorest outcomes. This goal will be advanced through 139 actions across six high-level objectives, as follows:

u advance socio-economic equality for women and girls [SDG 5.1];

u advance the physical and mental health and well-being of women and girls [SDG 5.6];

u ensure the visibility in society of women and girls, and their equal and active citizenship;

u advance women in leadership at all levels [SDG 5.5];

u combat violence against women [SDG 5.2]; and

u embed gender equality in decision-making.

Government is advised on the implementation of the Strategy and in monitoring progress by a Strategy Committee chaired at junior Minister level, which includes all Government Departments, key public bodies, the social partners and civil society in its membership. It is intended to publish progress reports annually.

The Strategy includes actions to give effect to the positive duty introduced in the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 2014, which requires public bodies to have due regard to equality and human rights issues that are relevant to their functions and which has provided a mechanism to apply a gender lens to decision-making. The Strategy also commits to building capacity with the Civil and Public Service with regard to gender mainstreaming and gender budgeting, building on the Governmentis commitment to develop the process of budget and policy proofing as a means of advancing equality, reducing poverty and strengthening economic and social rights. This work has advanced through a pilot programme of equality reporting for the 2018 budgetary cycle, anchored in the existing performance budgeting framework. An update on progress to date is included in the Public Service Performance Report 20172.

The CSO Men and Women in Ireland series of statistical reports are updated every two years. The report presents a set of 73 indicators which identify important gender differences in the activities of men and women in relation to their place in society, their employment, their education, and their health and lifestyles.

The first national strategy on domestic, sexual and gender-based violence ran from 2010 to 2014. The second national strategy runs from 2016 to 2021 [SDG 5.3]. It is a whole-of-Government approach to these issues. It has three overarching aims: to change societal attitudes, to hold perpetrators to account and to improve the support that is available to victims. A national awareness campaign, which is a key action in the strategy, is ongoing. The overall aim of the campaign is to increase the awareness of domestic and sexual violence, to bring about a change in long established societal behaviours and attitudes and to activate bystanders with the aim of decreasing and preventing this violence. It recognises that women and men are victims of such crimes. The campaign was sought by and is supported by NGO stakeholders. The campaign is currently focused on domestic violence and the focus will shift to sexual violence in 2019. The Domestic Violence Bill


2 Government of Ireland, [April 2018], \0xECPublic Service Performance Report 2017, Department of Public Expenditure and Reform.



44 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









was enacted on 8 May 2018 and significantly enhances the legal protections available to victims of domestic violence. This legislation will also bring Ireland a step closer to ratifying the Istanbul Convention which is a commitment in the Programme for Government.

In addition, the Second National Action Plan to Prevent and Combat Human Trafficking in Ireland [SDG 5.2] was launched in October 2016. Irelandis response to human trafficking is focused on a victim-based approach and is gender-sensitive. Since 2009 the majority of victims discovered each year have been women, primarily trafficked for sexual exploitation, but also for forced labour. The Plan has as a key objective the continued development

of structures to prevent all forms of human trafficking, the identification and support of victims, and the prosecution of those responsible. This has included taking legislative measures to reduce the demand for the services of trafficking victims in prostitution, which was fulfilled in 2017 with the introduction of the Criminal Law [Sexual Offences] Act 2017.

The Criminal Justice [Female Genital Mutilation] Act 2012 [SDG 5.3] makes it a criminal offence to remove a girl from the state to mutilate her genitals. Since 2011, there have been about 3,780 women living in Ireland who have undergone the mutilation. The level of Female Genital Mutilation [FGM] continues to increase in Ireland. A EIGE Report suggests that the number of girls at risk of FGM in Ireland is between 158 [low-risk scenario] and 1,632 [high-risk scenario].

The HSE National Social Inclusion Office was involved in the production and dissemination of the second edition of Female Genital Mutilation Information for Health-Care Professionals Working in Ireland.

Ongoing work in this area includes plans to:

u support training;

u raise awareness; and

u develop and strengthen appropriate referral and care pathways.

It also includes plans to provide appropriate information to health professionals and members of communities in partnership with relevant community-led organisations.

The enactment of the Electoral [Amendment] [Political Funding] Act 2012 [SDG 5.5] introduced gender quotas for national politics, requiring political parties to select at least 30% of candidates of each gender for national elections or else lose 50% of their State funding for the parliamentary term. The outcome was an increase in the number of female candidates running in the 2016 general election. Thirty-five women were elected to the D\0xB7il [the Lower House of the Irish Parliament] in 2016, an increase of 10 on the 2011 general election and the highest number of female TDs ever. The percentage of women among D\0xB7il members rose to 22% from 15% in 2011. This is a significant increase but female representation in the D\0xB7il remains low by international standards.














Voluntary National Review 2018	45

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Since 1993 a national target has been in place that women should constitute at least 40% of the membership of State boards. In 2006, women comprised 34% of all board members. The Government introduced new Guidelines on Appointments to State Boards in 2014, which included a package of measures to meet the 40% target. The Government also set an enhanced target of 45% for boards already meeting the 40% target. Since the launch of the Guidelines, 30% of over 7,500 applications received for state board appointment came from women, who made up some 45% of the appointments under this process. As of December 2017, women constitute 39.9% of board members, the highest percentage since the target was introduced, while the 40% target has been met in respect of almost half [48.9%] of all State boards.

Significant progress has also been made to advance women into senior and middle management positions in the Irish Civil Service. A previous National Womenis Strategy in 2007 set a target for 27% of all Principal Officers [senior managers] to be women. That target has been exceeded significantly. Women now constitute 40% of all Principal Officers, 33% of all Assistant Secretaries [deputy heads of Government departments] and 20% of all Secretaries General [heads of Government departments]. Further improving gender balance is a key strand within the Governmentis Civil Service Renewal Programme, launched in 2014. In January 2017, the Government announced further measures designed to foster greater gender equality. The measures announced include a new target of 50/50 for senior level appointments. Where two candidates of equal merit are under consideration for an Assistant Secretary vacancy, preference will be given to the female candidate where women are under-represented on the management team of the Department in question.

Turning to the judiciary, as of April 2018, 37% of Irish judges are female [59 of 161 judges]. In the Irish Supreme Court, three of the 9 judges are women, as is the former Chief Justice who retired in 2017. The number of female judges throughout the Irish judiciary has almost tripled in the past two decades.

While progress has been made to improve female representation in national politics, public administration, and on State boards, women remain underrepresented in decision-making roles in many areas of Irish life, including in senior business leadership and on corporate boards. While the percentage of women non-executive directors of corporate boards increased by almost 11 percentage points between 2007 and 2017, their representation still remains low at 17.6%.

Women are similarly under-represented in senior positions in the financial sector. The Central Bank indicated in March 2017 that women occupied only 20% of senior management positions in the financial services sector between 2012 and 2016.

There remains a gender imbalance in the staffing of Irish higher education institutions, particularly at senior levels. Although entry-level academic grades are gender balanced, significant gender imbalances arise at higher-level academic positions. Currently 81% of academic professor positions are filled by men. Men also represent 72% of the highest paid non-academic staff. The Higher Education Authority [HEA] National Review of Gender Equality in Irish Higher Education Institutions, published in 2016, highlighted the importance of achieving gender equality in employment in higher education institutions as a \0xECmeans to maximise their pursuit of excellence and successfully meet the many social, economic and cultural challenges of the future.



46 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Women continue to experience barriers to full socio-economic equality. As the economy has emerged from recession, the labour market participation rate for women has returned to 2006 levels and stood at 53.3% in quarter 4, 2016. The number of women employed increased by 2.7% in quarter 4, 2016 as compared to quarter 4, 2015. However, there continues to be a gap of almost 14 percentage points between the labour force participation rate of women and that of men, which was 67.1% in quarter 4, 2016. While the proportion of men working part-time has doubled since 2006, in quarter 4, 2016 women were still almost three times more likely than men to work part-time, with a third of employed women in that situation.

On average, female employees were paid 13.9% an hour less than male employees in Ireland in 2014 while the average EU gender pay gap in 2015 was 16.3%.

Consistent poverty levels are higher for women than men. In 2015, the consistent poverty rate for women was 9.1% compared to 8.3% for men. The risk of poverty for women over 65 is 2.6%, slightly less when compared to 2.9% for men over 65. The Government has taken a series of actions to address consistent poverty levels. Budget 2018 increased social welfare payment rates by \0xC45 per week. In January 2017, the Government increased the level of the National Minimum Wage to \0xC49.25 an hour.

Measures being taken under the National Strategy for Women and Girls to tackle these economic inequalities include initiating dialogue between union and employer stakeholders to address the gender pay gap, and developing practical tools to assist employers to calculate the gender pay within their organisations and to consider its aspects and causes. Additionally Ireland will promote wage transparency in the period to 2020 by requiring companies of 50 or more employees to complete a wage survey periodically and to report the results. The Strategy also provides for specific supports for female entrepreneurship.

One strand of addressing female poverty rates will focus on reducing the gap in poverty rates between female-headed households and male-headed households. Measures to be undertaken under this heading include programmes to assist return to the labour market.

It is acknowledged in national policy that the diversity of womenis circumstances poses a challenge, as outcomes on employment, poverty, leadership, and well-being can vary widely depending on a womanis situation. Outcomes are significantly poorer for Traveller women across a range of areas. Lone parents and women with disabilities continue to have much lower rates of labour market participation. Roma and some migrant women also experience significantly poorer outcomes in terms of employment and access to resources. The needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex [LGBTI] persons are less well understood, with less evolved policy responses as a result. Positive action measures for specific categories of women experiencing particular disadvantages will remain a priority.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	47

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Supporting the SDGs Globally

Gender equality and womenis empowerment is at the core of Irelandis international development cooperation programme and our foreign policy. Specifically, we work to [i] promote gender equality and ensure women and men have equal access to and control over resources, services and opportunities; [ii] ensure that discrimination against women and girls is reduced; and [iii] that women are empowered and are given meaningful space and voice to participate in decision-making processes.

Ireland believes that gender equality is a prerequisite to development and we are committed to supporting gender-responsive policy and programming. The OECD Development Assistance Committeeis [DAC] Peer Review [2014] notes that \0xECIreland is a strong leader internationally on gender equality and womenis empowerment [and has] consistently played an important agenda-setting role. In 2016, 84% of Irelandis bilateral allocable aid had gender equality and womenis empowerment as a principal or significant objective, an increase from 79% in 2015.

Figure 4.3: OECD DAC (2018) Irelandis Percentage of Gender Equality Focused Aid by Sector





















In co-chairing the negotiations on the SDGs, Ireland advocated for gender equality to be a core priority of the 2030 Agenda. It is estimated that of the 232 indicators identified to monitor progress in achieving the SDGs, 25% explicitly or implicitly address gender equality.

Ireland was elected to the Commission on the Status of Women [CSW] in 2017 and will continue to serve as a member of the Commission until 2021. Ireland will also hold the position of Chair of the Bureau of the Commission for two sessions in 2018 and 2019. As part of its candidacy, Ireland has pledged to work to strengthen the voice and functioning of the Commission, enhance its contribution to the wider 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and promote the participation of civil society in the Commissionis work. Ireland successfully chaired this yearis session of the Commission which resulted in agreed conclusions on challenges and opportunities for rural women and girls. In our National Statement, Ireland highlighted that rural women and girls are often the farthest and hardest to reach and face particular challenges especially in the areas of poverty and discrimination [SDG 5.1].




48 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









One World One Future identifies gender-based violence [GBV] as a fundamental abuse of human rights which can have serious impacts on womenis health, well-being and livelihoods. Irish Aid has prioritised policy development, funding and research to address GBV and is playing a leadership role in the elimination of GBV in all its forms. We support initiatives to increase awareness of gender-based violence, and community based programmes to address behaviour change, for example through our support to Raising Voices, a Ugandan-based organisation which works to prevent violence against women and children. We also support the Irish Consortium on Gender-based Violence [ICGBV], a unique entity made up of Irish development and humanitarian NGOs, the Irish Defence Forces and Irish Aid. The Consortium aims to increase knowledge and understanding of violence against women and girls and build leadership to support the vision of a world free from gender-based violence [SDG 5.2, 5.3].

Ireland is recognised as a leading advocate of United Nations Security Council [UNSC] Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security [WPS], which reflects our rich tradition in the areas of humanitarian assistance and development co-operation in fragile contexts, peacekeeping and conflict resolution, including on the island of Ireland. The priority we attach to the WPS agenda is in recognition of the fact that when women are included in peace processes there is a 35% increase in the probability of an agreement lasting at least 15 years. In 2015, Ireland launched its second National Action Plan [NAP] on Women, Peace and Security. A key commitment of our NAP on Women, Peace and Security is to support the protection women and girls in humanitarian crises, including those crises arising from conflict has and we target our our support to ensure the protection of women and girls is effectively addressed in humanitarian operations [SDG 5.2, 5.3].

As part of its active engagement in the OECD DAC network on Gender Equality [Gendernet] Ireland supported the development of a key Policy Paper on Gender equality and womenis empowerment in frag\0x2260ile and conflict-affected situations [October 2017], which assessed how donors can improve the quality of their gender equality and womenis empowerment programming in fragile situations. The Policy Paper stresses the need for a shift in perspective towards a more holistic approach for development partners that is deeper, wider, and more politically informed, with a strong focus on women as agents of change [SDG 5.5].

In partnership with UNESCO, Ireland supports the delivery of good quality comprehensive sexuality education that empowers adolescents and young people, and builds agency while developing the skills, knowledge, attitudes and competencies required for preventing HIV, reducing early and unintended pregnancies and eliminating gender-based violence [SDG 5.6].

Removing the legal and societal barriers faced by women limiting their access to and control over assets and resources is a component of Irelandis focus on womenis economic empowerment and of inclusive economic growth. Increasing the availability sex-disaggregated data is also key to ensure that access to services can be improved. [SDG 5A].












Voluntary National Review 2018	49

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 6: Clean Water and Sanitation

Irelandis performance under this Goal is mixed based on latest available EU and OECD data. The OECD, through its Better Life Initiative, places Ireland within the top tier of member countries in relation to freshwater abstractions, however this is based on 2009 data. Ireland is in the middle OECD tier in relation to renewable freshwater resources and, consistent with the OECD average, public satisfaction with local water quality has fallen slightly in the recent years. Based on EU SDG indicators, Ireland outperformed the EU average in relation to biochemical oxygen demand [BOD] in rivers in 2012, though failed to meet the threshold for the cleanest river category of less than 1.0 mg/L BOD. Ireland was also below the EU averages for Nitrate in groundwater and Phosphate in rivers. At 65%, Ireland was in 2014 in the bottom half of EU countries in terms of percentage of the population connected to at least secondary wastewater treatment. While Irelandis relatively low population density may mean that secondary treatment may not be necessary for all settlements, as many will be small and scattered, there is still room for improvement. EU data also indicates that some 0.2% of the Irish population have neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household which, while surprising in the first instance, is the fifth best finding among the EU28.

The Irish Government acknowledges that, over the last decade, the quality of our water has stood still and that, as we face increasing demands on our water resources from a growing population and economy, it is essential that we take strong steps to protect and improve our water quality.

In this context the Government launched the River Basin Management Plan [RBMP] for Ireland 2018-2021 in April 2018. The RBMP outlines the measures the State and other sectors will take to improve water quality in Irelandis groundwater, rivers, lakes, estuarine and coastal waters in the period to 2021. The Government aims to protect and improve water quality in 726 of Irelandis 4,829 water bodies over the next four years. The Plan responds to requirements under the EUis Water Framework Directive [WFD] [SDG 6.1-6.6].

Amongst the Planis main commitments are:

Planned investment by Irish Water [the national Water Utility] of approximately \0xC41.7 billion in waste water infrastructure and projects in 255 urban areas by the end of 2021 n protecting both the environment and public health.

Deployment of 43 specialist local authority investigative assessment personnel, who will carry out scientific assessments of water bodies and drive the implementation of measures at a local level.

A new Agricultural Sustainability Support and Advisory Programme, a partnership between the State and the dairy industry, consisting of 30 Sustainability Advisers. Advisers will engage collaboratively with farmers to promote agricultural best practice across the dairy sector in 190 targeted \0xEBareas for actioni. The programme will provide advice and support to farmers, facilitating knowledge transfer and encouraging behavioural change as the cornerstone of the drive towards better farming practice and water quality [SDG 6.3]. The initiative will complement agri-environment measures under the Rural Development Programme, the Nitrates Action Programme and the National Dairy Sustainability Forum.






50 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









A \0xEBBlue Dot Catchments Programmei, a programme to create awareness, promote best practice and focus efforts and resources to protect Irelandis highest quality waters [SDG 6.6], vital to the Irish environment and our national tourism and recreation sectors.

Greater focus on protecting drinking water sources in over 700 public and private drinking water supplies [SDG 6.1] and \0xC473 million per year in investment by Irish Water to reduce leakage, saving 61 million m3 of water each year [similar to total non-domestic water demand in the Greater Dublin Area every year]. This has the effect of reducing the leakage rate of drinking water produced from 45% to 38%.

A Community Water Development Fund to support community initiatives to improve water quality. The fund will be administered by the newly-established Local Authority Waters and Communities Office [LAWCO]. LAWCO consists of Community Water Officers located across the country who are already working with the public, communities and stakeholders on measures to improve local water quality.

Supporting the SDG Globally

Ireland recognises that affordable and sustainable access to clean water and sanitation is a key public health and development issue. Irelandis primary mechanism for support under this goal is the GEMS/Water, a unique global water quality monitoring network operating in 125 countries around the world, which provides water quality data to

a central database known as GEMStat. GEMS/Water was established in 1978 in response to a recommendation made at the 1972 Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment as an interagency programme under the auspices of the United Nations through the United Nations Environment Programme [UNEP], the WHO, the World Meteorological Organisation [WMO], and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation [UNESCO]. In November 2014, the Government of Ireland, through its Environment and Foreign Ministries, agreed to provide support for the capacity development element of the GEMS/Water programme [further details in text box 4.4] [SDG 6.1].

The promotion of Community Led Total Sanitation [CLTS] is another global initiative

which Ireland supports. Among the significant benefits of this approach is that communities understand that open defecation results in the contamination of their local environment including water sources. With CLTS implementation, countries with endemic diseases such as cholera, typhoid and other enteric diseases have demonstrated tremendous reductions in incidence of water and sanitation related diseases. For example, using this approach, incidents of water and sanitation related disease reduced by 50% in Kenyais Nyando District.

At country level, Ireland has supported the work of the Liberia WASH Consortium, which is made up of five international NGOs including Oxfam GB, Tearfund, Concern Worldwide, Action Contre la Faim [ACF] and Water Aid. The overall objective of the WASH Consortium is to contribute to the improvement of the health status of Liberians in cooperation with the Government of Liberiais development plans and goals. It aims to support the re-establishment and building up of government preventive health services and deliver water, sanitation and public health projects through a single, coordinated, integrated strategy [SDG 6.1, 6.2, 6B].





Voluntary National Review 2018	51

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Text box 4.4

GEMS/Water Capacity Development Centre

The GEMS/Water Capacity Development Centre was established in 2015 and is a Centre of the School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences and Environmental Research Institute of University College Cork. The functions of the Centre are to promote and support water quality monitoring and assessment on behalf of UNEP and in co-operation with UN Water and its thematic priority area of Water Quality.

A primary objective of GEMS/Water is to ensure compatibility and comparability of data for use in national, regional and global assessments. The Centre encourages a standardised approach to water quality data generation through providing guidance and training on all aspects of water quality monitoring and assessment and quality assurance of monitoring activities. Centre staff liaise closely with the GPCU in Nairobi, the GEMS/Water Data Centre, UNEP Regional Offices and regional GEMS/ Water partners to identify capacity needs at regional and national levels, to provide appropriate support, and to develop training for delivery in-situ and online in countries all over the world.

The key elements of the activities of the Centre over the next five years are:

1. Carrying out a detailed training needs assessment for water quality monitoring in Sub-Saharan Africa and the development of a training strategy to meet those needs;

2. Working closely with UN Environment Regional Offices and GEMS/Water

National Focal Points to prepare capacity development strategies for the other world regions;

3. Development of training materials for face to face and online delivery in partnership with GEMS/Water Regional Hubs, focusing initially on the Latin American and Caribbean Regions together with the National Water Agency [ANA] in Brazil;

4. Organisation and delivery of workshops and provision of expert advice on monitoring programme design and implementation in Africa and other world regions as required;

5. Development of a suite of technical training courses on water quality monitoring and assessment available in a variety of delivery modes, with a particular focus on initial implementation in Africa and then to all regions online;

6. Tailor-made training and assistance in the Centre;

7. Development of a \0xECtraining the trainers programme to be delivered globally in a blended learning format;

8. Updating and production of appropriate guidebooks and handbooks to accompany training courses.







52 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

The EU SDG indicators relate to energy consumption, energy supply and access to affordable energy. Irelandis performance under these indicators is mixed relative to other EU countries. The decrease in primary energy consumption in Ireland in 2015 relative to 2000 was below the EU average, however Irelandis decrease in final energy consumption [which only covers the energy consumed by end users], again in 2015 relative to 2000, was above the EU average. In terms of final energy consumption in households per capita, Ireland was above the EU average in 2015 but again has achieved reductions relative to year 2000 levels. Ireland had the highest level of energy productivity within the EU in 2015. Irelands share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption was also below the EU average in 2015 and the countryis level of energy dependence in 2015 was significantly above the EU average. In terms of energy affordability, the percentage of the Irish population unable to keep their home adequately warm was marginally below the EU average in 2015 [and improved significantly in 2016]. Irelandis energy consumption and supply is considered in greater detail in the paragraph below.

Ireland had the fourth highest rate of energy import dependency (85.3%) among the EU Member States in 2014, mainly in fossil energy. This dependency is both expensive (\0xC45.7 billion in 2014) and environmentally unsustainable. However, overall energy use in Ireland has declined since its peak in 2008. While this was primarily linked to the economic recession, there is evidence of increasing energy efficiency. There was also an increased use of renewable energy in this period. As Ireland returns to prosperity, decoupling of economic growth from increasing energy use needs to be accelerated. Irelandis principal energy requirements

arise from transport, accounting for 35% of the total, and residential heating and electricity, accounting for 25%. Decarbonisation of energy use in the transport sector is a key challenge. Fossil energy makes up about 90% of Irelandis energy use profile, of which oil (at 47%) remains the dominant fossil energy used, primarily for heating and transport. Overall trends in the use of various fossil energy sources vary, but there is a general decrease in fossil energy use and the use of renewable energy is growing, albeit from a very low base.

Irelandis full energy policy is set out in the Government White Paper \0xEBIrelandis Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 2015-2030i. The paper takes into account European and International climate change objectives and agreements, as well as Irish social, economic and employment priorities. As we progress towards a low carbon energy system, this policy update will ensure secure supplies of competitive and affordable energy to our citizens and businesses. It sets a vision of a radical transformation of Irelandis energy system which is required to meet our sustainable energy and climate policy objectives. This transformation sets out a pathway to achieving a low carbon energy system by 2050.

The policy direction looks to accelerate the transition to a low carbon economy in a cost efficient manner by prioritising the use of energy efficiency measures across all sectors in society, by increasing our use of renewable energy sources and by reducing over time our dependence on fossil fuels.

It is a transformation that is already underway. But, like other nations, we need to intensify our efforts to combat the impact of global warming and to make sustainability the very foundation of our energy policy and that while doing so we will maintain stability, affordability, and security of supply.


Voluntary National Review 2018	53

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









The policy framework gives a particular importance to energy efficiency, which will be at the centre of our energy transition. New technologies like smart meters, heat pumps, and mobile connectivity will allow citizens to boost energy efficiency and save money by managing and reducing their energy use. Government will support the installation of energy efficiency systems in homes, businesses and the broader public sector.

We will accelerate the development and diversification of renewable energy generation. New technologies, services, energy network architectures and community-based energy initiatives will emerge to facilitate and drive the energy transition. A low carbon future will involve: radically changing our behaviour as citizens, industry and Government, becoming more energy efficient, generating our electricity from renewable sources of which we have a plentiful indigenous supply, moving to lower emissions fuels [e.g. moving away from peat and coal to lower emission generation sources], and ultimately away from fossil fuels altogether, increasing our use of electricity and bioenergy to heat our homes and fuel our transport, increasing the Biofuels Obligation and improving take-up of zero and low carbon vehicles such as electric and natural gas vehicles, supporting the wide scale deployment of renewable heat in the business, public and residential sectors and adopting new technologies as they emerge. Irelandis EU 2020 renewable energy target is to increase the share of final energy consumption made up of renewable energy sources [RES] to 16%. This target is broken into three key sectors with individual targets for each sector: 40% of electricity supply [RES-E], 12% of heating [RES-H], and 10% of transport [RES-T]. Ireland also has a target of a 20% improvement in energy efficiency by 2020.

Ireland will further develop a coordinated energy security policy, which encourages diversification of energy supplies and facilitates more integrated energy markets, through our membership of the EU and the International Energy Agency [IEA]. Achieving our sustainable energy goals, and having fully integrated and well-functioning markets,
will play the central role in delivering our energy security.

A new National Affordable Energy Strategy was published in 2016 [SDG 7.1]. It outlines a new methodology for measuring and reporting energy poverty, actions to improve energy efficiency in the rental sector, measures to ensure better quality services to energy customers and a new pilot scheme for deep energy upgrades for people suffering from certain chronic health conditions. The new strategy maintains the objective set out in the first Government strategy on affordable energy, published in 2011, that everyone should be able to afford to adequately heat and power their home. It also reflects the progress made in understanding the nature of energy poverty in Ireland, along with the views received from a stakeholder consultation exercise on energy poverty conducted
in February 2015.

The National Development Plan 2017-2027 published in February 2018 includes Transition to a Low Carbon and Climate-Resilient Society as one of its 10 strategic priorities and allocates some \0xC420 billion in capital funding for energy efficiency, renewable energy and energy security projects over the next 10 years [SDG 7.1, SDG 7.2 and SDG
13.2]. Specifically, these projects will include:

u Investment in energy efficiency, with upgrades to homes increasing from 30,000 to 45,000 per annum from 2021 to achieve a minimum BER Rating \0xEBBi.

u Investments in energy efficiency of existing commercial and public building stock with a target of all public buildings and at least one-third of total commercial premises upgraded to BER Rating \0xEBBi.

54 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









u Supports for changing out oil-fired boilers to heat pumps, along with the provision of roof solar, in at least 170,000 homes.

u New Renewable Electricity Support Scheme to support up to 4,500 megawatts of additional renewable electricity by 2030.

u Energy research funding to accelerate diversification away from fossil fuels to green energy, including wind, wave, solar, biomass, biofuels, biogas and hydrogen. Full roll-out of the new Support Scheme for Renewable Heat.

u Enhanced electricity interconnection, including the Celtic Interconnector to France and further interconnection to the UK.

Text box 4.5


Warmth and Well-being Case Study

The Warmth and Well-being scheme is a joint pilot initiative between the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and the Department of Health. The scheme is being delivered under the Governmentis Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty and the Healthy Ireland Framework. The main aim of the scheme, which began in 2016, is to demonstrate the positive effects that making homes warmer and more energy efficient can have on the health and well-being of people in energy poverty who are living with chronic respiratory conditions.

The Warmth and Well-being pilot scheme is a new departure for climate, energy and health policy. It seeks to achieve energy and climate change policy objectives through actions taken in the health policy area. It also seeks to demonstrate that direct action on housing as the key determinant of health can improve an individualis health and well-being. This is an innovative way of improving health and well-being by improving the environment in which people live.




Laura Ball, homeowner and beneficiary of the Warmth and Well-being scheme; Geraldine McCullagh, Senior Occupational Therapist, HSE; Katherine Zappone, TD, Minister for Children and Youth Affairs; Denis Naughten TD, Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment


















Voluntary National Review 2018	55

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets










Spanning two very different policy areas, the success of this scheme is dependent on effective collaboration. The Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and the Department of Health have worked together to align policy objectives and energy and clinical eligibility criteria, while the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland and the national HSE work closely on the ground to recruit and support participants based on clinical need and the condition of their homes.

In total to date, 534 homes have received upgrades under the scheme, with an average cost of \0xC415,700 per home. The upgrades have meant a significant improvement in the condition of the home and, anecdotally, in the quality of life of the occupants as well as associated energy savings and emissions reductions.

An independent analysis is being carried out to assess the health and well-being impact of the scheme. At the conclusion of the scheme and with independent evidence on its effectiveness, the potential for a wider rollout will be considered. The scheme is examining how extensive energy efficiency upgrades to homes can improve the health and well-being of people with respiratory disease who live in cold, damp conditions and are in or at risk of energy poverty.


Supporting the SDGs Globally

Ireland is committed to supporting developing countries in their transition from the inefficient use of traditional energy supplies towards the use of modern, cleaner sources of energy, such as solar energy and energy efficient cook stoves. A number of small scale pilot projects have been supported to explore off grid household energy solutions for rural communities in Sub-Saharan Africa, and offer options to be considered for scale-up as part of an overall energy solution [SDG 7.1].

For example, the Irish Embassy in Malawi are working with United Purpose to pilot an innovative model for delivering sustainable energy technologies to the poorest households in Malawi. Using the National Social Cash Transfer [SCT] system operating in the country, recipients of cash transfers also receive a free energy efficient cook-stove, while local production groups are supported to sell the same stoves to all other types of households. Initial findings from research conducted by the International Institute for Environment and Development [IIED], as part of Irelandis Climate and Development Learning Platform, indicates the stoves have been successful in enabling access and uptake by the poorest households to sustainable sources of energy. In addition, through using the cook stoves, households have been able to reduce their firewood requirements, and therefore reduce deforestation, with findings indicating a total saving by households using the cook stoves of 8.7 tons of wood fuel per day, or 3,177 tons per year [SDG 7.3].















56 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









In addition to Malawi, programmes on renewable energy have also been supported through Irelandis Embassies in Vietnam and Uganda. In Uganda, the Irish Embassy was the first to go carbon neutral, off-setting its emissions through supporting smallholder tree planting initiatives and supporting users of improved cook-stoves, purchasing carbon credits from such initiatives. Due to such support, Ugandan Irish Embassy staff were also provided with energy efficient cook stoves to promote the adoption of green practices at home as well as in the office.

Ireland has jointly signed [with the European Commission, relevant Member States and other partners], the Energy Joint Declarations of Intent with Mozambique and Zambia, under the Africa Renewable Energy Initiative [AREI]. AREI is an African-led renewable energy initiative that has the goal of bringing energy access to all communities across Africa, including through small-scale, distributed, locally-controlled renewable energy systems. The Declarations of Intent commit Ireland, alongside EU Member States, to provide technical assistance and technical knowledge transfer, assist in the development of off-grid solutions to complement or improve rural electrification efforts, and to help identify and bring forward relevant energy projects to increase access to clean, renewable and sustainable energy sources. Irelandis Minister for Communications, Climate Action and the Environment signed the Declarations on behalf of Ireland on the 16th of November 2016, during the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change [UNFCCC] 22nd Conference of Parties [COP22] [SDG 7A].









































Voluntary National Review 2018	57

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth

The EU SDG indicators for this Goal mainly focus on employment data within Member States. Irelandis total employment rate was above the EU average and the number of Irish young people neither in employment nor in any education and training was in line with the EU average in 2017. Long-term unemployment in Ireland more than halved between 2011 and 2017, and is now marginally below the EU average. Involuntary temporary employment in Ireland was below the EU average in 2017, both in total and disaggregated for women and men. Regarding safety at work in Ireland, fatal accidents at work were, on a per capita basis, above the EU average in 2015. This could be due to the relatively large share of employment within the agricultural sector in Ireland, as this sector is characterised by a higher prevalence of workplace accidents across the EU.

It should be noted that the EU SDG indicators for this Goal must be caveated in relation to Ireland, in particular, in relation to economic growth.

Notwithstanding the well-known limitations with GDP and GNP in an Irish context, it is clear that the economic expansion has been very strong in recent years. This is particularly evident in the labour market which is rapidly approaching full employment. Importantly, following a number of years of rebalancing, the composition of economic activity is also more sustainable, with all sectors positively contributing to growth.

Modified domestic demand n that is excluding volatile components of multinational investment such as aircraft and intellectual property n has made a very strong contribution to growth in recent years and now exceeds the pre-crisis peak. For instance, modified domestic demand has increased by around 5 per cent on average over the 2014-2017 period.

On foot of the exceptional growth rate recorded in 2015, as well as the growing disconnect between standard macroeconomic aggregates and actual income levels, an Economic Statistics Review Group was established by the Central Statistics Office in 2016. The remit of the Group was to advise on alternative measures that would provide better indicators of economic trends in Ireland.

One of the key recommendations of the Group was for the CSO to develop a new indicator of the size of the economy that excludes globalisation activities that have a disproportionate impact on the Irish national accounts. In July 2017, the CSO published an alternative measure of the size of the economy, so-called \0xEBmodified Gross National Incomei [sometimes called GNI*]. This aggregate is equal to GNI but excludes the retained earnings of redomiciled companies, depreciation of foreign-owned intellectual property assets located in Ireland and the depreciation of aircraft owned by aircraft-leasing companies.

On a nominal basis, GNI* amounted to \0xC4189bn in 2016 compared with \0xC4276bn for Gross Domestic Product [GDP]. GNI* has increased by over 9% on average over the 2013-2016 period in nominal terms.

The latest available labour market figures nationally [Q4 2017] show that Irelandis total employment rate was 68.3% and its long-term unemployment rate was 2.5%. The latest monthly unemployment figures estimate youth unemployment at 12% in April 2018.

Some 115,000 people were classified as underemployed in Ireland in Q4 2017. The Irish unemployment rate for April 2018 is estimated to be 5.9% and Ireland is approaching full employment [SDG 8.5].



58 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Ireland recognises that sound and sustainable economic growth is essential to enable us to meet our SDG commitments as a whole. In order to sustain per capita economic growth over the medium and long-term, Ireland through its Department of Finance will continue to promote policies that enhance the growth capacity in our economy and ensure the long-term sustainability of our public finances [SDG 8.1]. Ireland has already taken a number of measures over the last number of years to rebalance the taxation system and enhance the capacity in the economy. In particular the introduction of a new earned income tax credit for the self-employed will incentivise increased participation in the labour market. Ireland has also adopted a range of measures designed to ensure that Small and Medium sized Enterprises [SMEs] have the access to funding required to support continued growth, including the rollout of an Export Finance Initiative and the introduction of a risk-sharing Counter Guarantee Scheme [SDG8.3]. Ireland will also continue to promote openness to trade and investment over the coming years. A cornerstone of our ability to attract Foreign Direct Investment [FDI] has been our competitive and stable corporate tax rate. In order to maintain this competitive advantage and attract FDI investment the corporate tax rate will be maintained at 12.5%.

Ensuring the long-term sustainability of our public finances is key to maintaining economic growth and improving living standards. Enhancing the reliance of our public finances places our economy in a better position to withstand the impact of unexpected shocks. Through prudent management of our public finances over the last number of years, our economy

is now closing in on a balanced budget. To help safeguard our public finances in particular from 2019 onwards, an annual contribution of \0xC4500 million will be allocated to a \0xEBrainy day fundi. This measure will ensure a sustainable fiscal buffer is in place in the event of an economic downturn.

Continued sustainable economic growth and job creation will help to support a wide range of SDGs. In particular, they will ensure that the resources are available to meet our objectives under Goal 9 to build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation. Meeting this Goal will be mutually reinforcing, as it will enhance the potential output in the economy, further supporting sustained growth in the economy.

Irelandis response to significant increases in unemployment as a result of the economic downturn has been through the Action Plan for Jobs [APJ], which was initiated in 2011 and launched in 2012 as a national programme to rebuild the Irish economy and create jobs.

Since initiation of the APJ, top priorities for the programme have been:

1. To support creation of 200,000 additional jobs by 2020

2. To get Ireland to a top-five ranking in international competitiveness

3. To stimulate the domestic economy and generate employment in locally traded sectors

4. To build an indigenous engine of growth that drives up the export market share of Irish companies

5. To build world-class clusters in key sectors of opportunity








Voluntary National Review 2018	59

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Overall, the program has been a success in terms of employment outcomes [from 1.9 million employed and 16% unemployment in 2012 to 2.2 million employed Q4 2017 and 5.9% unemployment in April 2018]. The programme has also been recognised for the performance monitoring and accountability mechanism that was created to drive implementation and reforms, which has achieved on schedule completion of approximately 90% of nearly 3,000 actions between 2012 and 2016.

Successive APJis were released each year from 2013 to 2018. Each APJ includes a list of hundreds of Measures mapped to 7-10 key Priorities, which must be completed by the 16 Government Departments and 46 Agencies to accomplish the Governmentis job creation and reform objectives. The first plan contained 270 actions to be implemented by the end of 2012.

Since the first APJ, Sector Opportunities has been one of the priorities with key actions in an assortment of focus sectors. Beginning in the 2013 APJ, the Government developed cross sector Disruptive Reforms requiring whole-of-Government coordination. Examples of disruptive reforms were creation of incentives for companies to hire the long-term unemployed, expanding e-commerce participation of retailers, strengthening overseas support for exporters, investing in big data, and launching of a one-stop shop government licensing portal. Emphasis on regional growth and distributed employment and investment outcomes became a focus in 2015 once the APJ had matured and already gained significant traction.

Ireland has in place a robust suite of employment rights legislation. Further legislation is in train to provide greater certainty to employees with precarious working conditions including the difficulties caused by the increasing casualisation of work and use of zero hoursi contracts. The enforcement of employment rights rests with the Workplace Relations Commission [WRC]. The WRC is an independent statutory body established in October 2015 following a major overhaul of Irelandis workplace relations infrastructure with the goal of delivering a world class workplace relations service. The WRC plays a crucial role in Irelandis ongoing economic development through supporting employers and employees in the resolution of workplace issues facilitating a healthy competitive environment based on fairness for all.

The Health and Safety Authority is the national statutory body with responsibility for ensuring that all workers [employed and self-employed] and those affected by work activity are protected from work related injury and ill-health. They do this by enforcing occupational health and safety law in line with the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005, promoting accident prevention, and providing information and advice across all sectors, including retail, healthcare, manufacturing, fishing, entertainment, mining, construction, agriculture and food services [SDG 8.8].

The Second National Action Plan to Prevent and Combat Human Trafficking in Ireland concentrates on the elimination of all forms of trafficking human beings, including forced labour and criminality. Increased training of frontline personnel has aided in the discovery of higher numbers of victims of labour exploitation in recent years. The Planis actions on eradicating trafficking for labour exploitation are focused on demand reduction, training, and continued support for programmes to assist victims of forced or child labour [SDG 8.7].






60 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









The EUis Youth Guarantee aims to provide young people under the age of 25 with a good quality offer of employment, continued education, an apprenticeship or a traineeship within a short time of becoming unemployed. Ireland has adopted its own national plan to implement the Youth Guarantee, Pathways to Work [SDG 8.6]. While youth unemployment has fallen in Ireland, and is now below the EU average, it remains high and will continue ongoing measures to reduce it.

The Department of Children and Youth Affairs operated a Youth Employability Initiative in 2016. The programmes assisted almost one thousand young people aged 15 to 24 years to build skills that enhanced their employability. A review of the initiative will inform the development of a new employability scheme, to be unveiled in 2018.

The overall current expenditure budget for the youth sector in 2017 is just under \0xC460m. The Youth Work budget supports the delivery of a range of youth work programmes and services for all young people, including those from disadvantaged communities, by the voluntary youth work sector.

Overall, over 80% of funding is allocated to targeted youth services, which support, in the main, the targeted programmes for young people who are at risk of drugs or alcohol misuse, homelessness, unemployment or early school leaving. These schemes are:

u Special Projects for Youth n Grant-aid is made available in respect of out-of-school projects for disadvantaged young people. Priority is given to projects in the spheres of special youth work initiatives, young homeless people, young people at risk of substance abuse and young travellers.

u Young Peoples Facilities and Services Fund n This fund was established by the Government to assist in the development of preventative strategies in a targeted manner through the development of youth facilities, including sports and recreational facilities, and services in disadvantaged areas where a significant drug problem exists or has the potential to develop.

u Youth Information Centres n The purpose of these Centres is to provide young people with access to information on rights, opportunities, benefits, health, welfare and other matters.

u Local Drug Task Force projects nThese projects, which target young people under the various pillars of the National Drugs Strategy, provide a range of supports for young people by way of targeted drug prevention and awareness programmes as well as referrals.

Innovation 2020 [SDG 8.2] is Irelandis strategy for research and development, science and technology, and was launched in 2015. Implementation of the strategy is also driven by a cross Government Implementation Group comprising the members of the Interdepartmental Committee and all public research funding agencies.

Innovation 2020 includes a focus on Innovation for Social Progress and recognises that innovation is key to our social development. The strategy takes account of Irelandis commitments under the SDGs, and that, \0xECover the coming decades, we will face profound challenges, and innovation and research will be centre-stage in developing our national responses.






Voluntary National Review 2018	61

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Innovation 2020 contains a series of actions to promote research and innovation in areas such as:

u sustainable and efficient natural resource management;

u the continued decarbonisation of the energy fuel mix, the development of indigenous energy supplies, and the move towards sustainability;

u research for policy to develop integrated approaches to addressing the challenges that arise from climate change, air and water quality and other environmental issues; and

u the sustainable development of Irelandis marine sector.

A Resource Opportunity 2012, Irelandis National Waste Prevention Programme addresses the need to achieve higher resource efficiency and decouple economic growth from environmental degradation [SDG 8.4].

Tourism is a hugely important indigenous economic sector in Ireland. In total, it was worth an estimated \0xC48.4 billion to the Irish economy in 2016, almost 4% of GNP. Government policy on tourism is set out in the Tourism Policy Statement n People, Place and Policy: Growing Tourism to 2025 [SDG 8.9]. This Policy was adopted by Government in early 2015, before the adoption of the SDGs. The Policy identifies a number of principles, many of which recognise the importance of social, environmental and economic sustainability. For example, in adopting the policy the Government agreed that:

u It will place tourism as a key element of its economic strategy, with development in the tourism sector reflecting the highest standards of environmental and economic sustainability, and the role of tourism in promoting peace and political co-operation on the island of Ireland will continue to be recognised and encouraged.

u Our heritage assets will be protected, and any public investment in tourism will be based on evidenced need.

A new Tourism Action Plan to cover the period 2018-2020 will be developed in 2018. This will identify further actions necessary to develop the tourism industry out to 2025 and, in doing so, will formally take account of the SDGs.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

The promotion of inclusive and sustainable economic growth is one Irelandis high-level goals for international development and a key policy priority. This means that Ireland works strategically across the SDGs to advance economic growth which benefits poor people and is environmentally sustainable.

At a multilateral level, Ireland has supported the major international organisations involved in trade-related technical assistance and capacity building. We provided support to two World Trade Organisation [WTO] programmes supporting better health standards to improve market access and trade negotiation capacity for developing countries [SDG 8.1].











62 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









With the ILO, Ireland is supporting a programme on employment intensive investment ensuring that public and private investment deliver decent jobs for people. This programme supports employment opportunities for poor and vulnerable people, contributing to decent work in target countries that include a number of Irelandis key partners [Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Vietnam] [SDG 8.3, 8.5].

In Mozambique, Ireland is supporting the World Bank in assisting the Ministry for Industry and Commerce to improve the enabling environment for business by removing barriers to business activity. Similarly, Ireland has assisted the creation of an accountancy training body in Mozambique, in partnership with the Institute of Certified Public Accountants

of Ireland, developing an essential human resource base for both the public and private sectors [SDG 8.3].

Irelandis support to vocational education in Uganda builds on our commitment to invest in skills development and employment opportunities for the growing youth population in Africa [SDG 8.6].

Ireland is committed to making a meaningful contribution to end Human Trafficking globally. Irish Aid has provided funding to ECPAT [End Child Prostitution and Trafficking [International] since 2010. This work currently supports a project in Thailand which aims to enhance effectiveness in combating sexual exploitation of children through an expanded and stronger network based on a multi-stakeholder and multi-sectoral approach. We also support missionary orders in Africa, Asia and South America, many of whom have a long-term commitment to work against human trafficking [SDG 8.7].

In June 2017, Ireland was elected to the Governing Body of the ILO as a full member in Geneva for a three year term. It is the first time Ireland has been a full member of the Governing Body of the ILO since joining the Organisation in 1923. Ireland will use this platform to positively influence international labour law [SDG 8.8].
































Voluntary National Review 2018	63

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 9: Industry, Innovation, Infrastructure

The EU SDG indicators for Goal 9 focus mainly on R&D levels and other knowledge intensive sectors in Member States and consider sustainable infrastructure from the perspective of transport.

As a percentage of GDP. Irelandis gross domestic expenditure on R&D is below the EU average for 2017, but this must be considered in light of the limitations of using GDP to measure Irish economic activity [see discussion under SDG8]. The Irish rate of employment in high- and medium-high technology manufacturing sectors and knowledge-intensive service sectors and the number of R&D personnel as a percentage of the total workforce, are both above the EU average. On a per capita basis, Irish patent applications to the European Patent Office [EPO] were below the EU average. However the EU average is impacted by the large numbers of applications from more industrially orientated Member States. The latest Eurostat figures show that in 2014 Ireland was ranked 11th out of the

EU-28 in terms of number of patent applications to the EPO per millions of population. Collective transport modes [buses, coaches, trains, excluding trams] account for a share of total [Irish] passenger land transport above the EU average. However Irelandis share of rail and inland waterways activity as a percentage of total freight transport is extremely low relative to other EU countries.

Innovation 2020 is Irelandis strategy for research and development, science

and technology. A key target in the strategy is a commitment to increase public and private investment in research to reach Irelandis intensity target of 2.5% of GNP by 2020 [SDG 9.5.1]. Irelandis R&D intensity rate was 1.52% of GNP in 2015 and 1.43% in 2016. The fall back is due to Irelandis significant GDP/GNP growth in 2015 of 26.3%/18.7%. Public Expenditure on R&D increased from \0xC4727 million in 2014 to an estimated \0xC4768 million in 2017, the highest since 2011. A further target in the strategy is to increase the number of research personnel in enterprise from 25,000 in 2013 to 40,000 by 2020 [SDG 9.5.2]. The most recent figures show there were 26,336 personnel in enterprise in 2015.

Innovation 2020 also commits to adopting a challenge-centric approach by focusing on research that has the potential to address national and global challenges.

Research Prioritisation was introduced in 2012 to align the majority of competitively awarded public research funding with areas that deliver economic and societal impact. Innovation 2020 contains a commitment to review and refresh the priority areas in the light of changed circumstances, taking into consideration recent and likely future advances in science and technology. A key criterion in determining the priority areas is that the area represents an appropriate approach to a recognised national challenge and/or a global challenge to which Ireland should respond.

A comprehensive review of the themes and priority areas was undertaken and published in March 2018. The refreshed priority areas that have regard to the SDGs include Health and Well-being; Energy, Climate Action and Sustainability; and Smart and Sustainable Food Production [SDG 9.5].









64 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









As a small, open economy, Ireland relies on external demand and international markets for sustainable and continued growth. The market for innovation and research is also global n international cooperation in research and innovation plays an important role in the development and sustainability of a world-class innovation and research system.

One of the main priorities of Innovation 2020, is to continue to facilitate, develop and exploit global research cooperation, and to strengthen our networks with global partners to seek solutions to shared societal problems and to pursue innovation for economic and social development. Irelandis membership of several key International Research Organisations supports this aim.

Our current engagement at EU level focuses on maximising Irish participation in the EUis Horizon 2020 programme and our involvement in the European Research Area. Ireland will participate in negotiations for the successor programme to Horizon 2020, Framework Programme 9 and has indicated in advance that the SDGs should be adopted as the preferred framework for selecting missions.

We also have bilateral intergovernmental agreements with a number of countries, and Irelandis embassy network will continue to seek opportunities for cooperation with third countries, particularly those with strong education and research links to Ireland.

Enterprise 2025 Renewed, Irelandis national enterprise strategy, has a strategic vision for Ireland to be the best place to succeed in business delivering sustainable employment and higher standards of living for all. The strategy aims, inter alia, to increase the number of Irish owned companies and increase the level of indigenous Irish exports, as well as increasing the share of indigenous export to markets other than the United Kingdom. The focus is on supporting the productive sector, enhancing Irelandis relative competitiveness, leveraging existing comparative advantage in key sectors, addressing structural issues in the economy, improving productivity and our capacity to innovate. [SDG 9.2]

Enterprise Ireland is the Irish Government agency responsible for support of indigenous exporting companies. The creation of jobs in clients of the agencies has been crucial, as the success of these companies has a large multiplier effect, which leads to additional domestic market jobs creation in other sectors such as construction, retail, food and beverage, professional services, etc.

The Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland [SBCI] was launched in 2014 to to ensure access to flexible funding for Irish SMEs by facilitating the provision of:

u Flexible products with longer maturity and capital repayment flexibility, subject to credit approval;

u Lower cost funding to financial institutions, the benefit of which is passed on to SMEs;

u Market access for new entrants to the SME lending market, creating real competition.

SCBI funding is available to SMEs through both bank and non-bank specialist on-lenders.

The release of long-term funds by promotional [or state-backed] financial institutions, through frontline [or traditional] finance providers, is a successful and effective model for funding SMEs throughout Europe.




Voluntary National Review 2018	65

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









The SBCI is currently working with non-bank financial institutions [such as leasing and invoice discounting providers] to expand the range of products available for the Irish SME sector in order to deliver choice and competition [SDG 9.3].

Irelandis latest NDP was launched in February 2018 and sets out the investment priorities for the next decade. This will guide national, regional and local planning and investment decisions in Ireland over the next two decades to cater for an expected population increase of over 1 million people. The NDP demonstrates the Governmentis commitment to meeting Irelandis infrastructure and investment needs over the next ten years, through

a total investment estimated at \0xC4116 billion over the period. This represents a very substantial commitment of resources and is expected to move Ireland close to the top of the international league table for public investment. The NDP takes account of the social, economic, and environmental requirements of and for capital investment in Ireland through 10 National strategic outcomes [SDG 9.1, 9.4].

Supporting the SDGs Globally

In adopting the National Plan on Business and Human Rights in 2017, Ireland seeks to ensure that Irish businesses adhere to and promote human rights in their national and international operations including in developing countries. In the Irish Aid programme, there is increasing recognition of the need to ensure that sustainable industrialisation and the fostering of innovation are inclusive processes [SDG 9.1].

In Kenya, Ireland is providing support to the Kenyan investment agency, KenInvest, to establish a One Stop Centre for Foreign Direct Investment, a key industrialisation priority for the Kenyan Government. Key activities include the establishment of the One Stop Centre systems, a change management programme, and technical support to develop sector profiles for potential investors [SDG 9.2].

Ireland supports the ILO to provide technical support to partner governments to incorporate local employment generation as an objective within public expenditure programmes. Linked across SDG 8 and SDG 9, it also supports reform of investment policies, public procurement policies and the legal framework to increase participation of small scale enterprises and communities in the infrastructure delivery [SDG 9.3].

Irish Aid is known for investing in innovation through piloting new initiatives and through its research. Our Research Strategy emphasises the need to build the capacity to plan for, conduct and apply development research in key partner countries, and particularly through north-south research partnerships. Irelandis support to five Product Development Partnerships [PDPs] is leading to the development of new products to prevent HIV transmission and drugs to treat severe malaria and drug resistant tuberculosis. PDPs enhance scientific research, upgrade technological capabilities and increase the number of R&D workers in partnership with national research institutions and the private sector in developing health products, drugs and vaccines [SDG 9.5].












66 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries

The EU SDG indicators mainly focus on the level of economic variation between EU countries and also within those countries. Irelandis results relative to the rest of the EU are mixed with 2016 purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita in Ireland significantly above the EU average while Irelandis adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita is below the EU average. These differing results are likely in part a consequence of the significant level of inward investment in Ireland by multinational enterprises, whose income increases GDP but is not reflected in gross household disposable income. In addition, the household income data is from 2015 and does not reflect the impacts of ongoing economic recovery in subsequent years. More recent data may see this disparity narrowing. Internally, in terms of economic inequality, Ireland performs marginally better than the EU average measured by relative median at-risk-of-poverty gap, Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income, and income share of the bottom 40% of the population. Relative to other EU Member States, Ireland has received relatively few first-time extra-EU-28 asylum applications but both applications and accepted applications increased in 2016 compared to 2011 levels.

In relation the economic inequality and social exclusion, a successor to the current NAPInclusion is being developed at present. It is proposed that the new plan will be for the four year period 2018-2021. The primary focus of the plan will be the reduction of consistent poverty: improved/supported incomes to reduce the percentage of the population at-risk-of-poverty [below 60% of the median income] and increased access to quality services to reduce the percentage of the population experiencing deprivation and reduce the risk of poverty development [intergenerational poverty] [SDG 10.1, 10.4].

The EU indicators do not address the policy frameworks which address social, and political exclusion in Ireland. These would include the National Strategy for Women and Girls, the National Disability Inclusion Strategy, the National Traveller and Roma Inclusion Strategy and Migrant Integration Strategy. In 2015 Ireland was the first country in

the world to legalise marriage equality by way of popular vote, through a referendum which introduced the 34th Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland. Ireland is also currently developing a LGBTI+ National Youth Strategy, and is the first country to do so. Furthermore, plans are underway to develop a National LGBTI Inclusion Strategy for all ages. The Gender Recognition Act 2015 provides that a person can apply for a Gender Recognition Certificate in order to have their preferred gender recognised by the Irish State. The Gender Recognition Act allows all individuals over the age of 18 to self-declare their own gender identity [SDG 10.2].

In relation to legal frameworks the Equal Status Acts 2000-2015 prohibit discrimination in the provision of goods and services, accommodation and education in Ireland. They cover the nine grounds of gender, marital status, family status, age disability, sexual orientation, race, religion, and membership of the Traveller community. In addition, the Acts prohibit discrimination in the provision of [housing] accommodation services against people

who are in receipt of various social welfare payments. The Acts prohibit discrimination subject to some exemptions, in access to and use of goods and service, including indirect discrimination and discrimination by association, sexual harassment and harassment, and victimisation. The Acts allow positive action to promote equality for disadvantaged persons or to cater for the special needs of persons. Discriminatory advertising is also



Voluntary National Review 2018	67

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









prohibited. It is prohibited to publish, display or cause to be published or displayed, an advertisement which indicates an intention to discriminate, harass or sexually harass.

The Employment Equality Acts 1998-2011, on the basis of the nine grounds mentioned in the preceding paragraph, outlaw discrimination at work including in relation to recruitment and promotion, equal pay, working conditions, training or experience and dismissal, and harassment including sexual harassment [SDG 10.3].

The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission is Irelandis national human rights and equality institution. The Commission is an independent public body that is accountable to the Oireachtas [Irish Parliament], with a mandate established under the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission Act 2014. The Commissionis purpose is to protect and promote human rights and equality in Ireland, and build a culture of respect for human rights, equality and intercultural understanding in the State.

The Commission has a range of powers and functions to support this mandate. In undertaking its mandate, the Commission is obliged by section 10[3] of the Act to exercise its functions with a view to encouraging and supporting the development of a society in which:

u there is respect for and protection of each personis human rights,

u there is respect for the dignity and worth of each person,

u a personis ability to achieve his or her potential is not limited by prejudice, discrimination, neglect or prohibited conduct,

u each person has a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the economic, political, social or cultural life of the State, and

u there is mutual respect between persons, including classes of persons, based on a shared understanding of the value of diversity within society and on a shared respect for equality and human rights.

In line with Irelandis international and humanitarian obligations, Ireland continues to pursue a migration policy that facilitates the orderly, safe, regular and responsible movement of people, taking into account Irelandis economic needs, and the global migration situation. Ireland continues to operate its immigration system at a national level, while taking into account best practice from our EU partners. Ireland offers a number of pathways to legal migration, including labour migration, education, family reunification and international protection. Ireland offers a number of different migration schemes under labour migration, including a skills based employment permit system, operated by the Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation, and through bespoke schemes carried out by the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service, on behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality.















68 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Supporting the SDGs Globally

Our international development policy recognises that when economic growth is considered only in terms of increased GDP per capita, it can fail to account for trends in inequality within a country. Our approach to inclusive economic growth includes action in a number of areas including social protection, investment in agriculture, with a focus on staple crops and decent job creation in the industrial sector. Irish Aid is committed to working more strategically to advance sustainable and climate-sensitive economic growth that supports employment and incomes especially for those who most need it [SDG 10.1].

Within our bilateral aid programmes efforts are underway to ensure that our programmes address growing inequality across and within countries. In reporting on SDG 5, we refer to Irelandis focus on inclusive economic growth for women. Ireland also works to empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of people with disabilities. For example, in Ethiopia through our support to the Ethiopian Centre for Disability and Development, Ireland supports inclusive vocational training and employment for persons with disabilities. In Vietnam, Ireland supports several civil society organisations that work with people with disabilities on social inclusion, empowerment, health and early childhood detection of disabilities, as well as mine-related risks. We also support work on issues relating to disability through civil society organisations such as Christian Blind Mission [CBM], Sightsavers, Plan Ireland and Misean Cara [SDG 10.2].

The promotion and protection of LGBTI rights is a priority area for human rights advancement in Irelandis foreign policy and this commitment is reflected in The Global Island. Ireland is committed to promoting the rights of LGBTI individuals who continue to endure disproportionate levels of discrimination in many countries. This commitment is being delivered through our engagement at international human rights fora, notably at the UN and EU, and through our bilateral relations. We have strongly supported efforts to address this issue at the Human Rights Council and at the United National General Assembly Third Committee [SDG 10.2].






















Simon Coveney TD, T\0xB7naiste and Minister

for Foreign Affairs and Trade







Voluntary National Review 2018	69

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Ireland promotes social protection as an important policy instrument to reduce poverty and inequality as well as for promoting gender equality, better nutrition, and improved education and health outcomes. We also recognise social protection as a key tool to enhance the social status and rights of the marginalised, promoting accountability and strengthening the citizen-government bond. We currently support six partner countries to put in place social protection systems [SDG 10.4].

Through our membership of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group Ireland advocates for the continuing increase in developing country representation within these institutions [SDG 10.6].

Ireland is actively involved in discussions on international developments in migration policy, including the EUis ongoing response to the 2015 migration crisis and its aftermath, and the UNis Global Compact on Migration. Ireland operates free movement of people for European Economic Area [EEA] countries and Switzerland [SDG 10.7].


















































70 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities

Looking only at the EU SDG indicators for SDG 11, Irelandis performance under this Goal would be considered positive overall. 2015 data suggests Ireland has the fourth lowest rates of people living in overcrowded conditions among EU Member States. Ireland also had the lowest percentage of the population living in households which they considered to be suffering from noise pollution, and the second best air quality in the EU as measured by exposure to particulate matter. Municipal recycling rates while still below the EU average, have increased significantly since 2000, and a significant drop in the level of deaths due to road traffic accidents between 2000-2015 has seen Ireland move from having an above the EU average number of road traffic deaths to having the sixth safest roads among Member States. The percentage of the Irish population which have difficulty accessing public transport is higher than the EU average but it should be noted that this is predominantly a reflection of the low population density in rural areas, as populations in Irish towns and cities report levels of access higher than the respective EU averages.

However, the EU SDG indicators do not fully capture the pressures on housing supply, which is particularly evident in Dublin and other cities, and the consequent increasing house prices and rents and the high incidence of homelessness in Ireland which

the current Government has acknowledged as one of the most pressing challenges currently facing Ireland. As of March 2018, official figures indicate that 9,781 people were homeless and accessing emergency accommodation through local government authorities. Approximately 38% of this homeless population are children. These figures do not include \0xEBrough sleepersi.

Current housing pressures in Ireland arise in part as a result of the collapse of housing construction levels in the aftermath of the economic downturn. Annual housing output dropped from a high of over 93,000 new homes in 2006 to less than 9,000 in 2011, and as the economic has recovered, there is now significant pent-up demand due to years of under-supply, as well as a fast-growing young population and economic recovery. In 2016 Government launched its Action Plan on Housing and Homelessness Rebuilding Ireland [SDG 11.1], which is designed to accelerate housing supply across all tenures. The Action Plan targets doubling the annual level of residential construction to 25,000 homes by 2020 and delivering 50,000 social housing homes in the 6-year period to 2021, involving direct Government expenditure of almost \0xC47bn. Furthermore, the NDP provides for this commitment to social housing to be extended further, with a total of \0xC411.6 billion provided over the period 2018-2027, so that 112,000 households can have their housing needs met in a social housing home over this period.

The Action Plan has five main \0xEBPillarsi to address specific challenges through a cross-cutting and interlinked way:

Pillar 1 n Address Homelessness

Provide early solutions to address the unacceptable level of families in emergency accommodation; deliver inter-agency supports for people who are currently homeless, with a particular emphasis on minimising the incidence of rough sleeping, and enhance State supports to keep people in their own homes.







Voluntary National Review 2018	71

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Pillar 2 n Accelerate Social Housing

Increase the level and speed of delivery of social housing and other State-supported housing.

Pillar 3 n Build More Homes

Increase the output of private housing to meet demand at affordable prices by providing enabling infrastructure up front to accelerate development of major sites, streamline planning, and provide more flexible guidance, particularly for city centre living.

Pillar 4 n Improve the Rental Sector

Address the obstacles to greater private rented sector delivery, to improve the supply

of units at affordable rents, and strengthen the protections for both tenants and landlords.

Pillar 5 n Utilise Existing Housing

Ensure that existing housing stock is used to the maximum degree possible n focusing on measures to use vacant stock to rejuvenate both urban and rural areas.

As implementation of the Action Plan has evolved to incorporate new initiatives and commitments, progress is being tracked across some 185 actions under these five pillars through quarterly status reports. Progress included in the Q4 2017 status report included:

u Almost 26,000 households had their social housing needs met, equivalent to 100 new households had their social housing need met each working day of the week.

u 4,000 individuals exited homelessness into homes.

u 200 additional permanent beds were provided for rough sleepers.

u Over 7,000 new homes were brought into the active social housing stock through build, acquisitions, voids and leasing programmes. This is a 40% increase [almost 2,000 new homes] on what was planned for the year, and 24% of an increase over what was achieved in 2016.

u Almost \0xC4200m investment in enabling infrastructure across 30 major sites, most in and around our cities, which have the potential to accelerate the delivery of some
20,000 new homes over the next 4 years.

u Rent Pressure Zones introduced in all cities which limits the annual rent increases to a maximum of 4%, providing greater rent predictability.

u Targeted actions to bring vacant homes in cities and towns back into use, as a key catalyst for urban regeneration and supporting communities.

In Q4 2017, Irelandis social housing construction programme included some 13,400 homes at various stages of planning, design and procurement, this a substantial increase on the 8,430 homes in the programme in Q4 2016.

Irish public transport services which are socially necessary but financially unviable are subsidised by the taxpayer through Public Service Obligation [PSO] funding. There is specific provision to address social exclusion in Irish rural areas arising from unmet public transport needs through the Rural Transport Programme [RTP]. The objective is to provide a quality nationwide community based public transport system in rural Ireland which responds to local need. The RTP has been consolidated through a streamlined network of 17 offices. This local presence and on-the-ground knowledge facilitates direct engagement



72 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









with service users and other stakeholders at a local level. All Locallink offices have been engaged in a process to establish the unmet demand in their area. New regular commuter bus services were developed in 2016 and 2017 under the RTP.

Public transport accessability is addressed through Irelandis Sectoral Plan for

Accessible Transport \0xEBTransport Access for Alli. This policy is based on the provisions

of the Disability Act 2005 and related Government strategies, for example the

Comprehensive Employment Strategy and in particular the National Disability Inclusion

Strategy [NDIS] 2017-2021, Accessibility features, such as wheelchair accessibility and

audio/visual aids, are built into all new public transport infrastructure projects and vehicles

from the design stage. For example Dublinis Light Rail system, known as the Luas, is fully

accessible. 100% of the Dublin Bus and Bus ireann city fleets are wheelchair accessible, as

well as approximately 80% of the Bus ireann coach fleet and this will increase as the coach

fleet is replaced. Other measures to assist people with disabilities using public transport

include the provision of Real Time Passenger Information on the web, by app and electronic

displays at bus stops, improved functionality and availability of the Leap Card and the

development of the step free journey planner. Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport

also funds a programme of retro-fitting older, existing, public transport infrastructure and

facilities to improve their accessibility feature [SDG11.2].

The NDP provides for some \0xC48.6bn in capital funding for public transport projects over the next decade.

In tandem with the NDP, in February 2018 Ireland launched its new NPF which will guide at a high-level strategic planning and development for the country over the next 20+ years, so that as the population grows, that growth is sustainable [in economic, social and environmental terms]. The NPF references the SDGs directly [SDG 11.3, 11.7, 11.a, 11.b]

The ultimate objectives of the NPF are to:

u Guide the future development of Ireland, taking into account a projected 1 million increase in our population, the need to create 660,000 additional jobs to achieve full employment and a need for 550,000 more homes by 2040;

u Enable people to live closer to where they work, moving away from the current unsustainable trends of increased commuting;

u Regenerate rural Ireland by promoting environmentally sustainable growth patterns;

u Plan for and implement a better distribution of regional growth, in terms of jobs and prosperity;

u Transform settlements of all sizes through imaginative urban regeneration and bring life/jobs back into cities, towns and villages;

u Coordinate delivery of infrastructure and services in tandem with growth, through joined-up NPF/National Investment Plan and consistent sectoral plans, which will help to manage this growth and tackle congestion and quality of life issues in Dublin and elsewhere.

A key focus within the NPF is to deliver more compact growth, particularly within the existing fabric and footprint of our cities. It is targeted that 25% of the predicted population growth [and consequent jobs] will be facilitated in Dublin, with over half that growth being delivered through brownfield urban regeneration, and another 250,000



Voluntary National Review 2018	73

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









people in total to be accommodated in the other four cities of Cork, Limerick, Galway and Waterford. The coordinated alignment of the NDP with the NPF will provide greater opportunities for better investment, infrastructure and service delivery to ensure that new communities within our urban areas are better integrated and have timely access to services. A key focus of the NPF is to improve citizensi quality of life through better place-making in terms of design, amenity and public space and encouraging more active and sustainable lifestyles.

Regarding the environmental impact of its cities, Ireland in 2018 will adopt its first National Clean Air Strategy to further reduce air pollution, which will positively impact on both human health and the environment. Ireland has a well established waste management policy in place since 2012, A Resource Opportunity Waste Management Policy in Ireland and as indicated, municipal recycling rates in Ireland are increasingly coming into line with EU averages [SDG 11.6].

Ireland also has specific policies in place to protect and safeguard cultural heritage as a national resource [SDG 11.4] and to make cities, towns and related settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. These include heritage-led regeneration strategies for the sustainable development of historic towns, cities and places such as the Living City Initiative and the Historic Towns Initiative. The Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht is preparing a climate change adaptation plan for the heritage sector and has published guidance on enhancing the energy efficiency of traditional buildings and on the adaptation and reuse of the historic built environment. Other initiatives include promoting the development of traditional building skills; providing funding for conservation and repair works to historic buildings; and supporting the work of other bodies involved in built heritage both within government and NGOs. Two new policy documents are currently in preparation within 2018: the National Policy on Architecture and the National Heritage Plan.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe [UNECE] has adopted the Framework Guidelines for Energy Efficiency Standards in Buildings to provide a concrete path toward massive reductions in the greenhouse gas emissions caused by buildings.

In 2017 Ireland signed a letter of intention with UNECE to establish a UNECE Centre of Excellence for High Performance Buildings in Wexford in Ireland. Participants in the Irish centre will be part of a global network of UNECE Centres of Excellence that will both serve the regions in which they are located and comprise a global constituency, providing diverse skills, knowledge and experience, including expertise in high performance building design, materials, technologies, and systems, as well as construction, commissioning, operation, maintenance and continuous performance improvement.















74 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 12: Responsible Consumption and Production

The EU SDG indicators for Goal 12 focus on the decoupling of environment impacts from economic growth, energy consumption and waste management. Irelandis resource productivity, increase substantially between 2001 and 2016, during which period it reached and exceeded the EU average. Ireland was among a number of EU countries which saw the volume of freight transport relative to GDP between 2010 and 2015, while total traffic volume was increasing. While this could suggest an absolute decoupling of transport from economic activities [for example due to the high level of service provision with the Irish economy] the caveats regarding GDP as a measure of economic activity in Ireland discussed under SDG 8 continue to apply. Average CO2 emissions per km from new passenger cars were also below the EU average for Ireland in 2016, suggesting Irish motorists are switching to lower emission vehicles. In terms of generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes Ireland was below the EU average but at a higher level than a decade previously. This is in contrast to the experience of the majority of EU states. The Irish recycling rate of waste excluding major mineral wastes increased in the period between 2010 and 2014 but needs to increase further to meet the EU average.

Irelandis overall policy in relation to sustainable development Our Sustainable Future, is the latest in a series of such national policies dating back to 1997, while the overall themes and objectives of Our Sustainable Future align well with the SDGs, Ireland intends to produce a new sustainable development policy which formally incorporates the SDGs.

National waste policy is set out in detail in A Resource Opportunity 2012. This sets out the measures through which Ireland will become a society that prioritises waste prevention and management in a way that is compatible with the protection of our environment.

It provides a roadmap on how Ireland will reduce its dependency on landfill, by putting in place appropriate measures and approaches to reduce waste, while at the same time making the most of opportunities to recover resources from waste [SDG 12.1, 12.2, 12.5].

Irelandis waste policy is evolving progressively from waste disposal and management to improving our resource efficiency and ultimately making a transition to a circular economy. For the period to 2030 at least, Irelandis waste policy will further evolve in the context of a negotiated EU agreement based on the European Commissionis \0xEBClosing the Loop n An Action Plan for the Circular Economyi.

In particular, Irelandis performance in this area centres around meeting various EU targets for the diversion, recovery and recycling of waste. The Environmental Protection Agency [EPA] monitors and reports on national performance.

A number of specific measures demonstrate Irelandis approach to meeting SDG 12 and related Goals:

Ireland has operated a national waste prevention programme since 2004. The EPA is funded from a ring fenced fund of revenues derived from green taxes and charges

[the National Environment Fund] to run a series of sub-programmes designed to support waste prevention by individuals, communities and businesses. These include supports such as Green Business, Green Healthcare, Stop Food Waste, Green Enterprise and Smart Farming.





Voluntary National Review 2018	75

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Since publication of A Resource Opportunity in 2012, Ireland has developed a food waste prevention strategy that reflects the increasing interest in the issue at a global and national level. In addition to supporting the EPAis Stop Food Waste work with communities, further resources are being provided to expand the EPAis programme with business via the Food Waste Charter. In 2017, a Retail Action Group on Preventing Food Waste in the Supply Chain was established by the Minister. Representing the majority of large grocery retailers, the Group has agreed on the principle and process for gathering food waste data within their organisations. Accurate data is recognised as the basis for meaningful action on preventing waste. Ireland is also participating fully at EU fora on food waste prevention [SDG 12.3].

Green Tenders n An Action Plan for Green Public Procurement is the national policy statement regarding green public procurement and was launched in 2012. Its objective is to assist public authorities to plan and implement green procurement. In 2014, the EPA produced Green Procurement n Guidance for the Public Sector. A key target of the Plan is that 50% of public procurement should conform to green criteria, both by cost and by the number of tenders awarded. As a member of the EU with a record of high compliance with EU directives, much of Irelandis procurement is thought to already qualify as \0xEBgreeni given the high threshold of environmental protection within the EU legislative body. That being said precise evidence for Irelandis performance in implementing Green Public Procurement [GPP] is not adequate currently [SDG 12.7].

It has long been recognised that policies consistent with the polluter-pays-principle are most likely to yield positive results when it comes to protection of the environment. In 2017, household waste collectors were required to begin the process of phasing out flat rate fees. Instead, householders are being switched progressively to payment plans that incentivise waste reduction and segregation.

Working with local authorities and their regional counterparts, the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment has developed a number of public education and awareness campaigns around waste prevention, segregation and recycling in 2017 and 2018.

The principal Producer Responsibility Initiatives operating in Ireland relate to Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment, batteries, packaging, end-of-life vehicles, tyres and farm plastics. These schemes have been critical to Ireland reaching recycling targets and have contributed to diverting substantial amounts of resources from landfill.

Irelandis Second National Action Plan on Corporate Social Responsibility 2017-2020 was launched in June 2017 [SDG 12.6]. The vision of the Plan is that \0xEBIreland will be recognised as a Centre of Excellence for responsible and sustainable business practice through the adoption and implementation of best practice in CSR in enterprises and organisationsi. The Plan was developed by Irelandis Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation, in consultation with the public and private sector stakeholders, against the backdrop of the SDGs. The plan is divided into four core dimensions which are strategically linked to specific SDGs. The new plan contains 17 actions under the four core dimensions.








76 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Table 4.1: Second National Action Plan on Corporate Social Responsibility - Core Dimensions

CSR Dimensions
SDG
The Workplace
5,8,10
The Marketplace
8,9,12
The Environment
11,12,13
The Community
3,8,11


The Plan encourages industry to set business strategies that take account of and positively influence the way in which their business impacts in the marketplace, workplace, community and the environment and will support the creation of a business environment that is comprehensively sustainable.

A number of actions in the CSR National Plan support Goal 12.6, as set out below:

Table 4.2: Actions from the CSR National Plan supporting SDG 12.6

4 Continue to increase awareness of CSR, its value to businesses and to society as a whole.

9 Encourage more micro, small and medium-sized enterprises to raise their competitiveness through improved CSR engagement.

10 Work to increase recognition among large businesses of the value of sustainable business practices and corporate social responsibility in boosting employment, attracting and retaining talent and their impact on wider society, including reporting on CSR/responsible business practices.

15 Work to increase the recognition of the impact of business operations on the environment and to encourage businesses to mitigate their negative impacts by:

???Supporting and promoting environmental policy;

??Encouraging businesses to implement resource efficiencies; and???Promoting the European Commissionis Circular Economy.

The Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation leads on driving the national CSR agenda as outlined in the Plan. The CSR Stakeholder Forum established in 2014 is a key delivery agent in implementing the actions under the Second National CSR Plan. Membership of the Forum comprises representatives of the business community, key Government Departments and agencies and the wider community.

Irelandis management of chemicals is primarily through the framework of EU regulations. The Chemical Act 2008 facilitates enforcement of the EU Reach Regulation in Ireland, as well as aspects of the detergents regulation and the Rotterdam Regulation concerning the Rotterdam Convention [SDG12. 4].




Voluntary National Review 2018	77

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Supporting the SDGs Globally

On responsible and sustainable food consumption, Ireland is supporting FAOis Global Initiative on Food Loss and Waste Reduction initiative. This multi-stakeholder programme facilitates dialogue between industry, research, politics, and civil society on food losses. Key aspects to this programme include: awareness raising on the impact of, and solutions for food loss and waste; collaboration and coordination of world-wide initiatives on food loss and waste reduction and support to policy, strategy and programme development for food loss and waste reduction [SDG 12.3].

Ireland is also a contributor to both the Global Environment Fund [GEF] and the Environment Fund of the UN Environment Programme [UNEP], both of which support, inter alia, sustainability projects globally.






















































78 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts

The EUis SDG indicators for Goal 13 address Climate mitigation as well as Climate

Impacts. Irelandis Greenhouse gas emissions peaked in 2001 at 71.39 Mt CO2 equivalent,

compared to estimated emissions for 2015 at 59.88 Mt CO2 equivalent. This downward

trend has closely tracked activity in the economy, with emissions falling in parallel with

the most recent economic downturn, and emissions are again now increasing across all

sectors in line with economic and employment growth, particularly in the transport sector.

Significant economic and population growth since 1990 [the Irish population has grown

by approximately 30% in the period] has seen total emissions remain above 1990 levels,

at just above 109% in 2015. Ireland has achieved significant reductions in CO2 equivalent

emissions on a per capita basis, with tonnes per capita reduced to 13.3 in 2015 compared

to 18.6 in 2000. However Irish emissions per capita remained above the EU-28 2015

average of 8.7 tonnes per capita. Ireland has reduced the Greenhouse gas emissions

intensity of energy consumption in 2015 compared to 2000 by marginally more than

the EU average. In terms of climate impacts, EU data indicates that Ireland has experienced

climate-related economic losses above the EU average in the period 1980 to 2015. It

should be noted that data for this indicator is limited and that it is not generally possible

to attribute individual extreme weather events to climate change. However, statistical

attribution studies have shown that various climate extremes in Europe and beyond have

become stronger and/or more frequent as a result of global climate change. Ireland is also

engaged with global climate initiatives with its 2014 and 2015 contributions to the 100

billion international commitment on climate-related expenditure amounting to some

\0xC444milion and \0xC436 million respectively. The proportion of Irelandis population covered by

the Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy in 2016 was also above the EU average.

The EU committed to reducing its emissions by 20% compared with 1990 levels, and in this regard established binding annual greenhouse gas emissions targets for its Member States for the period 2013 to 2020. For the year 2020 itself, the target set for Ireland is that emissions should be 20% below their level in 2005. Ireland faces a shortfall in achieving this target in 2020, with projected emission levels at that stage expected to represent a 4-6% reduction. This reflects both the constrained investment capacity over the past decade due to the economic crisis, and the extremely challenging nature of the target itself. Irelandis 2020 target is a binding obligation under EU law. Ireland is projected to comply with its emissions reduction targets in each of the years 2013 to 2018 but to exceed its targets in 2019 and 2020, which will result in a requirement to purchase compliance under the EU legislative framework.


















Voluntary National Review 2018	79

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Climate change is one of the biggest global challenges of our time. Its scale and complexity demands a coordinated approach at both national and international levels. As a party to the UNFCCC, Ireland is committed to concerted multilateral action to tackle climate change through the Paris Agreement. Ireland contributes to the goals of the Paris Agreement through its engagement as part of the overall EU strategy to reduce emissions. The strength of Irelandis commitment to meeting the challenge is reflected also in Irelandis

National Policy Position on Climate Action and Low Carbon Development [2014] and the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act, 2015, as well as the first National Mitigation Plan [2017] [SDG 13.2].

The National Policy Position on Climate established a commitment to deep decarbonisation of the economy by 2050, and the 2015 legislation provides the enabling statutory framework for this to happen. Ireland also recognises that, as part of the ongoing evolution of international climate change policy, the objectives set out in the National Policy Position will, in time, require review to ensure coherence with the Paris Agreement.

The National Mitigation Plan [NMP], published in July 2017, sets out this Governmentis collective approach to reducing Irelandis greenhouse gas emissions. The NMP covers greenhouse gas emissions in the Electricity Generation, Built Environment, Transport, and Agriculture, Forest and Land Use sectors. For each sector, the Plan sets out the policy context, the greenhouse gas emissions trends, the opportunities and challenges, the mitigation measures currently in place and under development, and specific actions to take forward.

The Plan contains over 70 mitigation measures and 106 related actions for various Ministers and public bodies to take forward as we move through the implementation phase of what will be a living document. These measures and actions will address the immediate challenge to 2020 and provide a framework for the development and implementation

of medium to long-term options to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and progress the overall National Policy Position for 2050. The actions under each measure in the NMP will contribute towards achieving many of the SDGs, having particular correspondence with SDG 13.2.

This first NMP does not represent a complete roadmap to achieve the 2050 objective, but rather is a work in progress reflecting the reality of where we are in our decarbonisation transition. It represents the first in what will be a series of strong roadmaps for action across all sectors to make progress towards Irelandis national transition objective.

Importantly, as the NMP is a living document, it will be updated as ongoing analysis, dialogue and technological innovation generate more and more cost-effective sectoral mitigation options. This continuous review process reflects the broad and evolving nature of the sectoral challenges outlined in the Plan, coupled with the continued development and deployment of emerging low carbon and cost effective technologies across different sectors of the economy.











80 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









A significant number of measures included in the NMP have already been implemented to reduce greenhouse gas emissions across the economy and continuous work will take place to make further progress towards achieving the national objective of transitioning to a competitive, low carbon, climate resilient and environmentally sustainable economy by 2050.

The National Planning Framework [NPF], announced by Government in February 2018, will address a broad range of issues in relation to planning for a sustainable future for Ireland over the period to 2040. The Framework aims to coordinate key areas such as housing, jobs, health, transport environment, energy and communications into an overall coherent strategy. In conjunction with the NPF, the Government adopted the NDP 2018-2027, which provides for \0xC4116 billion in capital investment over the next 10 years. The NPF and the NDP are fully integrated and are collectively referred to as Project Ireland 2040. Transition to a Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Society is one of the 10 strategic objectives of Project Ireland 2040, and accounts for the largest single portion of capital investment under the NDP, with \0xC421.8 billion allocated for projects related to carbon emission reduction, including through upgrading 45,000 homes per annum from 2021, providing an additional 3,000-4,500 MW of renewable energy, increasing support for renewable heat schemes, transitioning to low emission, including electric, buses for the urban bus fleet, and targeting just under half of our vehicle fleet to be fully electric by 2030. A new \0xC4500m Climate Action Fund will leverage further investment by public and private bodies, with a strong focus on interventions in the transport sector. There will also be substantial further investment in flood relief schemes to minimise the impact of river and coastal flooding [SDG 13.1 and 13.2]. This level of capital investment will represent a step-change in Irelandis delivery of climate-action objectives.

Text box 4.6


Decarbonising the Transport Sector

Alternative fuels have a strong potential to contribute towards the decarbonisation of the transport sector; currently the transport sector in Europe is almost entirely dependent on oil. Ireland published the National Policy Framework on Alternative Fuels Infrastructure for Transport in Ireland 2017-2030 in May 2017 with the aim to support the advancement of refuelling and recharging infrastructure ensuring that infrastructural barriers to low emitting vehicle market uptake are removed. It is expected that the Framework will reassure car manufacturers and investors of the long-term commitment of the State to alternative fuels and promote greater private investment and developments.

Under a commitment within the Programme for a Partnership Government a Low Emission Vehicle [LEV] Taskforce was established to consider the full suite of potential measures available to Government to expedite the deployment of low carbon technologies. The Taskforce is considering a wide range of measures to stimulate the Electric Vehicle [EV] market, including: reduced charges or exemptions on toll roads for EVs; benefit-in-kind relief; EV public parking charges; current public procurement policy; purchase grants for the small public service vehicle fleet; and reviewing the effectiveness of current incentives in place.




Voluntary National Review 2018	81

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets










Irish vehicles registration and motor taxation systems were changed in July 2008 to be based on CO2 emissions rather than engine size. The tax changes, which applied to vehicles purchased in 2008 or later, had an immediate and substantial positive effect in changing buyer behaviour encouraging the take up of low CO\0x22602\0x2260 emission vehicles. Initially, vehicles were categorised into seven graduating bands, A to G, with those choosing to purchase lower-emission vehicles paying less in Vehicle Registration Tax [VRT] and motor tax. A zero emissions band for electric vehicles was also introduced for motor tax purposes only. There has been a marked change in the proportion of new cars purchased within the lower emission bands; new private cars sold in the \0xEBAi emission band rose from just 1.5% in 2007 to 78% in 2016. Cars with CO2 emissions of 140 g/km or higher now comprise just 4% of new car purchases. Rebalancing the motor tax and VRT regimes has ensured that technological improvements are impacting more rapidly on the composition of the car and van fleet compared to an alternative taxation system based on engine size. The net effect has been to accelerate the reduction of carbon emissions within the national fleet and significant fuel and energy savings over the lifetime of each vehicle. This measure has been considered a very effective means of influencing purchasing decisions by motorists in favour of more fuel efficient vehicles.


The EU, through Regulations [EC] 443/2009 and [EC] 333/2014, mandated an improvement in average new car efficiency to 130g CO2/km by 2015 with a target of 95g CO2/km for 2020. Successful Irish implementation of these regulations is fundamental in moving the transport sector towards decarbonisation, particularly up to 2030. This measure has greatly increased the availability of lower emission vehicles in the Irish market. New cars entering the fleet are now approximately

25% more energy efficient than they were in 2007. Emissions from new cars sold in Ireland fell from 164g CO2/km in 2007 to c. 116g CO2/km by 2015. Ireland is ahead of both the EU target of 130g CO2/km and the average emissions from new car sales in many other EU Member States.

A number of energy efficiency actions are also underway in the public transport fleets such as the sole procurement of all new public transport vehicles to the highest EURO class standard available. Service providers/operators continue to improve energy efficiency through adopting various technological solutions and instigating driver behaviour change programmes. There are co-benefits of improving energy efficiency including increased fuel economy, consequential emission reductions and enhanced air quality. Examples include train configuration changes and eco-driving initiatives.















82 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Irelandis first statutory National Adaptation Framework [NAF] was published in 19 January 2018. The NAF sets out the national strategy to reduce the vulnerability of the country to the negative effects of climate change and to avail of positive impacts. The NAF was developed under the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015 [SDG 13.1].

Irelandis National Dialogue on Climate Action was launched in March 2017. This is in line with the commitment set out in the Programme for a Partnership Government [SDG 13.3] The primary objective of the Dialogue is to ensure an inclusive process of engagement and consensus building across society towards enabling the transformation to a low carbon and climate-resilient future.

To do this, the Dialogue will seek to create awareness, engagement and motivation to act [locally, regionally and nationally] in relation to the challenges presented by climate change and to establish, on a long-term basis, appropriate networks for people to meet periodically to consider evidence-based inputs on the economic, social, behavioural, environmental and public aspects of climate and energy policy. A correlation may be drawn between these objectives and the SDG ambition for increased education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation.

National Dialogue initiatives already announced consist of:

u The Green Schools National Climate Change Action and Awareness Programme, which includes the National Climate Ambassador Programme; Climate Action Week between 16 and 20 October 2017; and the Green Schools Climate Expo on 22 February 2018; and

u A series of lectures on key policy issues.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

Irelandis work on climate action supports our overall international development objectives, to ensure that climate change does not undermine Irelandis efforts in poverty eradication, nor reverse previously hard-won development gains addressing climate change. Both One World One Future and The Global Island characterise climate change as a global environmental, development and security challenge, exacerbating tensions over land, water, food and energy, creating migratory pressures, threatening food and nutrition security and undermining public health. In agreeing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, world leaders committed to implement the Agenda for the full benefit of all, for todayis generation and for future generations. In our global response to climate change, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade through Irish Aid works closely with the Mary Robinson Foundation and other partners to advocate that responses to climate change take account of the impacts on future generations.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	83

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Text Box 4.7

Our Work in Climate








1. Ensure climate
2. Support vulnerable
3. Strengthen Least
change does not
countries to devise
Developed Countries
undermine Irelandis
effective Climate
[LDC], civil society
efforts in poverty
Action Plans, ensuring
and grassroots
eradication, through
countries are prepared
participation at
integrating climate
to deal with climate
international level,
consideration across
impacts, especially for
bringing their voices to
our Development
the poorest and most
the table.
Cooperation
vunerable.

Programme/Irish Aid.




Globally, Irish financial support for international climate action is channelled chiefly through Government Departments and Agencies represented on the National Delegation, chaired by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment. The National Delegation meets regularly to discuss developments in the climate change area with a view to ensuring a coherent and whole-of-Government approach to climate action [SDG 13A].

Ireland has committed to scaling up its financial contributions in support of the commitment given by developed country Parties to the UNFCCC in 2009 to jointly mobilise US$100 billion annually by 2020 from public and private sources to support climate action in developing countries.

In this regard, Ireland committed to providing \0xC4175 million between 2016 and 2020 which is to be achieved primarily through Irelandis international development cooperation response. Ireland is on track to meet these commitments. In 2016, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade provided \0xC450.6m in climate finance as part of our international development cooperation programme.

Ireland seeks to deepen the climate change relevance and impact of our existing work in our key partner countries, almost all of which are Least Developed Countries [LDC], with a focus on those most vulnerable. We work with international partners to answer the call to action on climate, through supporting countries to devise strategies and investible and effective climate action plans, and building national and local capacity to receive finance. We seek to strengthen LDC voice at international level, with capacity building support, and to bring civil society organisations and grassroots voices to the table. We also support climate adaptation in agriculture, food and energy systems, disaster risk reduction, and support to strengthen the resilience of poor and vulnerable households, primarily in Sub-Saharan Africa [SDG 13B].



84 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Under the Paris Agreement, Ireland also provides direct support to the Least Developed Countries Fund [LDCF, \0xC41m per annum in 2016-18] and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group [LEG, \0xC4500,000 per annum in 2016-18], both of which assist vulnerable countries in developing and implementing strong National Adaptation Plans to prepare for the medium and long-term impacts of a changing climate. Ireland is among three developed countries [Canada, Austria and Ireland] who are members of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group, and was nominated for this role by the EU at COP21 [SDG 13.2].

In our key partner countries, Ireland has developed a Climate and Development Learning Platform, working with the International Institute for Environment and Development, to support the integration of climate across our International Development Cooperation Programme. The Platform works to strengthen understanding of climate adaptation and mitigation solutions to inform effective development programming, link local research to inform and add value to National and International Policy engagements, and capture learning and share knowledge through a strong community of practice. For example, the Platform has been supporting research in vulnerable disaster prone districts in Mozambique, supporting an innovative pilot model to link social protection delivery with suitable climate adaptation measures, which will inform the Mozambique Governmentis Social Protection Strategy and Local Climate Adaptation Plans, as well as Irelandis engagement and support in country. The Platform has also been conducting research on identifying effective climate resilient livelihood interventions in Ethiopia, to inform resilience programming for Irish Aid and partners, and engagement with policies and planning frameworks at national level. Further information on this work is freely accessible at www.climatelearningplatform.org [SDG 13.1].

In 2017, Irelandis Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment announced that Ireland will join the Nationally Determined Contributions [NDC] Partnership. Through the NDC Partnership, Ireland will be able to offer its key expertise and insights from our existing work with developing countries. This will focus on adaptation support for our developing country partners and on sharing our experiences with the world. Through its membership to the NDC Partnership, Ireland may help bring those developing countries closer to achieving their ambitions under their own respective NDCs, which in turn will help to strengthen their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters. Additional funding of \0xC42m has been provided to the Green Climate Fund in both 2016 and 2017, and a further contribution of \0xC4500,000 to other multilateral funds and agencies [SDG 13.B].





















Voluntary National Review 2018	85

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 14: Life Below Water

Based on the EUis SDG indicators [using 2013 data], the sufficiency of Irelandis marine sites designated under the EU Habitats Directive is below the EU average, as is Irelandis percentage of bathing sites with excellent water quality, coastal waters [using 2016 data]. In common with other EU Member States with fishing fleets, Irelandis catches from major fishing areas decreased in 2016 compared to 2001.

The Government launched the River Basin Management Plan [RBMP] for Ireland 2018-2021 in April 2018. The RBMP outlines the measures the State and other sectors will take to improve water quality in Irelandis groundwater, rivers, lakes, estuarine and coastal waters in the period to 2021 [SDG 14.1]. The Government aims to protect and improve water quality in 726 of Irelandis 4,829 water bodies over the next four years. The Plan responds to requirements under the EUis Water Framework Directive [WFD].

The current state of Irelandis marine environment is highlighted in Irelandis own national reports on the EU Habitats Directive and the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive [MSFD] in 2013. The MSFD requires European Member States, including Ireland, to reach good environmental status [GES] in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest. The Directive has been transposed into national legislation by Ireland [SDG 14.2, 14.5].

Of the marine habitats assessed under the Habitats Directive, only sandbanks and sea caves were assessed as being in \0xEBfavourablei condition. Estuaries, tidal mudflats, large shallow inlets and bays were assessed as being in \0xEBinadequatei condition. Reefs and lagoons were in \0xEBbadi condition. Further monitoring and reporting on the ecological status of Irelandis marine habitats will be forthcoming in 2018 under the MSFD and the WFD, which will give a clearer picture of the state of Irelandis marine environment.

Pressures from human activities on Irelandis coastal and marine biodiversity and

ecosystem services arise from a growing range of sources including nutrient and chemical

discharge from terrestrial ecosystems and through direct physical disturbance and habitat

degradation from pollution, litter and man-made noise. These pressures are mainly in

transitional and coastal waters. Fishing has widespread impacts on both pelagic [i.e.,

water column] and seabed communities, particularly for species with low growth rates, soft

substrates or cold water coral reefs, and some areas have been heavily impacted by this

activity. There are also concerns about the level of by-catch of birds and marine mammals

in certain fisheries.

Fish populations are generally improving since the reform of the EU Common Fisheries Policy [CFP] and more sustainable management of fish populations with the setting of Maximum Sustainable Yield [MSY] for commercial species. There are also provisions in the revised CFP for the establishment and implementation of clear conservation measures where adverse environmental impacts from fishing are thought to occur, with a view to ensuring better marine ecosystem and biodiversity protection. Climate change and ocean acidification present considerable threats and may modify effects of other pressures and facilitate further establishment and spread of invasive species.









86 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









The protection of our marine ecosystems and compliance with national and international environmental legislation and full implementation of the MSFD, WFD, Habitats Directive and revised CFP will help achieve Irelandis Vision for Biodiversity [i.e. that Irelandis marine biodiversity and ecosystems are conserved and restored, delivering benefits essential for all sectors of society]. The development, by contributing Government Departments, of effective Marine Spatial Planning for Irelandis coastal zone and Exclusive Economic Zone [EEZ] waters will also assist in the identification and improved protection of pressurised or threatened habitats and species, in line with the aims of the EU Maritime Spatial Planning Directive [2014/89/EU] and MSFD. The European Maritime Fisheries Fund [EMFF] contains measures such as investments in the protection and restoration of marine flora and fauna, improvements to the selectivity of fishing gear, and schemes to improve the environmental performance of aquaculture farms.

Ireland also committed to roll-out a Global Citizenship: Marine Environment education module for school children in 2017. It further committed to the continued support of the Clean Coasts Programme which engages communities to work actively with local authorities to protect Irelandis beaches, seas and marine life. Ireland announced the expansion of its \0xECFishing for Litter Programme which aims to retrieve plastics and other litter from the ocean as it threatens sea life and marine habitats. It is estimated that 80% of waste at sea is plastic. The Programme encourages fishermen to take ashore the litter they encounter at sea while fishing. Fishing boats of any nation signed up to Fishing for Litter can deposit collected litter waste in the member ports.

Ireland also reaffirmed its commitment to prohibit the sale or manufacture of certain products containing microbeads, including not just cosmetics but also body care and cleansing products as well as detergents and abrasive surface cleaning products, announced at the UNis First Ocean Conference in June 2017.

Supporting the SDGs Globally

At UN level, Ireland, through its membership of the EU, continues to play an active and constructive role in negotiations on a dedicated international agreement on high seas conservation and sustainable use [BBNJ].

At the October 2017 International Our Ocean Conference in Malta, Ireland committed to eight actions n three in the area of Marine Research, four in the area of Marine Litter with a final commitment in the area of Marine Protection. Through these commitments, Ireland aims to identify and support solutions to address some of the most important challenges facing the oceans: marine protection, marine pollution, climate change impact and sustainable fisheries.

Ireland committed \0xC46 million in funding to the sector, stressing the importance of promoting and protecting the worldis marine resources for present and for future generations.

\0xC44m will be invested in INFOMAR n the Integrated Mapping For the Sustainable Development of Irelandis Marine Resource n a joint venture between the Geological Survey of Ireland and the Marine Institute. The programme is a successor to the Irish National Seabed Survey [INSS] and concentrates on creating a range of integrated mapping products of the physical, chemical and biological features of the seabed in the near-shore area.




Voluntary National Review 2018	87

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









\0xC41 million will go towards Ship-Time Research on-board the RV Celtic Explorer in the period 2018-2021 to support the trilateral Atlantic Ocean Research Alliance [AORA] between Canada, the EU and the USA. AORA was launched in the North Atlantic when the Galway Statement on Atlantic Ocean Cooperation was signed between Canada, the EU and the USA in 2013. The overarching goal of the AORA is to advance their shared vision of an Atlantic Ocean that is healthy, resilient, safe, productive, understood and treasured so as to promote the well-being, prosperity and security of the present and future generations.

Ireland made a combined contribution of \0xC450,000 to three United Nations law of the sea trust funds in 2017. The contribution will go to the United Nations trust fund created to assist developing states engage with the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, to the trust fund to assist developing states in participating in the work of the UN Regular Process for global reporting and assessment of the marine environment and to the fund to assist developing states to participate in the negotiations on a new legal instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction [BBNJ]. Since 2003 Ireland has contributed more than \0xC4800,000 to these trust funds.

The National Marine Research & Innovation Strategy 2017-2021 was launched at the Our Ocean Wealth Summit in NUI Galway on June 30th 2017. The strategy provides a framework for research funders to assess the impact and likely return to the state from research investment in marine-related research themes. It is also designed to ensure that state support of marine research results in Irish researchers being able to compete at an international level and participate fully in transnational research projects.

Irish Aid provided \0xC450,000 to the Trust Fund to support LDC participation at the 11th WTO Ministerial Conference in December 2017, which adopted Decisions, inter alia, on Fisheries Subsidies [SDG 14.6] and the creation of a working party on accession for South Sudan.

Ireland has signed and ratified the OSPAR Convention n the mechanism by which 15 Governments and the EU cooperate to protect the marine environment of the North-East Atlantic [North-East Atlantic].


























88 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









Goal 15: Life on Land

EU and OECD indicators provide a mixed picture of Irelandis performance under Goal

15. The OECD, though its Better Life initiative and based on the latest available data in

2017, places Ireland within its middle performing tier under the headings of Forest Area,

Threatened Birds, Threatened Mammals, and Threatened Plants. EU SDG indicators demonstrate that, relative to very low historical base, Ireland has in the period 2009-2015 seen a large increase in its share of forest area as a percentage of total country area,and. Ireland was the only country [based on 2013 data] to have a complete network of designated sites of terrestrial habitats and species listed in the annexes of the EUis

Habitats Directives. Irelandis artificial land cover per capita is above the EU average but this can be attributed to Irelandis relatively low population density.

Irelandis own nationally produced 2013 Report on the Status of EU Protected Habitats and Species showed that over 90% of listed habitats were assessed as having an unfavourable conservation status with over 30% demonstrating ongoing declines. Over 70% of habitats were negatively impacted by agricultural activities.

The picture for 61 native species protected under EU Habitats Directive is somewhat better with 52% assessed as being in \0xEBFavourablei conservation status. Assessments carried out on Bird species protected under the EU Birds Directive indicate declining trends for over 20% of breeding and wintering bird species.

The occurrence and spread of invasive and non-native species in Ireland is increasing for all environments. Invasive species, such as the Zebra Mussel and Grey Squirrel, may displace native species and considerably alter biodiversity, and subsequently, ecosystem processes and services. To date, the majority of invasive species in Ireland have been plants [including Hottentot Fig, Giant Rhubarb, and Giant Hogweed] but the future trend may be towards invertebrates and vertebrate species comprising a greater percentage of new arrivals.

Responses to these pressures on biodiversity and ecosystem services in Ireland include

implementation and enforcement of various EU Directives on Water, Habitats, Birds,

and Nitrates, the EU Regulation on Invasive Alien Species, and reform of the EU Common

Agricultural Policy [CAP] delivered through the national Rural Development Programme

[RDP] [SDG 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.8].

A central priority of the Irish RDP is restoring, preserving and enhancing ecosystems related to agriculture and forestry. Ireland will continue to develop and implement agri-environment schemes such as the Green Low-carbon Agri-Environment Scheme [GLAS] and Locally Led Agri-Environment Schemes [LLAES] and ensure that a measurable net gain for biodiversity is attained.

The Forestry Programme 2014-2020 [SDG 15.2] includes higher support for broadleaf planting and also measures to promote the creation of new native woodlands and the appropriate restoration management of existing native woodlands, to promote associated biodiversity and other ecosystem services. The Government commits to implementing actions in this programme in order to maximise positive outcomes for biodiversity and ecosystem services and restoration of areas impacted by inappropriate forestry.







Voluntary National Review 2018	89

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









The 2016 National Peatlands Strategy and the National Raised Bog SAC Management Plan [SDG 15.5] outlines the way forward for conservation and restoration of important peatland sites which will also combat desertification and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss.

Natural capital accounting has advanced with the aid of the UN Statistical Commission of the System for Environmental and Economic Accounts [SEEA], which provides an internationally agreed method to account for material natural resources like minerals, timber and fisheries. Progress in measuring and valuing elements of Irelandis biodiversity is being made through the valuation of water services, the production of guidelines

for natural capital accounting and reporting for government and industry, and the development of national forest accounts using the SEEA framework.

A national Biodiversity Expenditure Review [2010-2015] will be published in 2018 which examines expenditure from relevant sectors including, Agriculture, Forestry, Marine, Heritage and eNGOs. This review also presents innovative financial mechanisms that could be utilised to mobilise additional resources for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. Research will build on this review to undertake a Financial Needs Assessment to determine the resources required to conserve and restore biodiversity.

As a Party to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, Ireland has made a commitment to prepare Action Plans towards the achievement of the Conventionis targets: namely to secure the conservation of biological diversity; sustainable use of its components; and the equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilisation of genetic resources. Irelandis third National Biodiversity Action Plan [NBAP], 2017-2021 [SDG 15.9] sets out actions through which a range of government, civil and private sectors will undertake to achieve Irelandis Vision for Biodiversity that \0xECbiodiversity and ecosystems in Ireland are conserved and restored, delivering benefits essential for all sectors of society and that Ireland contributes to efforts to halt the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of ecosystems in the EU and globally.

The NBAP contains 119 actions under a framework of seven strategic objectives. These encompass mainstreaming biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors; strengthening the knowledge base for the conservation; increasing awareness and appreciation of biodiversity and ecosystem services; conserving and restoring biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside; conserving and restoring ecosystem services in the marine environment; expanding and improving management of protected areas and species; and strengthening international governance for biodiversity and ecosystem services.

Many of the targeted actions in the NBAP also contribute towards Irelandis obligations under EU environmental directives and other relevant national policies including the National Peatlands Strategy and the Climate Change Adaptation Framework.













90 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









The NBAP highlights the 2030 Agenda which recognises that sustainable management of natural resources is relevant to achieving all the SDGs, and therefore the crucial role of biodiversity and ecosystem services in the well-being of both people and our planet. The actions under each objective within the NBAP will contribute towards achieving many of the SDGs. These links between the NBAP objectives and the SDGs are listed after each objective within Appendix 1 of the NBAP.

One of the actions within the NBAP aims to \0xECBuild on the National Biodiversity Indicators to develop state, pressures, and response indicators to allow assessment of Irelandis national and international biodiversity commitments by 2020, including this the third NBAP, the EU Biodiversity Strategy, the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the SDGs. These indicators are hosted on the National Biodiversity Data Centre website http:// indicators.biodiversityireland.ie/. The indicators are currently being tagged where linkages to the SDGs have been identified

Supporting the SDGs Globally

Strengthening international governance for biodiversity and ecosystem services is one of the strategic objectives of Irelandis National Biodiversity Action Plan [NBAP]. The plan also includes a specific target on publishing a Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora [CITES] national enforcement plan that will incorporate actions from the EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking [SDG15.7].

Ireland has signed and ratified a number of other international conventions, treaties, protocols and agreements that seek to provide a global response and approach to protecting biodiversity and ecosystem services, including: the Convention on Biological Diversity [CBD], the UN Bonn Convention [on conservation of migratory species of wild animals], and the Ramsar Convention [on wetlands]. Ireland is also a member of the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services [IPBES].

The NBAP includes a target for Biodiversity to be made a component of Irelandis development cooperation programme; and for support to, and cooperation with, developing countries to take into account biological diversity through the application of the CBD. Ireland will also continue to contribute data and information to European and international networks [including the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, and the European Environment Agency] to support conservation research and policy.























Voluntary National Review 2018	91

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions

Ireland is, by global and EU standards a highly peaceful and safe country. The EU SDGs indicators demonstrate that Irelandis death rate due to homicide, the percentage of the Irish population reporting occurrence of crime, violence or vandalism in their area, Irish Government expenditure on law courts and the perceived independence of the justice system in Ireland are all better than the EU average. Irelandis score of 74/100 in the Corruption Perceptions Index, where 100 equals minimal perception of corruption, is positive but leaves room for further improvement.

Investigations into all forms of criminality in Ireland is solely a matter for the Commissioner of An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na [the Irish Police Service] and his management team and the Minister for Justice and Equality has no role in relation to particular investigations. For its part, the Government remains committed to ensuring that An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na have the necessary resources to tackle all forms of crime in Ireland.

An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na continues to monitor all new and emerging crime trends, including trends relating to violent crime. Garda Operation Thor involves a broad range of activities to tackle organised crime gangs and other prolific offenders as well as working with communities

to prevent crime. This comprehensive national operation is supported by the enhanced Government investment in Garda resources, including an allocation of almost \0xC4100 million for Garda overtime in 2017. Furthermore, An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7nais Modernisation and Renewal Programme 2016-2021 places a strong emphasis on developing and supporting the community policing ethos of the organisation and enhancing the current delivery model so that Garda\0xCC spend more time in the community, gaining public confidence and trust and providing a greater sense of security. It will result in the introduction of multi-skilled Community Policing Teams in every district. Community Policing Teams will be made-up of Garda\0xCC from a number of different units who will work with the local community to prevent and detect crime, including all forms of serious crime. Substantial progress is being made by An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na in tackling these forms of crime, particularly the area of property-related crime [SDG 16.1].

\0xEBTackling Youth Crimei, the Youth Justice Action Plan [YJAP] 2014-2018 is a cross-cutting policy statement in relation to children and young persons who may become involved

in crime and anti-social behaviour. The YJAP forms part of \0xEBBetter Outcomes, Brighter Futuresi, the National Policy Framework for Young People 2014-2020, developed by the Department of Children and Youth Affairs to support better outcomes for children and families. The broad aims of the YJAP are to:

u support the continued downward trends in high volume crime and the use of detention;

u become more adept in understanding and intervening in more serious crime offending patterns;

u improve the effectiveness and efficiency of these interventions in addressing the behaviour and needs of the children and young persons involved.

The Plan involves evidence-informed targeted interventions to achieve better outcomes for children who come in contact with the criminal justice system, as well as reducing the level of crime and its impact on communities. The implementation of the YJAP is overseen by a Cross-Agency Team led by the Irish Youth Justice Service, with representation from the Probation Service, An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na, the Irish Prison Service, the Oberstown Detention School Campus and TUSLA n the Child and Family Agency [SDG 16. 2].


92 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









The core objective of the Second National Action Plan to Prevent and Combat Human Trafficking in Ireland is to identify and support victims. It contains a key focus for those that may be particularly vulnerable, such as children. As such there are 10 actions aimed at achieving this that are specific to children, including improved data collection, training, and ensuring that the best interests of child victims are the primary consideration in the provision of all services [SDG 16.2].

EU Justice Scoreboard: Ireland participates in the EU Justice Scoreboard project every year. This provides comparable data on the independence, quality, and efficiency of national justice systems. Ireland scores very highly on measures of the independence of the judiciary generally throughout the 2017 EU Justice Scoreboard report.

Review of the Administration of Civil Justice: In March 2017, it was announced that a Group would be established to review and reform the administration of civil justice in the State. The Group is to report to the Minister for Justice and Equality and will make recommendations for changes with a view to improving access to civil justice in Ireland. The aim of the Review is to examine the current administration of civil justice in the State with a view to, among other things, improving access to justice, reducing the cost of litigation, and ensuring timely hearings [SDG 16.3].

Through its membership of the Financial Action Taskforce [FATF], an inter-governmental organisation set up by the G7 with 37 member countries of which Ireland is one, Ireland is subject to mutual evaluation [peer review] with regard to the strength and effectiveness of our anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing measures. The most recent mutual evaluation review was published in September 2017 and was overall positive in nature, while highlighting specific areas where improvements need to be made. Work continues to ensure compliance with the findings of the mutual evaluation review, while also focusing on the transposition of European legal instruments in this area [primarily relating to the Fourth Anti-Money Laundering Directive] [SDG 16.4].

The development and implementation of anti-corruption policies does not rest with any one body in Ireland. The competence to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute corruption is spread across a number of agencies with a mandate to tackle corruption such as tribunals of inquiry, commissions of inquiry, high court inspectors, the Financial Regulator, the Standards in Public Office Commission [SIPO], local authorities, the Ombudsman, parliamentary committees on membersi interests, the Garda National

Economic Crime Bureau, the Criminal Assets Bureau [CAB], the Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement [ODCE], the Comptroller and Auditor-General, the Public Accounts Committee and the Director of Public Prosecutions [responsible for all criminal prosecutions of the most serious cases].

Article 6 of the UN Convention against Corruption requires that each State Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, ensure the existence of a body or bodies that prevent corruption. The Convention does not mandate the creation or maintenance of a body and recognises that, given the range of responsibilities and functions to be undertaken, it may be that this task is assigned to different existing agencies.







Voluntary National Review 2018	93

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









The Government is strongly committed to ensuring that the necessary domestic measures are in place to effectively combat corruption both nationally and in the context of our international commitments [SDG 16.5].

There is a broad spectrum of legislation in relation to the prevention of corruption including the Prevention of Corruption Acts, ethics legislation, political funding legislation, money laundering legislation, the Companies Acts etc. Also, the Programme for Government contains a commitment to enact a new consolidated and reformed anti-corruption law.

The Criminal Justice [Corruption] Bill published on the 1 November 2017, will clarify and strengthen the law criminalising corruption. The Bill will completely modernise Irish anti-corruption laws. It will repeal and replace the seven previous Prevention of Corruption Acts dating back as far as 1889. However, the Bill is not merely a consolidation of the old laws. It is a robust and innovative piece of legislation that provides for a number of new offences as well as stronger penalties for those convicted of corruption. When it is enacted, it will significantly strengthen our capacity to tackle corruption, both in public office and in commercial enterprises.

The Bill includes a new offence of \0xEBtrading in influencei to criminalise bribing a person who may exert an improper influence over the decision-making of a public or foreign official. Under the Bill, it will be an offence for a public official to make use of confidential information acquired in the course of their duties to obtain an advantage,

The Bill also includes a new strict liability offence where a corporation can be liable for the actions of directors, managers, employees or agents who commit a corruption offence for the benefit of the corporation. Designed to prevent corruption in corporate bodies, it shall be a defence for a company to prove that it took all reasonable measures and exercised due diligence to avoid the commission of the offence.

Regarding penalties, sentences of up to 10 years are provided for as well as unlimited

fines for conviction on indictment of the main corruption offences in the Bill. The Bill

gives discretion to a court to order that a public official found guilty of a corruption offence

be removed from their public office or position. The Court will also have the discretion to

prohibit those convicted of corruption offences from seeking certain public appointments

for up to ten years.

The Bill will help to meet Irelandis commitments to various international anti-corruption instruments, such as EU Council Decisions, the United Nations Convention on Corruption, the OECD Convention on Bribery of foreign public officials and the Council of Europe Criminal Law Convention on Corruption.

Our Public Service 2020 is part of a the broader transformation landscape across Irelandis public service and is designed \0xECto empower frontline service providers to make more decisions, ensure more accessible public services, encourage more collaboration between public sector bodies and reward public service innovation and change [Programme for Partnership Government 2016]. The actions of Our Public Service 2020 cut across all areas of the public service and will support continuous improvements in how public servants and public service organisations deliver for the Irish people. The actions are designed to complement and support the many reforms already being delivered at local and national level in the various sectors of the public service. This reform strategy has been designed



94 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









to enable the public service to deliver better outcomes and results for the public in an increasingly complex environment.

The Civil Service Renewal Plan is being delivered on a phased basis and significant progress has been made on the programme of change to date. The Plan outlines 25 practical actions to create a more unified, professional, responsive and open and accountable Civil Service. The overall vision is to provide a world-class service to the State and to the people of Ireland.

The next phase of implementation of Civil Service Renewal, overseen by the Civil Service Management Board [CSMB], aims to deepen and embed renewal across the Civil Service and also consolidate and implement current programmes already underway. Other priority actions for 2018 include work to strengthen policy-making; to improve the delivery of shared whole-of-Government projects; to support the development of a National Data Infrastructure and the area of innovation. Work will continue to implement the Civil Service People Strategy; Digital and ICT Strategy and Shared Services Strategy. In addition, actions will be taken in follow up to the results of the 2017 Civil Service Employee Engagement Survey which was published in March 2018. Civil Service Renewal will also align with the programme of reform in Our Public Service 2020.

Ireland continues to pursue a wide-ranging reform programme aimed at delivering an open, accountable and ethical government underpinned by a transparent and effective public system. Real progress has been made on several different fronts with a number of significant legislative and public governance measures being delivered.

Better use and re-use of the data Government holds is a cornerstone of the drive for greater digital delivery of services, a key priority in our efforts to reform the Public Service. Widespread data-sharing between public bodies reduces the burden on citizens and business by avoiding the need to provide the same information multiple times to different bodies.

Publication of official non-personal data in open format is also a core element of the Governmentis efforts to improve the use of data. The Department of Public Expenditure and Reform is leading on Irelandis Open Data initiative, which is a key part of the Public Serviceis reform activities. Significant progress has been made in progressing the Open Data initiative and an Open Data Strategy 2017-2022 was published in July 2017. Implementation of the Strategy is underway under the leadership of the Open Data Governance Board. The vision is for Ireland to be a leader in Open Data and to create an environment where the economic, social and democratic benefits of Open Data are recognised and realised.

A modernised, consolidated, restructured and more accessible Freedom of Information Act was also introduced in October 2014, repealing the 1997 and 2003 Freedom of Information [FOI] Acts.

A substantial review of the effectiveness and efficiency of Irelandis current Ethics framework has been undertaken, including consideration of the recommendations of the Mahon and Moriarty Tribunals and other relevant recommendations, as well as international best practice. The Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015 established a register for lobbying and a new Public Sector Standards Bill aims to significantly enhance the existing framework for identifying, disclosing and managing conflicts of interest and minimising corruption risks, to achieve a shift towards a more dynamic and risk-based system of



Voluntary National Review 2018	95

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









compliance and to ensure that the institutional framework for oversight, investigation and enforcement is robust and effective. The Government also introduced new legislation on Protected Disclosures in 2014.

Ireland is also a member of the Freedom Online Coalition. The Freedom Online Coalition [FOC] is a cross-regional coalition which is committed to advancing internet freedom n free expression, association, assembly and privacy online n worldwide. The Coalition was established in 2012, with Ireland as one of its founding members. Through intergovernmental meetings and consultations with stakeholders, as well as at the annual multi-stakeholder conference, the Coalition\0xEBs member states work together diplomatically to voice concern over measures to restrict internet freedom and support those individuals whose human rights online are curtailed. Ireland endorses the principles behind the Coalitionis recommendations and highlights our national priorities, particularly in relation to the right of freedom to expression and the protection of civil society space. The founding declaration of the Coalition contains a statement of dedication on the part of members to \0xECpromote the freedoms of expression, association, and peaceful assembly with respect to the internet and connection technologies [SDG 16.10].

Supporting the SDGs Globally

Irelandis approach to sustaining peace and international security is anchored in the values set out in our Constitution of the \0xEBideal of peace and friendly cooperation amongst nations founded on international justice and moralityi. This guides Irelandis efforts towards a safer, more peaceful, sustainable, equitable and inclusive world. The promotion and protection of human rights is a fundamental feature of Irelandis foreign and international development policies.

Irelandis commitment to the principles and values enshrined in the United Nations Charter has been constant, and our steadfast contribution to the UN in the fields of sustainable development, peacekeeping, disarmament and human rights has been at the heart of Irish foreign policy. We recognise that there can be no end to poverty without peace and Irelandis approach to achieving sustainable peace prioritises investment in conflict prevention, an increased focus on post-conflict reconciliation and other forms of peacebuilding, and the empowerment of women to have a more visible and recognised role in decision-making. Ireland has strengthened its contribution to international efforts aimed at achieving sustainable peace, in particular through support to UN mediation mechanisms, our support for the UN Peacebuilding Fund, and ongoing advocacy related to conflict prevention and peacebuilding aspects [SDG 16.1]. Ireland also has a bilateral development programme in a number of states affected by fragility or conflict including Sierra Leone, Liberia, Zimbabwe, Palestine and Colombia [SDG 16.1, SDG 16.2].

Ireland has a strong and committed tradition of principled humanitarian action through its international development cooperation programme. Irelandis response to crises is underpinned by a strong commitment to international humanitarian law and the provision of flexible and timely funding that is based on the principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality and humanity. Our humanitarian engagement is based on need and prioritises forgotten crises. It gives us a significant footprint in fragile and conflict-affected contexts beyond our development programmes in partner countries. As a result of our response to the increasing number of crises in Syria, Yemen, the Horn of Africa, and the Lake Chad




96 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









region, as well as climate-related emergencies, humanitarian assistance now accounts for over a quarter of Irelandis overseas development assistance.

The Irish Defence Forces have a proud tradition of successful participation in peace support operations. The operational experience gained continues to form a solid foundation from which to face the challenges posed by the changing nature of international conflict prevention and crisis management. The Government decides on a case-by-case basis whether, when and how to commit Defence Forcesi personnel to such operations, via a \0xECtriple lock system:

u The operation must be authorised/mandated by the United Nations

u It must be approved by the Government; and

u It must be approved by way of a resolution of D\0xB7il ireann, where the size of a Defence Forces contribution is more than twelve personnel.

Irish Defence Forces personnel have served in countries all over the world, including: Central America, Russia, the former Yugoslavia, Cambodia, Lebanon, Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Kuwait, Namibia, Western Sahara, Liberia, East Timor, Tchad, Mali, Cyprus, Congo, Angola, Somalia, Eritrea, and Cote diIvoire. The high standing of the Irish Defence Forces within UN Peacekeeping is reflected in the senior positions that have been held by Irish Military personnel in the past, Force Commander in Cyprus [UNFICYP], Syria-Israel Border [UNDOF] and Lebanon [UNIFIL], Chief of Staff of the United Nations Troops Supervision Organisation in the Middle East [UNTSO] and UNMIL in Liberia and Chief Military Observer India- Pakistani Border [UNMOGIP] [SDG 16.1, SDG 16.2].

The Irish Defence Forces have a workplace policy on human rights and a dignity charter designed to create awareness of the Defence Forcesi role and obligations in relation to gender-based violence and human rights. The Defence Forces ensures that its personnel deploying on active service to missions throughout the world receive detailed instruction in the areas of human rights afforded to minorities and women, cultural awareness issues and codes of conduct and behaviour both for the conduct of their [respective] missions and also their individual behaviour. The Defence Forces United Nations Training School Ireland [UNTSI] conducts the following courses ; Protection of Civilians; UN Observers; Human Rights Train the Trainers; Civilian/Military Relations, all of which have modules on Gender-Based Violence [GBV] and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse [SEA].

At the EU, Ireland advocates for a strong EU contribution to peacekeeping. Oriented towards external challenges of peacekeeping, conflict prevention and strengthening international security, the EUis Common Security and Defence Policy [CSDP] provides the operational capacity to undertake crisis management operations outside the EU, in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter. Ireland participates in a military and civilian capacity within CSDP missions, with 86 personnel currently deployed across 3 Missions [EUFOR BiH, EUTM Mali, EUNAVFOR Med OP SOPHIA]. Irish Military personnel have commanded the following EU CSDP Missions: Operational Commander, EUFOR Tchad; Mission Commander, EU Training Mission Somalia [SDG 16.1, SDG 16.2].

Ireland focuses on promoting gender equality and womenis empowerment, both from a rights based perspective and also in recognising gender inequality as a root cause of conflict and instability. Ireland prioritises preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence in peacekeeping and in response to emergencies. Ireland has produced two National Action Plans on UNSCR 1325 on Women, Peace and Security, and will begin



Voluntary National Review 2018	97

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









consultations for a third in the second half of 2018. Commitments in the National Action Plan extend to all of Irelandis peace and security work, and regular monitoring ensures coherence across Government Departments. Ireland continues to promote the agenda at the international level, across international policies and instruments, whilst also placing emphasis on domestic implementation. In addition to addressing aspects of the WPS agenda that focus on conflict related harms against women, Ireland also places a strong emphasis on the promotion of womenis participation in international peacebuilding, such as in negotiations and mechanisms of international security [SDG 16.1].

Irelandis work on Disarmament has included a strong focus on the gendered impact of weapons and on the need to improve womenis participation rates in disarmament forums and negotiations. Ireland has advocated successfully within the EU to have gender and disarmament adopted as one of the EUis priority areas for action in its disarmament and non-proliferation work.

The Irish Defence Forces have published a Second Defence Forces Action Plan on the Implementation of UNSCR 1325. The Defence Forces have also created a specific Staff Officer Gender Advisory expert appointment to mainstream gender in the Defence Forces, to co-ordinate professional development and training in this field, and to monitor the application of UN 1325 across all of the Defence Forces activities at home and abroad.

The Defence Forces also have an Equality and Diversity policy which includes detailed guidelines on Gender, Diversity and Anti-Racism and Equality of Opportunity.

The promotion of the rule of law and ensuring access to justice for all is reflected in Irelandis active adherence to core international and European human rights treaties, strong support for strengthening the regional and multilateral human rights framework and support for universal adherence to the Rome Statue establishing the International Criminal Court. Ireland is committed to the universality, indivisibility and interrelatedness of all human rights, to accountability for human rights violations and abuses and to the protection of those who are most vulnerable and marginalised. We participate in the scrutiny of the UN membersi human rights records though the Universal Periodic Review process. We contribute to the EUis human rights work though EU human rights dialogues with non-EU countries and EU human rights country strategy. We are committed to the Council of Europeis role as the reference point for human rights, democracy and rule of law across Europe, and the role of the European Convention on Human Rights and its associated Court. We promote respect for and adherence to International Humanitarian Law in all circumstances [SDG 16.3].

Ireland has played a leading role in efforts to promote disarmament, non-proliferation and the regulation of new weapons working to secure agreements setting global norms on landmines, cluster munitions and other weapons. In 2017, Ireland played a leading role in the process that led to the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons [TPNW]. Through the international development cooperation programme, Ireland supports de-mining in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Laos and Zimbabwe [SDG 16.4].

Ireland is a party to a number of international agreements, including the Council of Europeis Group of States against Corruption [GRECO], the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Public Officials in International Business Transactions. As a party to these international agreements, Ireland has undergone numerous evaluations and remains subject to such peer evaluation . The Reports and recommendations concerning Ireland are published on the websites of the Council of Europe, OECD and UNODC [SDG 16.5].



98 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









We are committed to effective, accountable and transparent institutions. This continues to be an important aspect of Irelandis international development policy. We work to strengthen the institutions of democracy, rule of law and accountability in the countries where we work, so that they work for the good of citizens, especially those who are marginalised or excluded. Programmes targeting key accountability institutions such as the Office of the Auditor General in Mozambique, and Parliaments, which have responsibility over public finances and the enforcement of accountability, are also supported in Uganda and Zambia. The emergence of multi-donor funding mechanisms for civil society organisations engaged in governance activities is a key feature in Malawi, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Uganda. Such funding mechanisms provide resources to local civil society actors working in challenging governance and operational environments, that focus on poverty reduction, good governance, accountability, protection of human rights, access to justice and capacity development [SDG 16.6].

Ireland is committed to the principles of development effectiveness at a global,

and particularly country level, and to find innovative and effective ways of promoting country ownership, whilst continuing to support a focus on results, accountability and transparency and inclusive partnerships. Development effectiveness principles inform Irish Aidis strategic planning processes and country programme evaluations [SDG 16.6].

Ireland supports the strengthening of parliamentary oversight, accountability and domestic resource mobilisation in developing countries. We continue to have a partnership with the International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions [INTOSAI], to support independent audit institutions in developing countries, thereby facilitating improved tracking and reporting of expenditures to parliament. In support of the promotion of transparency and accountability, we fund Transparency International in their global anti-corruption efforts [SDG 16.6].

Irelandis support to the African Tax Administration Forum [ATAF] has also focused on tax evasion and illicit financial flows and has assisted developing countries to overcome obstacles to engage in Exchange of Information. Encouraging results are emerging, with Uganda for example recovering over US$9 million as a result of successful support, following training for Ugandan officials by ATAF.

Ireland recognises that civil society space has come under increasing pressure in many parts of the world in recent years and in some countries, dialogue with civil society remains limited and the space for civil society engagement is either narrow or shrinking. The protection of civil society space is amongst Irelandis foreign policy priorities and we lead on a resolution on the matter for the first time at the Human Rights Council in 2013. Ireland continues to advocate at international level for the creation of a safe and enabling environment for civil society, free from reprisals, through multilateral engagement at human rights fora such as the United Nations and the EU and through bilateral relations [SDG 16.7].

Ireland has consistently supported broadening and strengthening the participation of developing countries in the institutions of global governance. A key commitment on Security Council reform is to emphasise the importance of increased African and SIDS representation [SDG 16.8].







Voluntary National Review 2018	99

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









Goal 17: Partnership for Goals

Working in partnership with others is central to Irelandis approach to international cooperation and to our contribution to meeting the SDGs.

SDG Goal 17.1 calls for strengthened domestic resource mobilisation and, consistent with this goal, Ireland supports and provides funding to the OECDis role in strengthening intergovernmental efforts to develop global norms on taxation through their tax and development programme. The Tax Inspectors without Borders initiative which emerged from the OECD programme has seen a total increase in revenue collected for developing countries of over US$260million.

Ireland strongly supports the OECDis role in strengthening intergovernmental efforts to develop global norms on taxation and we are committed to the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting [BEPS] project, Country-by-Country reporting and automatic exchange of tax information. These are important initiatives that can help developing countries increase their tax take and generate increased resources. Ireland also supports the African Tax Administration Forum [ATAF] to articulate tax priorities, build capacity in tax policy and administration and advance the role of taxation in African governance and state building [SDG 17.1].

In 2017, Ireland joined the Addis Tax Initiative, an international commitment to strengthen international cooperation in the area of tax and development. The Initiative, launched at the Financing for Development summit held in Ethiopia in July 2015, calls on developed countries to collectively double their support for taxation/domestic revenue mobilisation by 2020 at the latest, partner countries to step up domestic revenue mobilisation and adhere to a core set of principles to enable effective revenue collection and for all signatories to ensure policy coherence for development [SDG 17.1].

With close links to achieving SDG 3 and SDG 8, Ireland supports north-south and south-south cooperation in the development of new products for diseases of poverty through health research. For example, our partner, The Global TB Alliance is working closely with European, Indonesian and South African partners to ensure that new, improved TB treatments are developed and evaluated and that partners are ready to launch these new medicines and make them available to patients as soon as they are available. [SDG 17.6].

Ireland supports the WTO Trust fund for LDC participation at WTO Ministerial Conferences. For example, 108 delegates from LDCs were supported to participate in the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference in 2015, including all of Irish Aidis LDC Key Partner Countries. Six Ministerial Decisions on agriculture, cotton and issues related to LDCs were adopted at this event.

In the EU, Ireland is a strong advocate for negotiating an approach that was as flexible as possible under WTO law, with a view to delivering trade agreements that support the development priorities and needs of African, Caribbean and Pacific [ACP] states. [SDG 17.10].

Ireland has facilitated increased engagement with Irish and UK wholesalers to facilitate countries in Sub-Saharan Africa as a source for retail goods. Irish Aid also supports a three year project on Access to Markets for Value Added goods made in East Africa which has led to strengthened capacity of 26 East African producers to market their products internationally [SDG 17.11].



100 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 4  Goals and Targets









The SDGs set the context for the need for increased policy coherence across our domestic and international engagement and work. Cross-government work is evident in several key areas such as Health, Agriculture, Environment and Climate Change, and Peace and Security. Concrete examples of good practice include recognition of the challenge posed by climate change in the Programme for a Partnership Government and in the establishment of a new Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment; strengthened working relationships between the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Department of Health and the Department of Agriculture Food and the Marine on nutrition issues, and Irelandis multi stakeholder response to the Ebola crisis in West Africa. Building on already established representative fora, the Irish Forum for International Agriculture and Development [IFIAD] was recently launched with representation from a number of Government Departments, the private sector, civil society and academia. This forum provides the potential to advance policy coherence for development in relation to agriculture. Support to global health workforce planning has also been a key feature of cross departmental work, highlighted by the agreement of the 2017 Dublin Declaration on Human Resources for Health [SDG 17.14].

Delivering aid that reaches and benefits poor people in developing countries underpins Irelandis development co-operation. To achieve this, Ireland remains fully committed to aligning to national and local development priorities. We support and enable partner governments and civil society organisations to lead their development efforts while ensuring that we maintain a good understanding about the context in which we operate. Our programming objectives are grounded in evidence, aligned to partner country needs, and agreed in consultation with the partner government and other stakeholders. By providing multi-year indicative budgets for our programmes, Ireland provides good predictability to its partners and promotes the use of mixed funding mechanisms, which in fragile situations especially allows for adaptation of the programme and the means of delivery as the situation evolves [SDG 17.15].

International Financial Institutions will play a central role in the global partnership necessary to mobilise the finance necessary to achieve the SDGs. Through Irelandis financial contributions and active policy engagement at these institutions, we will aim to ensure that there is the means available to support truly sustainable economic growth, combat climate change and tackle poverty in all its forms. In this area Ireland has scaled up its efforts in recent years, joining the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and commencing contributions to the Green Climate Fund to complement our existing membership of the IMF, World Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Investment Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and Council of Europe Development Bank. Most recently, Ireland has applied for membership of the African Development Bank which will complement our strong bilateral aid programme to the region [SDG 17.16].

Ireland provides financial support to the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation and has participated in the monitoring rounds over the last number of years. Ireland also supports development effectiveness in fragile contexts through the partnership for International Dialogue on Peace and Security [IDPS] [SDG 17.16].

Ireland has committed to implement fully our international commitments on aid transparency, and to publish aid data in the internationally agreed format. We also work with our partners n governments, NGOs, multilateral organisations, and others n to ensure that they adhere to similar standards of accountability and transparency [SDG 17.16, SDG 17.17].




Voluntary National Review 2018	101

Chapter 4? Goals and Targets









At the heart of the means of implementation of the SDGs are how ambitious development goals are to be financed. Ireland firmly believes that there is no scope for allowing momentum on the 2030 Agenda to slacken. Whilst recognising the critical importance of private finance to achieve the Goals, Ireland stresses the importance of retaining the focus of ODA on development and poverty reduction, particularly in countries most in need, and in bolstering domestic resource mobilisation as key to sustainable development [SDG 17.17].

Finally, related to data, monitoring and accountability, Ireland advocates in particular for gender disaggregated data and supports the Evidence and Data for Gender Equality Joint Programme of UN Women and the UN Statistics Division which aims to increase the availability and use of gender equality statistics in relation to education, employment, and asset ownership. Irish Aid also supports the UN Women flagship programme on statistics, Making Every Woman and Girl Count. The programmes objective is the production, availability, accessibility and use of quality data and statistics on key aspects of gender equality and womenis empowerment. Ireland provided funding of \0xC4150,000 to the flagship programme in 2016 [SDG 17.18, SDG 17.19].















































102 Voluntary National Review 2018

Chapter 5  Conclusions and Next Steps








5.	Conclusions and Next Steps

Ireland has, particularly in recent years, achieved significant progress on economic, social and environmental challenges through the mechanism of cross-government or whole-of-Government action plans or strategies. This joined up approach to policy should serve Ireland well in the period to 2030 as it implements the SDGs. As can be seen from the preceding chapter, Ireland has an extensive suite of national policies which address the

17 SDGs and their associated targets, and particularly in relation to social inclusion, Ireland is adopting world leading approaches for example in relation to the LGBTI+ community.

While this VNR reflects Irelandis overall strong economic recovery it also indicates that challenges remain for Ireland in terms of meeting its own national poverty targets, and addressing inequality of outcomes within the education system. While national policies in relation to achieving gender equality are ambitious, further progress in this area will need to be made, especially in relation to representation within the political system. A significant level of investment is required to protect Irelandis drinking and bathing waters but this will be addressed through the River Basin Management Plan and its associated capital investment. Performance in relation to life on land and under water in Ireland is also mixed. It should be noted in this regard that Irelandis Biodiversity Action Plan is potentially the most detailed Irish example of engagement with the SDGs in a sectoral policy and this is a positive indicator of future progress.

Ireland is adopting innovative collaboration based approaches to particular SDGs with the private sector, through the Stakeholder Forum on Corporate Social Responsibility and the Retail Action Group on Food Waste. Government will explore opportunities for more such collaborations, as well continuing and increasing its engagement with and support to civil society groups active in the SDG space.

This VNR has firmly placed Irelandis SDG implementation within the context of our membership of the EU. This is appropriate, as a significant amount of the policy and regulatory measures through which Ireland will achieve the SDGs are developed within the EU. The use of the EU SDG indicator set has also been beneficial to the preparation of this VNR as it provided an external independent guide as to indicator selection and provides for consistent cross country comparisons with Irelandis EU peers. Ireland intends to continue using this approach towards indicators in subsequent SDG reporting and will support the EUis work in further developing and expanding its SDG indicator set. Additionally, as the EUis own response to the SDGs continue to develop, Ireland as a Member State will be active in contributing to that development and will seek to keep the SDGs at the centre of the EUis internal agenda.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	103

Chapter 5? Conclusions and Next Steps









The timing of this VNR is useful given that Ireland has recently launched or will shortly launch a number of major national policies with relevance to the SDGs, and subsequent reports will provide information on the impact of these policies. The first SDG National implementation Plan is obviously the most relevant policy and Ireland will now focus on establishing and bedding in the ambitious stakeholder engagement arrangements and SDG awareness strategies provided for under the Plan. Both the NDP and the NPF recognise the interdependence of economic and social growth, as well as the importance of sustainability. The forthcoming National Social Inclusion Plan will also be an important pillar of Irelandis SDG implementation, as will the new Policy on International Development, which will further strengthen the alignment of Irelandis aid programme with the SDGs

Overall, while providing an important an comprehensive overview in relation to Irelandis SDG performance and relevant national policies, this first VNR should be considered as a stock taking exercise, which establishes a baseline against which Irelandis future progress will be measured. While remaining committed to reporting on all 17 Goals, for its next scheduled VNR, in 2022, Ireland will consider additional means of providing a greater level of sectoral detail, possibly through supplementary online reporting.















































104 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








Annex I: Statistical Annex

This annex presents data for Ireland using the EUis SDG indicator set to track Irelandis progress towards meeting the SDGs. The annex provides data for 95 of the 100 EU SDG indicators, as the remaining five do not cover EU Member State level data but rather the EU as a whole and are therefore outside the scope of this National Review. The data included in this annex has been provided by the Central Statistics Office [CSO] Irelandis national statistical office and presented in tabular format by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment who coordinated Irelandis VNR process. The annex has been prepared on the basis of the most recently available data as of March 2018. Where available, national data has been disaggregated on the basis of gender and socio-economic status.

Ireland has chosen to rely on the EU SDG indicator set for several reasons. Ireland considers that the EU SDG indicator set provides for a comprehensive and relevant assessment of Member Statesi progress toward achieving the SDGs. In addition, use of the EU SDG indicator set allows for comparisons between Ireland and its EU peers, and reflects the fact that a significant amount of the measures through which Ireland will achieve the SDGs will be developed/implemented within the EUis legislative and/or policy frameworks. Finally, Ireland considers the use of the EU SDG indicator enhances the transparency of this statistical annex as the indicators used have been independently selected by the EU statistical agency, Eurostat.

The EU SDG indicator set was published in July 2017 and the first \0xEBMonitoring Report on Progress Towards the SDGS in an EU Contexti based on the set was published in November 2017. The EU SDG indicator set is structured along the 17 SDGs and covers the social, economic, environmental and institutional dimension of sustainability as represented

by the Agenda 2030. The Monitoring report notes that \0xEBthe 100 indicators are evenly distributed across the 17 Goals, so that progress in each SDG is measured by five or six indicators primarily attributed to them which reflect its broad objective and ambition. The indicators have been selected taking into account their policy relevance from an EU perspective, availability, country coverage, data freshness and quality. With a few exceptions, the indicators stem from already existing indicator sets used for monitoring long-term EU policiesi.

Ireland intends to use the data presented in this annex as a baseline for its subsequent implementation of the SDGs. While the presentation of longer term data in this annex provides context for Irelandis progress in implementing the SDGs, Ireland considers the adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 2015 as the appropriate starting point for measuring ongoing progress.

A number of the charts in this annex feature breaks in the times series presented. Breaks in time series may occur when the data collected in a specific year are not completely comparable with the data from previous years. This could be caused by a change in the classification used, the definition of the variable, the data coverage and/or other reasons. Breaks in time series could affect the continuity and consistency of data over time. However, it should be noted that such breaks do not undermine the reliability of the data.






Voluntary National Review 2018	105

Appendices









SDG 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere

Eurostat SDG indicator 01.11 People at risk of poverty or social exclusion












% of population


People at risk of poverty or social exclusion

(%)

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year





Eurostat SDG indicator 01.12 People at risk of poverty after social transfers












% of population


People at risk of income poverty after social

transfers (%)

25


20

15

10

5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year













106 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 01.13 Severely materially deprived people








% of population


Severely materially deprived people (%)

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 01.14 People living in households with very low work intensity

People living in households with very low

work intensity (%)


% of total pop. aged less than 60


30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year






















Voluntary National Review 2018	107

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 01.21 Housing cost overburden rate








% of population


Housing cost overburden rate by poverty status - Total (%)

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year











% of population




Housing cost overburden rate by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year











% of population




Housing cost overburden rate by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)

3


2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year












108 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 01.22 Share of total population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation, or rot in window frames or floor

Population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - Total (%)


% of population


20

15

10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year



Population living in a dwelling with leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


15

10

5

0







2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year



Population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


30

20

10

0






2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016


Year












Voluntary National Review 2018	109

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 03.41 Self-reported unmet need for medical examination and care

Self-reported unmet need for medical care by detailed reason - too expensive or too far on waiting list (%)




% of pop. aged 16 and over


4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year





Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - too expensive (%)





% of pop. aged 16 and over


3


2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year













110 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices




















% of pop. aged 16 and over









Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - too far (%)

0.12


0.1


0.08


0.06


0.04


0.02


0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year



Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - waiting list (%)







% of pop. aged 16 and over


1.2



1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	111

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.11 Share of total population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household









% of population


Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - Total (%)

3

2

1

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year













% of population



Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

4

3

2

1

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year















% of population





Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)

4


2

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year











112 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.10 Percentage of people affected by fuel poverty (inability to keep home adequately warm)








% of population


Population unable to keep home adequately

warm by poverty status - total (%)

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year












% of population





Population unable to keep home adequately warm by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

25

20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year





Population unable to keep home adequately warm by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


10


8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year












Voluntary National Review 2018	113

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 10.11 Real adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita in PPS

Adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita - purchasing power standard (PPS) per inhabitant (%)




% of EU average


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita - purchasing power standard (PPS) per inhabitant





Observation value


25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year

















114 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









SDG 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

Eurostat SDG indicator 02.11 Obesity rate








% of pop. aged 18 or over


Obesity rate by body mass index - Pre-obese

(%)

40

30

20

10

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year








% of pop. aged 18 or over



Obesity rate by body mass index - Overweight

(%)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year







% of pop. aged 18 or over



Obesity rate by body mass index - Obese (%)

20


15

10

5

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year










Voluntary National Review 2018	115

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 02.21 Agricultural factor income per annual work unit (AWU)

Agricultural factor income per annual work unit

(AWU) - chain linked volumes (2010)







Euro per AWU


25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year




Agricultural factor income per annual work unit

(AWU)







Index 2010 = 100


160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year



















116 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 02.26 Government support to agricultural research and development

Government support to agricultural research

and development







Euro per inhabitant


25


20


15


10


5


0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year



Government support to agricultural research

and development







Million euro


120


100

80

60

40

20

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	117

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 02.31 Area under organic farming

Area under organic farming (%)





% of utilised agricultural area


2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 02.52 Ammonia emissions from agriculture

Ammonia emissions from agriculture







kilograms per hectare


28


27

26

25

24

23

22

21

20

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015












Year


























118 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 02.54 Gross nutrient balance on agricultural land (Nitrogren)

Gross nutrient balance on agricultural land by

nutrient - Nitrogen







kg per hectare


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 02.54 Gross nutrient balance on agricultural land (Phosphorus)

Gross nutrient balance on agricultural land by

nutrient - Phosphorus








kg per hectare


10


9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013

Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	119

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 06.24 Nitrate in groundwater

Nitrate in groundwater







mg NO3 per litre


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 15.41 Estimated soil erosion by water

Estimated soil erosion by water




% of non-artificial erosive area


1.2


1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year


















120 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









SDG 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

Eurostat SDG indicator 03.11 Life expectancy at birth

Life expectancy at birth by sex - Total






Age


82

81

80

79

78
77 

76 

75 

74 

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012

Year









Age



Life expectancy at birth by sex - Female

84

82

80

78

76

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012

Year


Life expectancy at birth by sex - Male







Age


80


79

78

77

76

75

74 

73 

72 

71 

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	121

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 03.14 Self-perceived health (good or very good)

Self-perceived health by level of perception -

good or very good (%)



% of population


85
84.5
84
83.5
83
82.5
82
81.5
81

80.5

2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 03.14 Self-perceived health (fair)

Self-perceived health by level of perception -

fair (%)




% of population


14.5

14

13.5

13

12.5

12

2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year





























122 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 03.14 Self-perceived health (bad or very bad)

Self-perceived health by level of perception -

bad or very bad (%)



% of population


5

4

3

2

1

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 03.25 Death rate due to chronic diseases











than65
Number per 100,000 persons aged less


Death rate due to chronic diseases by sex -

Total

200

150

100

50

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year





























Voluntary National Review 2018	123

Appendices

















than65
Number per 100,000 persons aged less









Death rate due to chronic diseases by sex -

Female

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Year











than65
Number per 100,000 persons aged less



Death rate due to chronic diseases by sex -

Male

250

200

150

100

50

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Year


































124 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 03.31 Suicide death rate

Suicide rate by sex - Total



Per 100,000 persons


14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year


Suicide rate by sex - Female




Per 100,000 persons


6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year


Suicide rate by sex - Male




Per 100,000 persons


25


20

15

10

5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	125

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 03.36 Smoking prevalence





% of pop. aged 15 or over


Smoking prevalence - Non-smoker, Total (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year







% of pop. aged 15 or over


Smoking prevalence - Occassional smoker,

Total (%)

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year






% of pop. aged 15 or over


Smoking prevalence - Daily smoker, Total (%)

16


14


12


10


8


6


4


2


0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year














126 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 03.41 Self-reported unmet need for medical examination and care

Self-reported unmet need for medical care by detailed reason - too expensive or too far on waiting list (%)




% of pop. aged 16 and over


4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - too expensive (%)






% of pop. aged 16 and over


3


2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	127

Appendices

















% of pop. aged 16 and over









Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - too far (%)

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Self-reported unmet need for medical care by

detailed reason - waiting list (%)





% of pop. aged 16 and over


1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year




















128 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 02.11 Obesity rate

Obesity rate by body mass index - Pre-obese

(%)


% of pop. aged 18 or over


40

30

20

10

0










2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year







% of pop. aged 18 or over


Obesity rate by body mass index - Overweight

(%)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year






% of pop. aged 18 or over


Obesity rate by body mass index - Obese (%)

20


18


16


14


12


10


8

6

4

2

0

2013	2014	2015	2016	2017

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	129

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 08.60 Fatal accidents at work by sex (NACE Rev. 2, A, C-N) - Unstandardised incidence rate

People killed in accidents at work


per 100,000 employees


3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year

Eurostat SDG indicator 11.25 People killed in road accidents

People killed in road accidents




Number


500

400

300

200

100

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year



People killed in road accidents






Rate


12


10

8

6

4

2

0

2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012 Year



















130 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 11.31 Urban population exposure to air pollution by particulate matter

Exposure to air pollution by particulate matter

- particulates < 10 micrometers








ug/m3


25


20


15


10


5


0

2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 11.36 Proportion of population living in households considering that they suffer from noise

Population of households considering that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - total (%)




% of population


16


14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year

















Voluntary National Review 2018	131

Appendices




















% of population









 Population living in households considering that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year














% of population



Population living in households considering

that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year






















132 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all

Eurostat SDG indicator 04.10 Early childhood education and care




of
4

    compulsory education years old and the starting age % of the age group between


Participation in early childhood education by

sex - Total (%)

105

100

95

90

85

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year




the age group between 4 years
old and the starting age ofcompulsoryeducation
% of



Participation in early childhood education by

sex - Female (%)

102

100

98

96

94

92

90

88

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year




the age group between 4
old and the starting age of
comulsory education
% of
years



Participation in early childhood education by

sex - Male (%)

100


98

96

94

92

90

88

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	133

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.20 Early leavers from education and training

Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Total (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


20

15

10

5

0









2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Female (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year



Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Male (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


20


15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year
















134 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.30 Tertiary educational attainment

Tertiary educational attainment by sex - Total

(%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Tertiary educational attainment by sex -

Female (%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Tertiary educational attainment by sex - Male

(%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


50


40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	135

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.31 Employment rate of recent graduates







% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex -

Total (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year







% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex - Female (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year








% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex -

Male (%)

100


80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year















136 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.40 Adult participation in learning

Adult participation in learning by sex - Total

(%)


% of pop. aged 25 to 64


8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016

Year


Adult participation in learning by sex - Female

(%)


% of pop. aged 25 to 64


10

8

6

4

2

0










2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year

Adult participation in learning by sex - Male

(%)


% of pop. aged 25 to 64


8

7

6
5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016

Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	137

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.50 Underachievement in reading, maths and science

Underachievement in reading (%)



% of 15 year old students


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year


Underachievement in mathematics (%)


% of 15 year old students


25

20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015 Year



Underachievement in science (%)


% of 15 year old students


18


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015 Year















138 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 08.20 Young people neither in employment nor in education and training






% of pop. aged 15 to 29


Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - total (%)

25

20

15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year







% of pop. aged 15 to 29


Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - female (%)

25

20

15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year







% of pop. aged 15 to 29


Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - male (%)

25


20

15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	139

Appendices









Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Eurostat SDG indicator 05.10 Gender pay gap

Gender pay gap in unadjusted form (%)


% of averagegross hourly earnings of men


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
















2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 05.12 Gender employment gap

Gender employment gap (%)






% difference


25


20

15

10

5

0

2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016 Year





















140 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 05.20 Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments and local government












% of seats


Seats held by women in national parliments

and governments - National Parliment (%)

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year












% of seats


Seats held by women in national parliments

and governments - Government members (%)

30


25

20

15

10

5

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year



















Voluntary National Review 2018	141

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 05.21 Proportion of women in senior management positions










% of positions


Positions held by women in senior

management positions - Board members (%)

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year




Positions held by women in senior

management positions - Executives (%)






% of positions


14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year























142 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 05.33 Physical and sexual violence by a partner or a nonpartner

Physical and sexual violence to women experienced within 12 months prior to the interview (%)






% of women


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

60 years or 50 to 59 years 40 to 49 years 30 to 39 years 18 to 29 years 15 to 74 years more

2012


Eurostat SDG indicator 05.44 Inactivity rates due to caring responsibilities

Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - total (%)





% of inactive pop. aged 20 to 64


45


40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	143

Appendices
















% of inactive pop. aged 20 to 64









Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - female (%)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - male (%)




% of inactive pop aged 20 to 64


10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016 Year






















144 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal#

Eurostat SDG indicator 04.20 Early leavers from education and training

Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Total (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Female (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Early leavers from education and training by

sex - Male (%)


% of pop. aged 18 to 24


20


15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	145

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.30 Tertiary educational attainment

Tertiary educational attainment by sex - Total

(%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Tertiary educational attainment by sex -

Female (%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Tertiary educational attainment by sex - Male

(%)


% of pop. aged 30 to 34


50


40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year













146 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 04.31 Employment rate of recent graduates







% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex -

Total (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year







% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex -

Female (%)

100

80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year







% of pop. aged 20 to 34


Employment rates of recent graduates by sex -

Male (%)

100


80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	147

Appendices









Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

Eurostat SDG indicator 06.11 Share of total population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household








% of population


Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - Total (%)

3

2

1

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

% of population


4

2

0





2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year










% of population



Population having neither a bath, nor a shower, nor indoor flushing toilet in their household by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)

4


2

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year















148 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.13 Population connected to urban wastewater treatment with at least secondary treatment

Population connected to at least secondary

wastewater treatment (%)






% of pop.


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 06.21 Biochemical oxygen demand in rivers

Biochemical oxygen demand in rivers







mg O2 per litre


1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012

Year





















Voluntary National Review 2018	149

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.24 Nitrate in groundwater

Nitrate in groundwater






mg NO3 per litre


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 06.26 Phosphate in rivers

Phosphate in rivers






mg PO4 per litre


0.05

0.045

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year

























150 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.41 Water exploitation index (WEI)

 Water exploitation index by type of water source - fresh surface and groundwater (%)
 

% of long term average available water


1.52

1.5

1.48

1.46

1.44

1.42

1.4

1.38

1.36

1.34

2005	2006	2007	2008	2009

Year


Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 14.13 Bathing water quality

Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - freshwater excellent (%)






%


88.90

88.90
88.90
88.90
88.89
88.89
88.89
88.89
88.89

88.88

2015	2016

Year





















Voluntary National Review 2018	151

Appendices




















number









Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - freshwater excellent total

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2015	2016

Year















number


Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - seawater excellent

94.2

94

93.8

93.6

93.4

93.2

93

92.8

92.6

92.4

2015	2016

Year

















152 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices





















%









Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - seawater excellent (%)

72.8

72.6

72.4

72.2

72

71.8

71.6

71.4

71.2

2015	2016

Year














number


Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - seawater total

131.5

131

130.5

130

129.5

129

128.5

128

127.5

127

126.5

2015	2016

Year




















Voluntary National Review 2018	153

Appendices









Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

Eurostat SDG indicator 07.10 Percentage of people affected by fuel poverty (inability to keep home adequately warm)

Population unable to keep home adequately

warm by poverty status - total (%)





% of population


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Population unable to keep home adequately warm by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)






% of population


25


20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year
















154 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Population unable to keep home adequately warm by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)






% of population


9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 07.20 Share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption

Share of renewable energy in gross final

energy consumption (%)









%


10


9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


















Voluntary National Review 2018	155

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.30 Primary energy consumption; final energy consumption

Primary energy consumption









Index 2005 = 100


110


105


100


95


90


85


80

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Primary energy consumption









Millions tonnes of oil


16


15.5

15

14.5

14

13.5

13

12.5

12

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year












156 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices



















Index 2005 = 100









Final energy consumption

120


100


80


60


40


20


0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Final energy consumption








Million tonnes of oil


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year

















Voluntary National Review 2018	157

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.32 Final energy consumption in households per capita

Final energy consumption in households per

capita







kg of oil equivalent


800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 07.33 Energy dependence

Energy dependence by product - all products

(%)


% of imports in total energy consumption


100


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year














158 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices














imports in total energy
consumption
% of










Energy dependence by product - total

petroleum products (%)

106

104

102

100

98

96

94

92

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Energy dependence by product - solid fuels (%)


imports in total energy
consumption
% of



90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Energy dependence by product - gas (%)


imports in total energy
consumption
% of



120


100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	159

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.35 Energy productivity

Energy productivity


Euro per kilogram of oil equivalent


18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Energy productivity


power standard per kilogram of oil
equivalent
Purchasing



20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year






















160 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 13.14 Greenhouse gas emissions intensity of energy consumption

Greenhouse gas emissions intensity of energy

consumption









Index 2000 = 100


105



100



95



90



85



80

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year


































Voluntary National Review 2018	161

Appendices









Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all

Eurostat SDG indicator 08.10 Real GDP per capita - growth rate

Real GDP per capita - chain linked volumes (%)

% change on previous period, per capita


30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


-10
Year




Eurostat SDG indicator 08.20 Young people neither in employment nor in education and training










% of pop. aged 15 to 29


Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - total (%)

25



20


15


10


5


0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year
















162 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices
















% of pop. aged 15 to 29









Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - female (%)

25

20

15

10

5

0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year











% of pop. aged 15 to 29


Young people neither in employment nor in

education and training by sex - male (%)

25


20


15


10


5


0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year























Voluntary National Review 2018	163

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 08.30 Total employment rate

Employment rate by sex - total (%)


% of pop. aged 20 to 64


80

75

70

65

60

55

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Employment rate by sex - female (%)



% of pop. aged 20 to 64


66

65

64

63

62

61

60
59 

58 

57 

56 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Employment rate by sex - male (%)



% of pop. aged 20 to 64


90


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year















164 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 08.31 Long-term unemployment rate

Long-term unemployment rate by sex - total

(%)



% of active pop.


10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Long-term unemployment rate by sex - female

(%)



% of active pop.


7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Long-term unemployment rate by sex - male

(%)



% of active pop.


14


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year














Voluntary National Review 2018	165

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 08.35 Involuntary temporary employment

Involuntary temporary employment by sex -

total (%)


% of employeesaged 20 to 64


6

5

4

3

2

1

0











2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year

Involuntary temporary employment by sex -

female (%)


% of employees aged 20 to 64


6

5

4

3

2

1

0












2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year

Involuntary temporary employment by sex -

male (%)


% of employees aged 20 to 64


6

5

4

3

2

1

0












2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year















166 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 08.60 Fatal accidents at work by sex (NACE Rev. 2, A, C-N) - Unstandardised incidence rate

People killed in accidents at work



per 100,000 employees


3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 05.44 Inactivity rates due to caring responsibilities

Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - total (%)


% of inactive pop. aged 20 to 64


50

40

30

20

10

0










2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year







% of inactive pop. aged 20 to 64


Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - female (%)

60


50

40

30

20

10

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year








Voluntary National Review 2018	167

Appendices









Inactive pop. due to caring responsibilities by

sex - male (%)


% of inactive pop aged 20 to 64


10

8

6

4

2

0












2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015    2016 Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 12.40 Resource productivity













Index 2000 = 100


Resource productivity and domestic material

consumption

300


250


200


150


100


50


0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year























168 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation

Eurostat SDG indicator 09.10 Gross domestic expenditure on R&D

Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sector -

all sectors (%)






% of GDP


1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year


Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sector -

Government sector (%)








% of GDP


0.1


0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


















Voluntary National Review 2018	169

Appendices




















% of GDP









Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sector - higher education sector (%)

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sector -

business enterprise sector (%)








% of GDP


1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year






















170 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 09.11 Employment in high- and medium-high technology manufacturing sectors and knowledge-intensive service sectors

Employment in high and medium- high technology manufacturing sectors and knowledge intensive service sectors - total (%)






% of total employment


50.5


50


49.5


49


48.5


48

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


Employment in high and medium-high

technology manufacturing sectors and knowledge intensive service sectors - total knowledge intensive services (%)





% of total employment


45.5


45

44.5

44

43.5

43

42.5

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	171

Appendices









Employment in high and medium- high technology manufacturing sectors and knowledge intensive service sectors - high and medium-high technology manufacturing (%)




% of total employment


5.25

5.2

5.15

5.1

5.05

5

4.95

4.9

4.85

4.8

4.75

2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 09.13 Total R&D personnel

R&D personnel by sector - total (%)







% of active population


1.8


1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year

















172 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices














% of active population









R&D personnel by sector - Government sector

(%)

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


R&D personnel by sector - higher education

sector (%)


% of active population


1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


R&D personnel by sector - business enterprise

sector (%)


% of active population


1


0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	173

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 09.14 Patent applications to the European Patent Office (EPO)

Patent applications to European Patent Office






Per millions inhabitants


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 09.40 Share of collective transport modes in total passenger land transport












% of total inland passenger km


Share of collective transport modes in total passenger land transport by vehicle - trains (%)

4


3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year















174 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 09.41 Share of rail and inland waterways activity in total freight transport

Share of rail and inland waterways activity in

total freight transport - total (%)





% of total inland freight tonne - km


4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year

Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 12.51 Average CO2 emissions per km from new passenger cars

Average CO2 emissions per km from new

passenger cars







CO2 per km


180


160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	175

Appendices









Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries

Eurostat SDG indicator 10.101 GDP per capita in PPS

Purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita -

real expenditure per capita in PPS








EU28 = 100


60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita - volume indices of real expenditure per capita in PPS








EU28 = 100


200


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year












176 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 10.11 Real adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita in PPS

Adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita - purchasing power standard (PPS) per inhabitant (%)




% of EU average


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Adjusted gross disposable income of households per capita - purchasing power standard (PPS) per inhabitant





Observation value


25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year



















Voluntary National Review 2018	177

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 10.22 Relative median at-risk-of-poverty gap

Relative median-at-risk-of-poverty gap (%)




% distance to poverty threshold


30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 10.24 Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income

Gini coefficient of equivalised dsiposable

income


0 = maximal equality / 100 = maximal inequality


32.5

32

31.5

31

30.5

30

29.5

29

28.5

28

27.5

27


















2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


















178 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 10.25 Income growth of the bottom 40 per cent of the population and the total population

Income share of the bottom 40% of the

population (%)



% of income


23

22

21

20

19

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 10.31 Number of first time asylum applications (total and accepted) per capita




Number of million inhabitants


Asylum applications by state of procedure -

positive first instance decision

100

80

60

40

20

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year





Number of million inhabitants



Asylum applications by state of procedure -

first time applicant

1000


800

600

400

200

0

2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	179

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 01.12 People at risk of poverty after social transfers

People at risk of income poverty after social

transfers (%)










% of population


25



20



15



10




5



0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


































180 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable

Eurostat SDG indicator 11.12 Overcrowding rate by degree of urbanisation

Overcrowding rate by poverty status - total (%)




% of population


7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Overcrowding rate by poverty status - below

60% of median equivalised income (%)



% of population


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Overcrowding rate by poverty status - above

60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


8


6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	181

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 11.21 Distribution of population by level of difficulty in accessing public transport










% of population


Difficulty in accessing public transport by level

of difficulty and degree of urbanistion - total

(%)

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Very high total	Very high or	High total	Low total	Very low or	Very low total

high total	low total

2012













% of population


Difficulty in accessing public transport by level of difficulty and degree of urbanisation - rural (%)

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Very high rural	Very high or	High rural	Low rural	Very low or	Very low rural

high total rural	low rural

2012



















182 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices





















% of population









Difficulty of accessing public transport by level of difficulty and degree of urbanisation - town and suburbs (%)

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Very high	Very high or	High towns and Low towns and Very low or low Very low towns
towns and	high total	suburbs	suburbs	towns and	and suburbs
suburbs	towns and	suburbs

suburbs

2012


Difficulty in accessing public transport by level

of difficulty and degree of urbanisation - urban

(%)







% of population


60


50

40

30

20

10

0

Very high urban	Very high or	High urban	Low urban	Very low or low Very low urban

high total urban	urban

2012













Voluntary National Review 2018	183

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 11.25 People killed in road accidents

People killed in road accidents





Number


500

400

300

200

100

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year



People killed in road accidents





Rate


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 11.31 Urban population exposure to air pollution by particulate matter









ug/m3


Exposure to air pollution by particulate matter

- particulates < 10 micrometers

25


20

15

10

5

0

2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014 Year

















184 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 11.36 Proportion of population living in households considering that they suffer from noise

Population of households considering that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - total (%)


% of population


20

15

10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year










% of population


 Population living in households considering that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)

20

15

10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year









% of population


 Population living in households considering that they suffer from noise, by poverty status - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)

15


10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	185

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 11.52 Recycling rate of municipal waste

Recycling rate of municipal waste (%)








% of total waste generated


40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year








































186 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 01.22 Share of total population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation, or rot in window frames or floor

Population living in a dwelling with leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - above 60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


20

10

0






2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year


Population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - below 60% of median equivalised income (%)


% of population


30

20

10

0






2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year


Population living in a dwelling with a leaking roof, damp walls, floors or foundation or rot in window frames or floor - Total (%)


% of population


20


15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	187

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.13 Population connected to urban wastewater treatment with at least secondary treatment

Population connected to at least secondary

wastewater treatment (%)






% of pop.


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 09.40 Share of collective transport modes in total passenger land transport










% of total inland passenger km


Share of collective transport modes in total passenger land transport by vehicle - trains (%)


4


3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year


















188 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 15.21 Artificial land cover per capita










m2


Artificial land cover per capita by type -

artificial land

585

580

575

570

565

560

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year










m2


Artificial land cover per capita by type - built
up area

180

179

178

177

176

175

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year











m2


Artificial land cover per capita by type -

artificial non-built up areas

405


400

395

390

385

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year
















Voluntary National Review 2018	189

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 15.24 Change in artificial land cover per year









Index 2009 = 100


Change in artificial land cover - index 2009

105

104

103

102

101

100

99

98

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 16.19 Share of population which reported occurrence of crime, violence or vandalism in their area












% of pop.


Population reporting occurrence of crime,

violence or vandalism in their area by poverty

status (%)

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year






















190 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns

Eurostat SDG indicator 12.10 Generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes

Generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes by hazardousness - hazardous & non-hazardous






kg per capita


3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 12.11 Recycling and landfill rate of waste excluding major mineral wastes

Recycling and landfill rate of waste excluding major mineral wastes - deposit onto or into land (%)




% of total waste treated


60


50

40

30

20

10

0

2010	2011	2012

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	191

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 12.40 Resource productivity








Index 2000 = 100


Resource productivity and domestic material

consumption

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year




Eurostat SDG indicator 12.51 Average CO2 emissions per km from new passenger cars

Average CO2 emissions per km from new

passenger cars



CO2 per km


200

150

100

50

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 12.54 Volume of freight transport relative to GDP

Volume of freight transport relative to GDP



Index 2005 = 100


120


100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year
















192 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 07.20 Share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption

Share of renewable energy in gross final

energy consumption (%)









%


10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 07.30 Primary energy consumption; final energy consumption

Primary energy consumption






Index 2005 = 100


110


105

100

95

90

85

80

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	193

Appendices














Millions tonnes of oil









Primary energy consumption

16

15.5

15

14.5

14

13.5

13

12.5

12

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Final energy consumption




Index 2005 = 100


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Final energy consumption




Million tonnes of oil


16


14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year














194 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.35 Energy productivity

Energy productivity


Euro per kilogram of oil equivalent


18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Energy productivity


Purchasing power standard per kilogram of oil equivalent


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0


2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year















Voluntary National Review 2018	195

Appendices









Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts

Eurostat SDG indicator 13.11 Greenhouse gas emissions (indexed totals and per capita)

Greenhouse gas emissions







Tonnes per capita


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012











Year













Greenhouse gas emissions





CO2 equivalent, base year 1990


140


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015












Year























196 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 13.14 Greenhouse gas emissions intensity of energy consumption

Greenhouse gas emissions intensity of energy

consumption






Index 2000 = 100


105


100


95


90


85


80

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 13.51 Contribution to the 100bn international commitment on climate related expending (public finance)











million euro


Contribution to International 100bn USD

commitment on climate related expending

42


41

40

39

38

37

36

35

34

33

2014	2015

Year

















Voluntary National Review 2018	197

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 13.63 Share of population covered by the new Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy

Population covered by the Covenant of Mayors

for Climate & Energy signatories






Millions persons


2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

2014	2015	2016	2017

Year


Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 07.20 Share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption

Share of renewable energy in gross final energy

consumption (%)









%


10


9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year














198 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 07.30 Primary energy consumption; final energy consumption

Primary energy consumption







Index 2005 = 100


110

105

100

95

90

85

80

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Primary energy consumption







Millions tonnes of oil


16

15.5

15

14.5

14

13.5

13

12.5

12

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year



















Voluntary National Review 2018	199

Appendices









Final energy consumption



Index 2005 = 100


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Final energy consumption



Million tonnes of oil


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 12.51 Average CO2 emissions per km from new passenger cars

Average CO2 emissions per km from new

passenger cars




CO2 per km


200


150

100

50

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year

















200 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

Eurostat SDG indicator 14.13 Bathing water quality









number


Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - freshwater excellent

10

8

6

4

2

0

2015	2016

Year










%


Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - freshwater excellent (%)

88.91

88.90

88.90

88.89

88.89

2015	2016

Year










number


Bathing sites with excellent water quality by

locality - freshwater excellent total

10


8

6

4

2

0

2015	2016

Year












Voluntary National Review 2018	201

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 14.21 Sufficiency of marine sites designated under the EU habitats directive

Sufficiency of marine sites designated under the EU Habitats directive - marine protected area








km2


12000

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 14.41 Catches in major fishing areas

Catches in major fishing areas - total fishing

areas








Tonnes live weight


400000


350000

300000

250000

200000

150000

100000

50000

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year










202 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices




















Tonnes live weight









Catches in major fishing areas - Northeast

Atlantic

300000


250000


200000


150000


100000


50000


0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Catches in major fishing areas - Central Atlantic









Tonnes live weight


80000


70000

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	203

Appendices









Goal 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss

Eurostat SDG indicator 15.11 Forest area as a proportion of total land area

Share of forest area - forest and other wooded

land (%)





% of total land area


22.5

22.4

22.3

22.2

22.1

22

21.9

21.8

2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 15.21 Artificial land cover per capita

Artificial land cover per capita by type -

artificial land

585


580

575

m2

570

565

560

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year











204 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices





















m2









Artificial land cover per capita by type - built

up area

179.5

179

178.5

178

177.5

177

176.5

176

175.5

175

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year














m2


Artificial land cover per capita by type -

artificial non-built up areas

404

402

400

398

396

394

392

390

388

386

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year






















Voluntary National Review 2018	205

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 15.24 Change in artificial land cover per year













m2


Change in artificial land cover - index 2009

105

104

103

102

101

100

99

98

2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 15.32 Sufficiency of terrestrial sites designated under the EU habitats directive












Sufficiency index


Sufficiency of terrestrial sites designated under the EU Habitats Directive - terrestrial protected area

105


100

95

90

85

80

75

2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013 Year


















206 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 15.41 Estimated soil erosion by water

Estimated soil erosion by water (%)





% of non-artificial erosive area


1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012

Year


Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 06.21 Biochemical oxygen demand in rivers

Biochemical oxygen demand in rivers







mg O2 per litre


1.6


1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012

Year













Voluntary National Review 2018	207

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 06.24 Nitrate in groundwater

Nitrate in groundwater







mg NO3 per litre


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 06.26 Phosphate in rivers

Phosphate in rivers







mg PO4 per litre


0.05

0.045

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012 Year




















208 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels

Eurostat SDG indicator 16.10 Death due to homicide, assault, by sex

Total death rate due to homocide by sex


per 100,000 persons


1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year


Female death rate due to homocide by sex



per 100,000 persons


0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year


Male death rate due to homocide by sex



per 100,000 persons


2


1.5

1

0.5

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Year











Voluntary National Review 2018	209

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 16.19 Share of population which reported occurrence of crime, violence or vandalism in their area

Population reporting occurrence of crime, violence or vandalism in their area by poverty status (%)



% of pop.


20

15

10

5

0

2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 16.32 General government total expenditure on law courts

General government total expenditure on law

courts


euro per inhabitant


140

120

100

80
60 

40 

20 

0 

2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012

Year


General government total expenditure on law

courts




millions


800


600

400

200

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year













210 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 16.50 Corruption Perception Index







0 = highly corrupt / 100 = very clean


Corruption Perceptions Index

76

75

74

73

72

71

70

69

68

67

66

2012	2013	2014	2015	2016

Year


Eurostat SDG indicator 16.61 Perceived independence of the justice system

Perceived independence of the justice system

(%)








% of population


80


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Fairly bad	Fairly good	Unknown	Very bad	Very bad or	Very good	Very good or

fairly bad	fairly good

2014














Voluntary National Review 2018	211

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 16.62 Level of citizensi confidence in EU institutions








% of population


Population with confidence in EU insitutions

by institution - European Commission (%)

80

60

40

20

0

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year


Population with confidence in EU institutions

by institution - European Parliment (%)




% of population


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year








% of population


Population with confidence in EU institutions

by institution - European Central Bank (%)

70


60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year














212 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Multipurpose indicators: Supplementary indicators of other Goals which complement the monitoring of this Goal

Eurostat SDG indicator 05.33 Physical and sexual violence by a partner or a nonpartner















% of women


Physical and sexual violence to women experienced within 12 months prior to the interview (%)

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

60 years or 50 to 59 years 40 to 49 years 30 to 39 years 18 to 29 years 15 to 74 years more

2012



































Voluntary National Review 2018	213

Appendices









Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development

Eurostat SDG indicator 17.10 Official development assistance as share of gross national income

Official development assistance as share of

gross national income (%)


% of gross national income


0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015 Year



Eurostat SDG indicator 17.13 General government gross debt

General government gross debt (%)








% of GDP


140


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Year














214 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Eurostat SDG indicator 17.19 Shares of environmental and labour taxes in total tax revenues

Shares of environmental and labour taxes in

total tax revenues (environmental)









%


9.2

9

8.8

8.6

8.4

8.2

8

7.8

7.6

7.4

7.2

7

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

Year


Shares of environmental and labour taxes in

total tax revenues (labour)









%


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015

Year


No data at Member State level for:

u Eurostat SDG indicator 12.30

u Eurostat SDG indicator 13.21

u Eurostat SDG indicator 13.45

u Eurostat SDG indicator 14.31

u Eurostat SDG indicator 15.31

u Eurostat SDG indicator 17.11

u Eurostat SDG indicator 17.12






Voluntary National Review 2018	215

Appendices








Annex II: Irelandis 2030 Vision

Meaningful implementation of the SDGs at the national level requires that each country, guided by the level of global ambition reflected in the Goals, defines what constitutes successful achievement of the SDGs in light of its national circumstances.

As a highly developed country with a deep commitment to global cooperation and to the SDGs in particular, Ireland has an ambitious vision for achieving the Goals by 2030.

Our 2030 vision for Ireland is of a country:

u defined by its commitment to ensuring that all citizens have the opportunity to reach their full potential at every stage of their lives;

u that is just, equitable and socially inclusive, that protects its most vulnerable citizens and where no citizen, regardless of gender, age, family status, civil status, sexual orientation, race, disability, religion or membership of the Traveller Community faces discrimination or barriers to their full participation in society;

u that plans for and accommodates its growing population in a manner that sustainably fosters, enhances and integrates existing and new communities, that improves our quality of life and the quality of our shared environment and that provides tailored housing supports and State assistance in ensuring access to good quality, safe homes for its residents;

u where a robust national economy delivers shared prosperity, sustainable growth and decent jobs and, together with sustainable management of the public finances, provides the funding to pay for comprehensive services and public investment;

u that is supported by an effective, resilient and responsive public service that engages with the public in an open and accountable manner to ensure their needs are central to policy development and high-quality service delivery;

u where the rights of all children and young people are respected, protected and fulfilled; where their voices are heard and where they are supported to realise their maximum potential now and in the future;

u where older people enjoy a comfortable standard of living, their dignity respected, and they can live independently in their own homes and communities for as long as possible or have equitable access to high-quality long-term residential care where needed;

u with an education and training system that has become the best in Europe and which; harnesses education to break down barriers for groups at risk of exclusion; delivers a learning experience to highest international standards; equips learners of all ages and capacities to participate and succeed in a changing world; and allows

Ireland to be a leader across a broad range of fields, scientific, cultural, enterprise and public service;












216 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









u where peopleis health and well-being is maximised, by keeping people healthy, reducing health inequalities, providing the healthcare people need, delivering high-quality services, and getting best value from health system resources;

u that is on-track to achieving a transition to a competitive, low carbon, climate-resilient and environmentally sustainable economy by 2050, while also addressing the issue of energy poverty, supported by investment in renewable energy and sustainable transport, together with improvements in the energy efficiency of the built environment;

u that protects and preserves its terrestrial, freshwater and marine biodiversity;

u that has embedded a pattern of sustainable consumption and production in its economic systems;

u with food production systems which show absolute commitment to the principles of sustainability, and which acknowledges that environmental protection and economic competitiveness are equal and complementary n one will not be achieved at the expense of the other; and

u that continues to work for a fairer, more just, more secure, more sustainable world, and to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms, disarmament, and international peacekeeping, as well as addressing extreme poverty, hunger and malnutrition.










































Voluntary National Review 2018	217

Appendices









Annex III: Summary Report of the VNR Stakeholder Consultation Workshop

Chair:	Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment [DCCAE]

Venue:	Government Buildings, Dublin, 14 May 2018.

Workshop Summary

The workshop, organised by DCCAE, took place in the Italian Room, Government buildings on 14 May 2018, where participants representing national civil society and private sector stakeholder groups attended. The workshop consisted of three main sessions:

u Introductory presentation and main messages, followed by Q&A;

u Roundtable breakout discussions; and

u Report back from roundtables, further Q&A.

DCCAE provided opening remarks at the workshop and welcomed all participants. The workshop was arranged in order to enable stakeholder consultation on the draft VNR, and to provide a forum for open and interactive discussion between officials and stakeholder representatives on the main messages and substance of the draft report. DCCAE outlined how feedback received at the workshop would be incorporated into a final draft of the report which would then be submitted to the Senior Officials Group on the SDGs. It was also noted that a high-level summary of the workshop would be included as an annex to the VNR.

DCCAE presented an overview of the VNR outlining key messages, its structure and progress under each Goal discussing both related data and policy measures. For a number of Goals Irelandis performance is mostly above the EU average including Goal 3 and 4. DCCAE referred to Goal 8 which speaks to Irelandis strong economic recovery. However where Ireland is progressing less well was also discussed. It was also acknowledged that some indicators may be perceived as inappropriate for national circumstances [e.g. Goal 6 and Goal 11], as the data indicates quite a positive performance but fails to reflect the challenges faced by Ireland in these areas. The issues relating to GDP measurement in an Irish context was also noted.




















218 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade [DFAT] presented an overview of Irelandis international development and its contribution to a specific set of the Goals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 13 and 16. Ireland takes an outcome-based approach to its development work and plays to its strengths with a large portion of its work focused on agriculture and nutrition. Ensuring Irelandis aid is gender sensitive is hugely important and Ireland ranks very high in this area. ODA protection is also a key focus of Ireland. A new White Paper on international development policy will be published this year which will build on Irelandis existing development cooperation programme and further strengthen its alignment to the SDGs.

Following the presentations, there was a question and answer session from the floor. In their interventions, participants thanked officials for their presentations and sought clarification on some information presented and also recommended areas where further information should be provided which included:

u The need to expand and widen the set of indicators used and broaden scope to use tier 2 and 3 data sets.

u Some felt the high-level comparator to EU-28 to be misleading and recommended to compare against EU-15 instead as a more appropriate peer group.

u Welcomed the disclosure on issues faced with GDP figures in Ireland but believed should instead go further and use GNI* for all data sets.

u It was also noted there are issues with the indicators and reporting around womenis role and lack of recognition, and also womenis rights needs to be looked at and addressed.

u Reflecting on Irelandis implementation across both global and national level was welcomed, however a third layer which the external dimension of national implementation was requested.

u Some participants felt the report needs to strengthen the multilateral aspect of implementation, and include actions of civil society and also initiatives which are government funded.

u A number spoke about the interconnectedness of the Goals which they felt did not come out strongly enough.

u The importance of policy coherence was underlined and sought information on how Government intends to address tensions that exist across policies.

DCCAE addressed and responded to questions as they were raised while DFAT responded to global aspects. DCCAE committed to raise sector specific points with relevant government departments. DCCAE also noted, that for some areas, development is still in the early stages, such as addressing internal policy tensions that exist across the SDGs. It was also acknowledged that a more extensive public consultation for the VNR would have been preferable and committed to improve on this for the next reporting period.













Voluntary National Review 2018	219

Appendices









Session two involved roundtable breakout discussions where participants were grouped in tables of ten with three questions to discuss:

1. What are your views on the proposed main messages in the VNR?

2. Do you see gaps in the draft VNR as presented?

3. Do you have specific feedback regarding individual SDGs?

Following the lunchbreak, the rapporteurs presented the key findings from their table to the workshop in Session three.

All groups revealed difficulty in providing comprehensive feedback without adequate time to consider or see a full draft report. However from what they learned from the morning session, some commented that the report seems to provide a genuine attempt to answer to its commitments and international reporting requirements. However some groups also expressed concerns that the messaging may be too positive and overstate the economic recovery. The importance of the VNR speaking to and engaging with the public in a clear manner was underlined. They also felt that the VNR should go beyond stating what policies exist and must focus more on implementation, the quality of implementation and its results. Many felt the VNR fails to provide a future vision which should set this ambition and should be in the main messages. The \0xEBleave no one behindi principle was identified and recommended to be incorporated more throughout the text but in particular in the main messages.

Specific areas which were identified as needing to be strengthened included:

The urgency in tackling climate change was mentioned as an area to be strengthened along with the environment sector more generally, but commented that the social pillar seemed to be well reflected.

The importance of partnerships for effective implementation, including reference to existing structures, was highlighted.

Participants welcomed the reference to inequalities that exist but the divide between rural and urban areas was identified as specific area that should also be outlined.

It was noted more attention and narrative on the interconnectivity of the Goals should be included.

The need for a robust policy coherence mechanism in implementing the Goals was also highlighted. Communications and awareness around the Goals was cited as deserving more attention in the report.


















220 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices









Some concerns were raised that the VNR would be too \0xEBgovernment focusedi, and recommended that it incorporate more on the actions of local government, civil society and community led groups.

Stakeholder also consider that reference to the 0.7% ODA target should feature in VNR and that Ireland should consider if its domestic and international policy approaches aligned, particularly in relation to human rights issues.

In response to the feedback provided DCCAE again expressed regret that the full report was not available but reassured participants that many of the points and topics raised are included in the full text and where there are omissions these would be brought to the attention of the SDG Interdepartmental Working Group to consider.























































Voluntary National Review 2018	221

Appendices







Annex IV: SDG Policy Map



Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
Goal 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere


1.1
By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all
DFAT
One World, One Future

people everywhere, currently measured as



people living on less than $1.25 a day





The Global Island


DFIN
Ongoing engagement



with IFIs
1.2
By 2030, reduce at least by half the
DEASP
National Action Plan for Social

proportion of men, women and children of

Inclusion

all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions



according to national definitions


1.3
Implement nationally appropriate social
DEASP
National Action Plan for Social

protection systems and measures for

Inclusion

all, including floors, and by 2030 achieve



substantial coverage of the poor and



the vulnerable


1.4
By 2030, ensure that all men and women,
DFIN
Ongoing engagement with

in particular the poor and the vulnerable,

IFIs

have equal rights to economic resources, as



well as access to basic services, ownership



and control over land and other forms of



property, inheritance, natural resources,



appropriate new technology and financial



services, including microfinance


1.5
By 2030, build the resilience of the poor
DHPLG
Rebuilding Ireland Action Plan

and those in vulnerable situations and

for Housing and Homelessness

reduce their exposure and vulnerability to



climate-related extreme events and other



economic, social and environmental shocks



and disasters


1.a
Ensure significant mobilization of
DFAT
One World, One Future

resources from a variety of sources,



including through enhanced development



cooperation, in order to provide adequate

The Global Island

and predictable means for developing




DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with

countries, in particular least developed





IFIs

countries, to implement programmes and







policies to end poverty in all its dimensions.






222 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices














National Policy Key Objective


One World, One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience, Goal #2 Sustainable development, inclusive economic growth, Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.





National Social Target for Poverty Reduction.




National Social Target for Poverty Reduction.


















Pillar 1 and 2 of Action Plan is to increase supply and services to meet the social housing needs of households including those at risk of or experiencing homelessness.






One World One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience, Goal #2 Sustainable development, inclusive economic growth, Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.


Cooperation between Multilateral Development Banks is encouraged to maximise the resources available and ensure their efficient allocation.






Voluntary National Review 2018	223

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
1.b
Create sound policy frameworks at the
DFAT
One World, One Future

national, regional and international



levels, based on pro-poor and gender-



sensitive development strategies, to

The Global Island

support accelerated investment in




DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with

poverty eradication actions





IFIs





Goal 2.

End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

2.1
By 2030, end hunger and ensure access
DFAT
One World, One Future

by all people, in particular the poor and



people in vulnerable situations, including

The Global Island

infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient







food all year round


2.2
By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition,
DoH
A Healthy Weight for Ireland n

including achieving, by 2025, the

Obesity Policy and Action Plan

internationally agreed targets on stunting

2016-2025

and wasting in children under 5 years of



age, and address the nutritional needs of



adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating



women and older persons


2.3
By 2030, double the agricultural
DFAT
One World, One Future

productivity and incomes of small-scale food



producers, in particular women, indigenous

The Global Island

peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and







fishers, including through secure and equal



access to land, other productive resources



and inputs, knowledge, financial services,



markets and opportunities for value



addition and non-farm employment


2.4
By 2030, ensure sustainable food
DAFM
Elements covered by the

production systems and implement

National Biodiversity Action

resilient agricultural practices that

Plan 2017-2021

increase productivity and production, that

Food Wise 2025

help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen







capacity for adaptation to climate change,

Rural Development Programme

extreme weather, drought, flooding and



other disasters and that progressively

2014-2020

improve land and soil quality













224 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

One World One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience, Goal #2 Sustainable development, inclusive economic growth, Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.









One World, One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience.






A sustained downward trend (averaging 0.5% per annum as measured by the Healthy Ireland Survey) in the level of excess weight averaged across all adults;

a sustained downward trend (averaging 0.5% per annum as measured by Child Obesity Surveillance Ireland (COSI)) in the level of excess weight in children; and a reduction in the gap in obesity levels between the highest and lowest socioeconomic groups by 10%, as measured by the Healthy Ireland and COSI surveys.

One World, One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience.











Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.



For Ireland to be a global leader in sustainable food production building on our national advantages, specific objectives articulated in the Strategy.

For Ireland to be a global leader in sustainable food production building on our national advantages, specific objectives articulated in the Strategy.












Voluntary National Review 2018	225

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
2.5
By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity
DAFM
National Genetic

of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed

Conservation Strategies

and domesticated animals and their

for animals and plants.

related wild species, including through

National Biodiversity Action

soundly managed and diversified seed and





Plan 2017-2021

plant banks at the national, regional and





Rural Development Programme

international levels, and promote access to



and fair and equitable sharing of benefits

2014-2020

arising from the utilization of genetic



resources and associated traditional



knowledge, as internationally agreed


2.a
Increase investment, including through
DFAT
One World, One Future

enhanced international cooperation, in



rural infrastructure, agricultural research

The Global Island

and extension services, technology







development and plant and livestock gene



banks in order to enhance agricultural



productive capacity in developing countries,







in particular least developed countries


2.b
Correct and prevent trade restrictions and
DAFM
World Trade Organisation

distortions in world agricultural markets,

(WTO) Export Competition

including through the parallel elimination

Ministerial Decision of 19

of all forms of agricultural export subsidies

December 2015, the \0xEBNairobi

and all export measures with equivalent

Packagei, WT/MIN(15)/45

effect, in accordance with the mandate

WT/L/980

of the Doha Development Round


2.c
Adopt measures to ensure the proper
DAFM
Food Wise Strategic Blueprint

functioning of food commodity markets

for Agri-Food Sector

and their derivatives and facilitate timely



access to market information, including



on food reserves, in order to help limit



extreme food price volatility


Goal 3.



Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages

3.1
By 2030, reduce the global maternal
DFAT
One World, One Future

mortality ratio to less than 70 per

The Global Island

100,000 live births



















226 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective





Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.


Conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources for food and agriculture.






One World One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience.










Ireland works with the European Commission and Member State colleagues to ensure elimination of export subsidies in accordance with the agreement struck at the WTO Ministerial Conference in Nairobi in 2015.






To ensure up-to-date and timely provision of relevant data to the CSO and European Commission in line with EU legislative requirements.









One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	227

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
3.2
By 2030, end preventable deaths of
DoH
Creating A Better Future

newborns and children under 5 years of age

Together: National Maternity



Strategy 2016-2026








Better Outcomes, Brighter

Futures: the National Policy

Framework for Children and

Young People 2014-2020




3.3
By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS,
DoH
Healthy Ireland n A Framework

tuberculosis, malaria and neglected

for Improved Health and Well-

tropical diseases and combat hepatitis,

being 2013-2025

water-borne diseases and other



communicable diseases





The National Sexual Health



Strategy 2015-2020






Irelandis National Action Plan

on Antimicrobial Resistance

2017-2020























228 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

A health and well-being approach is adopted to ensure that babies get the best start in life; Mothers and families are supported and empowered to improve their own health and well-being; Women have access to safe, high-quality, nationally consistent, woman-centred maternity care; Pregnancy and birth is recognised as a normal physiological process, and insofar as it is safe to do so, a womanis choice is facilitated;

Maternity services are appropriately resourced, underpinned by strong and effective leadership, management and governance arrangements, and delivered by a skilled and competent workforce, in partnership with women.

That all our children and young people are:

1. Active and healthy, with positive physical and mental well-being.

2. Achieving their full potential in all areas of learning and development.

3. Safe and protected from harm.

4. Economically secure and have economic opportunity.

5. Connected, respected and contributing to their world.

Increase the proportion of people who are healthy at all stages of life.

Reduce health inequalities.

Protect the public from threats to health and well-being.

Create an environment where every individual and sector of society can play their part in achieving a healthy Ireland.

Everyone in Ireland will receive comprehensive and age-appropriate sexual health education/ information and will have access to appropriate prevention and promotion services;

Equitable, accessible and high-quality sexual health services, which are targeted and tailored to need, will be available to everyone; and

Robust and high-quality sexual health information will be generated to underpin policy, practice, service planning and strategic monitoring.




























Voluntary National Review 2018	229

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
3.4
By 2030, reduce by one third premature
DoH
Healthy Ireland n A Framework

mortality from non-communicable

for Improved Health and Well-

diseases through prevention and

being 2013-2025

treatment and promote mental



health and well?being





The National Cancer Strategy



2017-2026



National Physical Activity Plan



for Ireland 2016




Connecting for Life 2015-2020

(National Suicide Strategy)













3.5
Strengthen the prevention and treatment
DoH
Reducing Harm, Supporting

of substance abuse, including narcotic drug

Recovery n a health led

abuse and harmful use of alcohol

response to drug and alcohol



use in Ireland 2017-2025







Public Health (Alcohol) Bill



2017 [Currently before the



Oireachtas]
3.6
By 2020, halve the number of global deaths
DTTAS
Government Strategy on

and injuries from road traffic accidents

Road Safety 2013-2020
3.7
By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual
DoH
The National Sexual Health

and reproductive health-care services,

Strategy 2015-2020

including for family planning, information



and education, and the integration



of reproductive health into national



strategies and programmes








230 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Increase the proportion of people who are healthy at all stages of life.

Reduce health inequalities.

Protect the public from threats to health and well-being.

Create an environment where every individual and sector of society can play their part in achieving a healthy Ireland.

The strategy is focused on preventing cancer across our population, diagnosing cancer early, providing optimal care to patients and maximising their quality of life.

The aim of the National Physical Activity Plan is to increase physical activity levels across the entire population thereby improving the health and well-being of people living in Ireland, where everybody will be physically active and where everybody lives, works and plays in a society that facilitates, promotes and supports physical activity and an active way of life with less time spent being sedentary.

1. To improve the understanding of, and attitudes to, suicidal behaviour, mental health and well-being.

2. To support local communitiesi capacity to prevent and respond to suicidal behaviour.

3. To target approaches to reduce suicidal behaviour and improve mental health among priority groups.

4. To enhance accessibility, consistency and care pathways of services for people vulnerable to suicidal behaviour.

5. To ensure safe and high-quality services for people vulnerable to suicide.

6. To reduce and restrict access to means of suicidal behaviour.

7. To improve surveillance, evaluation and high-quality research relating to suicidal behaviour.

Promote and protect health and well-being.

Minimise the harms caused by the use and misuse of substances and promote rehabilitation and recovery.

Address the harms of drug markets and reduce access to drugs for harmful use.

Support participation of individuals, families and communities.

Develop sound and comprehensive evidence-informed policies and actions.

The objective of the Bill is to reduce alcohol consumption in Ireland to the OECD average of 9.1 litres of pure alcohol per capita, by 2020.

To reduce road crash fatalities from 186 in 2011 to 124 or fewer by 2020.


To ensure everyone in Ireland will receive comprehensive and age-appropriate sexual health education/information and will have access to appropriate prevention and promotion services;

Equitable, accessible and high-quality sexual health services, which are targeted and tailored to need, will be available to everyone; and

Robust and high-quality sexual health information will be generated to underpin policy, practice, service planning and strategic monitoring.





Voluntary National Review 2018	231

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
3.8
Achieve universal health coverage,
DoH
Government Response to

including financial risk protection, access

the Report of the Committee

to quality essential health-care services

on the Future of Healthcare.

and access to safe, effective, quality

Sl\0xB7intecare Report 2017-

and affordable essential medicines

2026. [Currently under

and vaccines for all

development]
3.9
By 2030, substantially reduce the number
DBEI
Chemicals Act 2008

of deaths and illnesses from hazardous



chemicals and air, water and soil pollution



and contamination










DCCAE
Waste Management Policy,



Legislation and National



Implementation Plan on



Persistent Organic Pollutants



National Clean Air Strategy
3.a
Strengthen the implementation of the
DoH
Tobacco Free Ireland 2013-

World Health Organization Framework

2025

Convention on Tobacco Control in all



countries, as appropriate


3.b
Support the research and development
DFAT
One World, One Future

of vaccines and medicines for the

The Global Island

communicable and non-communicable







diseases that primarily affect developing



countries, provide access to affordable



essential medicines and vaccines, in



accordance with the Doha Declaration on



the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,



which affirms the right of developing



countries to use to the full the provisions in



the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects



of Intellectual Property Rights regarding



flexibilities to protect public health, and, in



particular, provide access to medicines for all











232 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

To ensure that, in future, everyone has access to an affordable, universal, single-tier healthcare system, in which patients are treated promptly on the basis of need, rather than ability to pay.






The main purpose of the 2008 Act is to facilitate the enforcement of certain EU Regulations concerning chemicals. These Regulations include the:

u REACH Regulation;

u Classification, Labelling and Packaging of Substances and Mixtures (CLP) Regulation;

u Rotterdam Regulation concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals under the Rotterdam Convention; and the

u Detergents Regulation.

Comprehensive policy (2012 \0xEBA Resource Opportunityi) and legislation to ensure that the disposal and recovery of waste does not present a risk to water, air, soil, plants, human health and animals. Legislation also sets a general duty on everyone not to hold, transport, recover or dispose of waste in a manner that causes or is likely to cause environmental pollution. Implementing legislation covers national priorities in addition to EU and international obligations.

This Strategy will provide the framework to promote and identify a range of measures across government policy required to reduce air pollution and promote cleaner air while delivering on wider national and international objectives.

To reduce smoking prevalence to less than 5% by 2025.





One World One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.




























Voluntary National Review 2018	233

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
3.c
Substantially increase health financing and
DFAT
One World, One Future

the recruitment, development, training

The Global Island

and retention of the health workforce in







developing countries, especially in least



developed countries and small island



developing States


3.d
Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in
DFAT
One World, One Future

particular developing countries, for early

The Global Island

warning, risk reduction and management







of national and global health risks



Goal 4.

Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all

4.1
By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys
DES
Action Plan for Education

complete free, equitable and quality

2016-2019

primary and secondary education



leading to relevant and effective



learning outcomes





Delivering Equality of



Opportunity in Schools Plan



The National Strategy on



Education for Sustainable



Development in Ireland 2014-



2020
4.2
By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys
DCYA
Early Childhood Care and

have access to quality early childhood

Education Programme

development, care and pre-primary



education so that they are ready for



primary education



























234 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

One World One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.







One World One Futureis Goal #1 Reduced hunger, stronger resilience.








Improve the learning experience and the success of learners.

Improve the progress of learners at risk of educational disadvantage or learners with special educational needs. Help those delivering education services to continually improve.

Build stronger bridges between education and the wider community.

Improve national planning and support services.

To address educational disadvantage at school level.


Ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, the key dispositions and skills and the values that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.

Provides early childhood education for children of preschool age.






























Voluntary National Review 2018	235

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
4.3
By 2030, ensure equal access for all
DES
Further Education and Training

women and men to affordable and

Strategy 2014-2019

quality technical, vocational and tertiary

National Strategy for Higher

education, including university





Education to 2030







National Plan for Equity of



Access to Higher Education



2015-2019



The National Strategy on



Education for Sustainable



Development in Ireland



2014-2020



National Skills Strategy 2025
4.4
By 2030, substantially increase the
DES
Further Education and Training

number of youth and adults who have

Strategy 2014-2019

relevant skills, including technical and

National Strategy for Higher

vocational skills, for employment, decent





Education to 2030

jobs and entrepreneurship





National Plan for Equity of







Access to Higher Education



2015-2019



The National Strategy on



Education for Sustainable



Development in Ireland



2014-2020



National Skills Strategy 2025
4.5
By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in
DES
National Traveller and Roma

education and ensure equal access to all

Inclusion Strategy 2016-2020

levels of education and vocational training

Action Plan for Education

for the vulnerable, including persons





2016-2019

with disabilities, indigenous peoples





Delivering Equality of

and children in vulnerable situations





Opportunity in Schools Plan



The National Strategy on



Education for Sustainable



Development in Ireland



2014-2020



National Skills Strategy 2025






236 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

To support the active inclusion of individuals of all ages and abilities to participate in further education and training to enable every citizen to fully participate in society.

Provide a more flexible system, with a greater choice of provision and modes of learning for an increasingly diverse cohort of students.

To promote equality of opportunity in higher education.



Ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, the key dispositions and skills and the values that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.

The National Skills Strategy aims to provide an education and training system that is flexible enough to respond to a rapidly changing environment and that can provide the mix of skills needed over the next ten years, and beyond.

To support the active inclusion of individuals of all ages and abilities to participate in further education and training to enable every citizen to fully participate in society.

Ensure that higher education connects more effectively with wider social, economic and enterprise needs and translate that into high value jobs and real benefits for society.

To promote equality of opportunity in higher education.



Ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, the key dispositions and skills and the values that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.

The National Skills Strategy aims to provide an education and training system that is flexible enough to respond to a rapidly changing environment and that can provide the mix of skills needed over the next ten years, and beyond.

To bring about a real improvement in the quality of life for Travellers and Roma.


Improve progress of learners at risk of educational disadvantage or learners with special educational needs.

To address educational disadvantage at school level.


Ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, the key dispositions and skills and the values that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.

There will be active inclusion to support participation in education and training and the labour market.




Voluntary National Review 2018	237

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
4.6
By 2030, ensure that all youth and a
DES
National Literacy and

substantial proportion of adults, both men

Numeracy Strategy n Literacy

and women, achieve literacy and numeracy

and Numeracy for Learning and



Life 2011-2020



Further Education and Training



Strategy 2014-2019



Delivering Equality of



Opportunity in Schools Plan



Action Plan for Education



2016-2019



The National Strategy on



Education for Sustainable



Development in Ireland



2014-2020



National Skills Strategy 2025
4.7
By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the
DES
The National Strategy on





knowledge and skills needed to promote

Education for Sustainable

sustainable development, including, among

Development in Ireland

others, through education for sustainable

2014-2020

development and sustainable lifestyles,



human rights, gender equality, promotion



of a culture of peace and non-violence,



global citizenship and appreciation



of cultural diversity and of cultureis



contribution to sustainable development


4.a
Build and upgrade education facilities that
DES
Action Plan for Education

are child, disability and gender sensitive

2016-2019

and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and



effective learning environments for all


4.b
By 2020, substantially expand globally
DFAT
One World, One Future

the number of scholarships available



to developing countries, in particular

The Global Island

least developed countries, small







island developing States and African



countries, for enrolment in higher



education, including vocational training



and information and communications



technology, technical, engineering and



scientific programmes, in developed



countries and other developing countries










238 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

To improve literacy and numeracy standards among children and young people in the education system.



To support the active inclusion of individuals of all ages and abilities to participate in further education.

To improve literacy and numeracy standards among children and young people at risk of disadvantage.

Improve the learning experience and the success of learners.


Ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge, the key dispositions and skills and the values that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.

People across Ireland will engage more in lifelong learning.

To ensure that education contributes to sustainable development by equipping learners with the relevant knowledge (the \0xEBwhati), the key dispositions and skills (the \0xEBhowi) and the values (the \0xEBwhyi) that will motivate and empower them throughout their lives to become informed active citizens who take action for a more sustainable future.








Deliver appropriate infrastructure for learning environments.





One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.






















Voluntary National Review 2018	239

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
4.c
By 2030, substantially increase the supply
DFAT
One World, One Future

of qualified teachers, including through

The Global Island

international cooperation for teacher







training in developing countries, especially



least developed countries and small island



developing States


Goal 5.



Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

5.1
End all forms of discrimination against all
DJE
National Strategy for Women

women and girls everywhere

and Girls 2017-2020 (NSWG)
5.2
Eliminate all forms of violence against all
DJE
Second National Strategy on

women and girls in the public and private

Domestic, Sexual and Gender-

spheres, including trafficking and sexual

based Violence 2016-2021

and other types of exploitation

Second National Action Plan to







Prevent and Combat Trafficking in



Human Beings 2016
5.3
Eliminate all harmful practices, such as
DFAT
One World, One Future

child, early and forced marriage and female



genital mutilation

The Global Island




5.4
Recognize and value unpaid care and
DJE
National Strategy for Women

domestic work through the provision of

and Girls 2017-2020

public services, infrastructure and social



protection policies and the promotion of



shared responsibility within the household



and the family as nationally appropriate


5.5
Ensure womenis full and effective
DJE
National Strategy for Women

participation and equal opportunities for

and Girls 2017-2020

leadership at all levels of decision-making



in political, economic and public life


5.6
Ensure universal access to sexual and
DoH
The National Sexual Health

reproductive health and reproductive

Strategy 2015-2020

rights as agreed in accordance with the



Programme of Action of the International



Conference on Population and



Development and the Beijing Platform



for Action and the outcome documents



of their review conferences
DJE
National Strategy for Women



and Girls 2017-2020







240 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.











The overall goal of the NSWG is \0xECto change attitudes and practices preventing womenis and girlsi full participation in education, employment and public life at all levels, and to improve services for women and girls, with priority given to the needs of those experiencing, or at risk of experiencing, the poorest outcomes.

To change societal attitudes, to hold perpetrators to account and to improve the support that is available to victims.


Continued development of structures to identify and support victims of trafficking and prosecute those responsible.


One World One Future n Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.




High-Level Objective 1: Advance socio-economic equality for women and girls.







High-Level Objective 4: Advance women in leadership at all levels.





Everyone in Ireland will receive comprehensive and age-appropriate sexual health education/ information and will have access to appropriate prevention and promotion services;

Equitable, accessible and high-quality sexual health services, which are targeted and tailored to need, will be available to everyone; and

Robust and high-quality sexual health information will be generated to underpin policy, practice, service planning and strategic monitoring.

An Ireland where all women enjoy equality with men and can achieve their full potential, while enjoying a safe and fulfilling life.







Voluntary National Review 2018	241

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
5.a
Undertake reforms to give women
DFAT
One World, One Future

equal rights to economic resources, as

The Global Island

well as access to ownership and control







over land and other forms of property,



financial services, inheritance and natural



resources, in accordance with national



laws


5.b
Enhance the use of enabling technology,
DFAT
One World, One Future

in particular information and

The Global Island

communications technology, to promote







the empowerment of women


5.c
Adopt and strengthen sound policies and
DJE
National Strategy for Women

enforceable legislation for the promotion

and Girls 2017-2020

of gender equality and the empowerment



of all women and girls at all levels



Goal 6.

Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

6.1
By 2030, achieve universal and equitable
DHPLG
River Basin Management Plan

access to safe and affordable drinking

(2018-2021)

water for all

Water Services Policy







Statement 2018









6.2
By 2030, achieve access to adequate and
DFAT
One World, One Future

equitable sanitation and hygiene for all

The Global Island

and end open defecation, paying special







attention to the needs of women and girls



and those in vulnerable situations






















242 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

One World One Future n Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.









One World One Future n Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.





Overall goal of National Strategy for Women and Girls 2017-2020.








The River Basin Management Plan (2018-2021) is to contain provision for:

u Increased waste water treatment in urban areas;

u Increased focus in agriculture on the efficient use of nutrients and on water quality;

u Improved protection of public drinking water sources;

u New water quality measures in 600n700 water bodies;

u Improved water quality in 150 additional water bodies;

u Increased public and stakeholder engagement with water issues.

The Water Services Policy Statement is to address policy objectives, including quality, conservation and the future proofing of water services.

One World One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.

























Voluntary National Review 2018	243

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
6.3
By 2030, improve water quality by
DHPLG
River Basin Management Plan

reducing pollution, eliminating dumping

(2018-2021)

and minimizing release of hazardous

Water Services Policy





chemicals and materials, halving the

Statement 2018





proportion of untreated wastewater and



substantially increasing recycling and safe



reuse globally









DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012
6.4
By 2030, substantially increase water-use
DHPLG
River Basin Management Plan

efficiency across all sectors and ensure

(2018-2021)

sustainable withdrawals and supply of

Water Services Policy





freshwater to address water scarcity and

Statement 2018





substantially reduce the number of people



suffering from water scarcity








6.5
By 2030, implement integrated water
DHPLG
River Basin Management Plan

resources management at all levels,

(2018-2021)

including through transboundary

Water Services Policy





cooperation as appropriate

Statement 2018
































244 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

The River Basin Management Plan (2018-2021) is to contain provision for:

u Increased waste water treatment in urban areas;

u Increased focus in agriculture on the efficient use of nutrients and on water quality;

u Improved protection of public drinking water sources;

u New water quality measures in 600n700 water bodies;

u Improved water quality in 150 additional water bodies;

u Increased public and stakeholder engagement with water issues.

The Water Services Policy Statement is to address policy objectives, including quality, conservation and the future proofing of water services.

Reduce, Reuse, Recycle; Hazardous Waste management; landfill remediation; tackling illegal dumping.

The River Basin Management Plan (2018-2021) is to contain provision for:

u Increased waste water treatment in urban areas;

u Increased focus in agriculture on the efficient use of nutrients and on water quality;

u Improved protection of public drinking water sources;

u New water quality measures in 600n700 water bodies;

u Improved water quality in 150 additional water bodies;

u Increased public and stakeholder engagement with water issues.

The Water Services Policy Statement is to address policy objectives, including quality, conservation and the future proofing of water services.

The River Basin Management Plan (2018-2021) is to contain provision for:

u Increased waste water treatment in urban areas;

u Increased focus in agriculture on the efficient use of nutrients and on water quality;

u Improved protection of public drinking water sources;

u New water quality measures in 600n700 water bodies;

u Improved water quality in 150 additional water bodies;

u Increased public and stakeholder engagement with water issues.

The Water Services Policy Statement is to address policy objectives, including quality, conservation and the future proofing of water services.




















Voluntary National Review 2018	245


National Mitigation Plan

Irelandis Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 2015-2030
Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
6.6
By 2020, protect and restore water-
DHPLG
River Basin Management Plan

related ecosystems, including mountains,

(2018-2021)

forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes

Water Services Policy







Statement 2018











DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
6.a
By 2030, expand international
DFAT
One World, One Future

cooperation and capacity-building

The Global Island

support to developing countries in water-







and sanitation-related activities and



programmes, including water harvesting,



desalination, water efficiency, wastewater



treatment, recycling and reuse technologies


6.b
Support and strengthen the participation
DFAT
One World, One Future

of local communities in improving water

The Global Island

and sanitation management






Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
7.1
By 2030, ensure universal access to
DCCAE
Irelandis Transition to a Low

affordable, reliable and modern energy

Carbon Energy Future 2015-

services

2030



Strategy to Combat Energy



Poverty in Ireland
7.2
By 2030, increase substantially the share of
DCCAE


renewable energy in the global energy mix
























246 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

The River Basin Management Plan (2018-2021) is to contain provision for:

u Increased waste water treatment in urban areas;

u Increased focus in agriculture on the efficient use of nutrients and on water quality;

u Improved protection of public drinking water sources;

u New water quality measures in 600n700 water bodies;

u Improved water quality in 150 additional water bodies;

u Increased public and stakeholder engagement with water issues.

The Water Services Policy Statement is to address policy objectives, including quality, conservation and the future proofing of water services.

Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.


One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.









One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 5 Essential Services.





To guide transition to a low carbon energy system, which provides secure supplies of competitive and affordable energy to our citizens and businesses.





To guide transition to a low carbon energy system, which provides secure supplies of competitive and affordable energy to our citizens and businesses.


To provide clarity on policies and measures that are part of a framework for actions across the electricity generation sector to achieve a low carbon electricity sector by 2050.

















Voluntary National Review 2018	247

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
7.3
By 2030, double the global rate of
DCCAE
Irelandis Transition to a Low

improvement in energy efficiency

Carbon Energy Future 2015-



2030



National Mitigation Plan



National Energy Efficiency



Action Plan for Ireland # 4



2017-2020



Better Energy Programme
7.a
By 2030, enhance international cooperation
DFAT
One World, One Future

to facilitate access to clean energy research

The Global Island

and technology, including renewable







energy, energy efficiency and advanced



and cleaner fossil-fuel technology,



and promote investment in energy



infrastructure and clean energy technology


7.b
By 2030, expand infrastructure and
DFAT
One World, One Future

upgrade technology for supplying modern

The Global Island

and sustainable energy services for all







in developing countries, in particular



least developed countries, small island



developing States, and land-locked



developing countries, in accordance with



their respective programmes of support



Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all

8.1
Sustain per capita economic growth in
DFIN/
A range of measures including:

accordance with national circumstances
DFAT
earned income tax credit

and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross

for self-employed, export

domestic product growth per annum in the

finance initiative and counter

least developed countries

guarantee scheme for SMEs,



and stable corporate tax rate



Medium-term objective



and rainy day fund
8.2
Achieve higher levels of economic
DBEI
Innovation 2020

productivity through diversification,



technological upgrading and innovation,
DCCAE
National Broadband Plan

including through a focus on high-value







added and labour-intensive sectors









248 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

To guide transition to a low carbon energy system, which provides secure supplies of competitive and affordable energy to our citizens and businesses.


To provide clarity on policies and measures that are part of a framework for actions across the electricity generation sector to achieve a low carbon electricity sector by 2050.

To maximise progress to the target of improving national energy efficiency by 20% by 2020.



Ireland has a target of a 20% improvement in energy efficiency by 2020. New targets for 2030 will be set by the end of 2018.

One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 3 Climate Change and Development.









One World, One Future n Priority Action Area 3 Climate Change and Development.













These measures will incentivise labour market participation, assist small-to-medium enterprise in accessing funding, continue to attract foreign direct invesment and safeguard our public finances.









Innovation 2020 sets out the roadmap for continuing progress towards the goal of making Ireland a Global Innovation Leader, driving a strong sustainable economy and a better society.

The National Broadband Plan aims to deliver high speed broadband to every citizen and business in Ireland. This is being achieved through a combination of accelerated commercial investment by telecoms operators, and a proposed State intervention to provide high speed broadband to those parts of the country where there is no certainty that the commercial sector will invest.





Voluntary National Review 2018	249

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
8.3
Promote development-oriented policies
DBEI
Enterprise 2025 Renewed

that support productive activities, decent



job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity



and innovation, and encourage the



formalization and growth of micro-, small-



and medium-sized enterprises, including



through access to financial services


8.4
Improve progressively, through 2030,
DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012

global resource efficiency in consumption



and production and endeavour to decouple



economic growth from environmental



degradation, in accordance with the



10-year framework of programmes on



sustainable consumption and production,



with developed countries taking the lead


8.5
By 2030, achieve full and productive
DBEI
Action Plan for Jobs

employment and decent work for all



women and men, including for young



people and persons with disabilities, and



equal pay for work of equal value


8.6
By 2020, substantially reduce the
DEASP
Action Plan for Jobs;

proportion of youth not in employment,

Pathways to Work

educaton or training

Various Youth programmes







and Youth Employability



initiative
8.7
Take immediate and effective measures
DFAT/DJE  One World, One Future

to eradicate forced labour, end modern

The Global Island

slavery and human trafficking and secure







the prohibition and elimination of the



worst forms of child labour, including



recruitment and use of child soldiers, and



by 2025 end child labour in all its forms


8.8
Protect labour rights and promote safe
DEASP/
Action Plan for Jobs

and secure working environments for all
DBEI


workers, including migrant workers, in



particular women migrants, and those



in precarious employment


8.9
By 2030, devise and implement policies to
DTTAS
People, Place and Policy:

promote sustainable tourism that creates

Growing Tourism to 2025

jobs and promotes local culture and products










250 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Enterprise 2025 Renewed is Irelandis national enterprise strategy. It sets out the ambition for Ireland in 2025 to be the best place to succeed in business delivering sustainable employment and higher standards of living for all.






National Waste Prevention Programme.










The Action Plan for Jobs is a whole-of-Government initiative under which Government Departments and Agencies work to support job creation.




National employment rate target under EU 2020.


Increase soft skills of young people to assist them in terms of their employability.



Goal #3 Better governance, human rights and accountability.









The Action Plan for Jobs is a whole-of-Government initiative under which Government Departments and Agencies work to support job creation.




By 2025, ensure revenue from overseas visitors, excluding carrier receipts, will increase to \0xC45 billion in real terms. Employment in the tourism sector will be 250,000 by 2025, compared with around 200,000 in 2015. There will be 10 million visits to Ireland annually by 2025.








Voluntary National Review 2018	251

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
8.10
Strengthen the capacity of domestic
DFIN
Establishment of the Cost of

financial institutions to encourage and

Insurance Working Group

expand access to banking, insurance and

by Minister for Finance, and

financial services for all

associated reports and action



plans
8.a
Increase Aid for Trade support for
DFAT
One World, One Future

developing countries, in particular least

The Global Island

developed countries, including through







the Enhanced Integrated Framework for



Trade-Related Technical Assistance to



Least Developed Countries


8.b
By 2020, develop and operationalize a
DEASP /
Action Plan for Jobs

global strategy for youth employment and
DBEI


implement the Global Jobs Pact of the

Pathways to Work

International Labour Organization







Goal 9.

Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation

9.1
Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and
DPER
Building on Recovery:

resilient infrastructure, including regional

Infrastructure and Capital

and transborder infrastructure, to support

Investment 2016-2021

economic development and human well-



being, with a focus on affordable and



equitable access for all


9.2
Promote inclusive and sustainable
DBEI
Enterprise 2025 Renewed

industrialization and, by 2030, significantly



raise industryis share of employment



and gross domestic product, in line with



national circumstances, and double its



share in least developed countries


9.3
Increase the access of small-scale industrial
DFIN
Strategic Banking

and other enterprises, in particular in

Corporation of Ireland (SBCI)

developing countries, to financial services,



including affordable credit, and their



integration into value chains and markets


9.4
By 2030, upgrade infrastructure
DPER
Building on Recovery:

and retrofit industries to make them

Infrastructure and Capital

sustainable, with increased resource-use

Investment 2016-2021

efficiency and greater adoption of clean
DCCAE
National Mitigation Plan

and environmentally sound technologies





A Resource Opportunity 2012

and industrial processes, with all countries



taking action in accordance with their



respective capabilities






252 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Stabilise cost of insurance and insurance market generally.






Goal #2 Sustainable development, inclusive economic growth.







The Action Plan for Jobs is a whole-of-Government initiative under which Government Departments and Agencies work to support job creation.

National employment rate target under EU 2020.






This Capital Plan reflects the Governmentis commitment to supporting strong and sustainable economic growth and raising welfare and living standards for all.






Enterprise 2025 Renewed is Irelandis national enterprise strategy. It sets out the ambition for Ireland in 2025 to be the best place to succeed in business delivering sustainable employment and higher standards of living for all.




Irelandis national promotional institution. The strategic mission of the SBCI is to deliver effective financial supports to Irish SMEs that address failures in the Irish credit market, while driving competition and innovation and ensuring the efficient use of available EU resources.



This Capital Plan reflects the Governmentis commitment to supporting strong and sustainable economic growth and raising welfare and living standards for all.



National Waste Prevention Programme.







Voluntary National Review 2018	253

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
9.5
Enhance scientific research, upgrade the
DBEI
Innovation 2020

technological capabilities of industrial



sectors in all countries, in particular



developing countries, including, by 2030,



encouraging innovation and substantially



increasing the number of research and



development workers per 1 million people



and public and private research and



development spending


9.a
Facilitate sustainable and resilient
DFAT
One World, One Future

infrastructure development in developing

The Global Island

countries through enhanced financial,







technological and technical support



to African countries, least developed



countries, landlocked developing countries



and small island developing States.


9.b
Support domestic technology
DFAT
One World, One Future

development, research and innovation in



developing countries, including by ensuring

The Global Island





a conducive policy environment for, inter



alia, industrial diversification and value



addition to commodities


9.c
Significantly increase access to information
DFAT
One World, One Future

and communications technology and strive

The Global Island

to provide universal and affordable access







to the Internet in least developed countries



by 2020


Goal 10.



Reduce inequality within and among countries


10.1
By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain
DFIN
Updated National Action Plan

income growth of the bottom 40 per cent

for Social Inclusion, 2015-2017

of the population at a rate higher than the



national average


10.2
By 2030, empower and promote the social,
DJE
Every Government policy,

economic and political inclusion of all,

including The National

irrespective of age, sex, disability, race,

Strategy for Women and

ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or

Girls, 2017-2020, National

other status

Disability Inclusion Strategy,



National Traveller and Roma



Inclusion Strategy and Migrant



Integration Strategy







254 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

The Strategy is aimed at building on existing infrastructures and achieving ambitious private-public collaborations. A key ambition of the Strategy is to increase total investment in Research and Development in Ireland, led by the private sector, to 2.5% of GNP.







































Key plan objective is to reduce consistent poverty to 2 per cent or less by 2020, from the 2010 baseline rate of 6.3 per cent.



Reduce and remove barriers to inclusion and participation.

















Voluntary National Review 2018	255

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
10.3
Ensure equal opportunity and reduce
DJE
Equal Status Act,

inequalities of outcome, including by

Employments Equality Act,

eliminating discriminatory laws, policies

European Convention on

and practices and promoting appropriate

Human Rights Act and all

legislation, policies and action in this regard

current strategies. No single



strategy.
10.4
Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage
DFIN
Updated National Action Plan

and social protection policies, and

for Social Inclusion, 2015-2017

progressively achieve greater equality


10.5
Improve the regulation and monitoring of
DFIN
Finance Statement of

global financial markets and institutions

Strategy, 2017-2020

and strengthen the implementation of such



regulations


10.6
Ensure enhanced representation and
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with

voice for developing countries in decision-

IFIs

making in global international economic



and financial institutions in order to deliver







more effective, credible, accountable and



legitimate institutions


10.7
Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and
DJE
Department of Justiceis 2015-

responsible migration and mobility

2017 Statement of Strategy

of people, including through the

on \0xEBAn Efficient, Responsive

implementation of planned and well-

and Fair Immigration, Asylum

managed migration policies

and Citizenship Systemi.
10.a
Implement the principle of special and
DFAT
One World, One Future

differential treatment for developing

The Global Island

countries, in particular least developed







countries, in accordance with World Trade



Organization agreements


10.b
Encourage official development assistance
DFAT
One World, One Future

and financial flows, including foreign direct

The Global Island

investment, to States where the need is







greatest, in particular least developed



countries, African countries, small



island developing States and landlocked



developing countries, in accordance with



their national plans and programmes


10.c
By 2030, reduce to less than 3 per cent the
DFIN
Payment Services Directive n

transaction costs of migrant remittances

at EU level

and eliminate remittance corridors with



costs higher than 5 per cent









256 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Reduce and remove barriers to inclusion and participation.







Key plan objective is to reduce consistent poverty to 2 per cent or less by 2020, from the 2010 baseline rate of 6.3 per cent.


A balanced and equitable economy enabled by a vibrant, secure and well-regulated financial sector.



Engage in shareholding discussions at the IMF and World Bank Group to ensure that developing countries continue to increase their voice and representation at such insitutions.






A balanced migration policy that supports our economy and meets our international and humanitarian obligations, whilst also taking a tough approach to tackling illegal migration.
























Payment Services Directive extends existing rules on transparency to cover payments outside the EU but only as regards the \0xECEU part of the transaction.









Voluntary National Review 2018	257

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy

Goal 11.

Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable

11.1
By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate,
DHPLG
Rebuilding Ireland Action Plan

safe and affordable housing and basic

for Housing and Homelessness

services and upgrade slums


11.2
By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable,
DTTAS
EU Regulation 1370/2007 on

accessible and sustainable transport

Public Passenger Transport

systems for all, improving road safety,

Services by Rail and by Road

notably by expanding public transport,

& Dublin Transport Authority

with special attention to the needs of those

Act 2008

in vulnerable situations, women, children,

Rural Transport Programme

persons with disabilities and older persons





Transport Access for All n







Sectoral Plan for Accessible



Transport under the Disability



Act 2005



National Disability Inclusion



Strategy, 2017-2021



Capital Investment Plan 2016-



2021 & Transport Strategy for



the Greater Dublin Area 2016-



2035
11.3
By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable
DHPLG
Project Ireland 2040: National

urbanization and capacity for participatory,

Planning Framework

integrated and sustainable human



settlement planning and management in all



countries


11.4
Strengthen efforts to protect and
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

safeguard the worlds cultural and natural

Plan 2017-2021

heritage


11.5
By 2030, significantly reduce the number
DHPLG
Framework for Major

of deaths and the number of people

Emergency Management in

affected and substantially decrease

Ireland

the direct economic losses relative to



global gross domestic product caused



by disasters, including water-related



disasters, with a focus on protecting the



poor and people in vulnerable situations


11.6
By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita
DCCAE
National Clean Air Strategy

environmental impact of cities, including by



paying special attention to air quality and

A Resource Opportunity 2012

municipal and other waste management










258 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective




Pillar 1 and 2 of this Action Plan is to increase supply and services to meet the social housing needs of households including those at risk of or experiencing homelessness, while Pillars 3 and 4 identify actions to increase the supply of new homes and more rental properties to match supply with demand.

To provide funding for socially necessary but uneconomic public transport services.






To provide, community-based public transport system in rural Ireland to meet local needs.

Ensures accessibility included in all transport projects from design stage.








\0xC42.7 billion for investment in public transport has been provided for the remaining four years of the Plan to 2021.



Compact urban growth, with services and infrastructure being provided in tandem with new developments, and improving overall quality of life for citizens in urban settlements of all scales, from cities down to villages.



Expand and improve management of protected areas and species. Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.













The Strategy will provide the framework to promote and identify a range of measures to reduce air pollution and promote cleaner air while delivering on wider national and international objectives.

Waste Prevention, Reduce, Reuse, Recycle.





Voluntary National Review 2018	259

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
11.7
By 2030, provide universal access to safe,
DHPLG
National Planning Framework;

inclusive and accessible, green and public

Design Guidelines on Quality

spaces, in particular for women and children,

Housing for Sustainable

older persons and persons with disabilities

Communities
11.a
Support positive economic, social and
DHPLG
National Planning Framework;

environmental links between urban, peri-

Design Guidelines on Quality

urban and rural areas by strengthening

Housing for Sustainable

national and regional development

Communities; Development

planning

Plan and Development



Management Guidelines;



Guidelines on Regional Planning



Guidelines


DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
11.b
By 2020, substantially increase the number
DHPLG
National Planning Framework;

of cities and human settlements adopting

Design Guidelines on Quality

and implementing integrated policies

Housing for Sustainable





and plans towards inclusion, resource

Communities; The Planning

efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to

System and Flood Risk

climate change, resilience to disasters,

Management n Planning

and develop and implement, in line with

Guidelines

the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012

Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster







risk management at all levels


11.c
Support least developed countries,
DFAT
One World, One Future

including through financial and technical

The Global Island

assistance, in building sustainable and







resilient buildings utilizing local materials


Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns

12.1
Implement the 10-year framework of
DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012

programmes on sustainable consumption



and production, all countries taking action,



with developed countries taking the lead,



taking into account the development and



capabilities of developing countries


12.2
By 2030, achieve the sustainable
DCCAE
Department of

management and efficient use of

Communications, Climate

natural resources

Action & Environment



Statement of Strategy



2016-2019



A Resource Opportunity 2012






260 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Urban design, street layouts, amenities and access and public realm design.





Inclusive and accessible design of urban centres and suburban areas, provision of amenity and green space.








Mainstream biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors.


Compact urban form, sustainable design and policies, consideration of flood risk assessment in zoning and designing developments, climate adaptation considerations.







National Waste Prevention Programme.











National Waste Prevention Programme.







To exploit and manage our mineral, hydrocarbon and other geological resources, and inland fisheries in a sustainable and productive manner (High-level Objective 6)




National Waste Prevention Programme.






Voluntary National Review 2018	261

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
12.3
By 2030, halve per capita global food
DAFM
Rural Innovation &

waste at the retail and consumer levels and

Development Fund

reduce food losses along production and
DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012

supply chains, including post-harvest losses






12.4
By 2020, achieve the environmentally
DBEI
Chemicals Act 2008

sound management of chemicals and



all wastes throughout their life cycle, in



accordance with agreed international



frameworks, and significantly reduce



their release to air, water and soil in order



to minimize their adverse impacts on



human health and the environment




DCCAE
Waste Management Policy,



Legislation and National



Implementation Plan on



Persistent Organic Pollutants
12.5


National Clean Air Strategy

By 2030, substantially reduce waste
DCCAE
A Resource Opportunity 2012

generation through prevention, reduction,



recycling and reuse


12.6
Encourage companies, especially large
DBEI
Towards Responsible Business:

and transnational companies, to adopt

Irelandis Second National

sustainable practices and to integrate

Plan on Corporate Social

sustainability information into their

Responsibility (CSR) 2017-

reporting cycle

2020
12.7
Promote public procurement practices
DPER n
Green Tenders n An Action Plan

that are sustainable, in accordance with
OGP
on Green Public Procurement

national policies and priorities

(GPP)
12.8
By 2030, ensure that people everywhere
DCCAE
Our Sustainable Future

have the relevant information and



awareness for sustainable development
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

and lifestyles in harmony with nature

Plan 2017-2021
12.a
Support developing countries to
DFAT
One World, One Future

strengthen their scientific and

The Global Island

technological capacity to move towards







more sustainable patterns of consumption



and production








262 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Research projects that are aimed at reducing food waste.


Waste Prevention.

The main purpose of the 2008 Act is to facilitate the enforcement of certain EU Regulations concerning chemicals. These Regulations include the:

u REACH Regulation;

u CLP Regulation;

u Rotterdam Regulation concerning the export and import of dangerous chemicals under the Rotterdam Convention; and the

u Detergents Regulation.

Comprehensive policy (2012 \0xEBA Resource Opportunityi) and legislation to ensure that the disposal and recovery of waste does not present a risk to water, air, soil, plants, human health and animals. Legislation also sets a general duty on everyone not to hold, transport, recover or dispose of waste in a manner that causes or is likely to cause environmental pollution. Implementing legislation covers national priorities in addition to EU and international obligations.

This Strategy will provide the framework to promote and identify a range of measures across government policy required to reduce air pollution and promote cleaner air while delivering on wider national and international objectives.

National Waste Prevention Programme.



It is the Governmentis vision that Ireland will be recognised as a centre of excellence for responsible and sustainable business practices through the adoption and implementation of best prectice in CSR in enterprises and organisations.



Green Tenders objective n commits the public sector to playing an exemplary sustainability role through its procurement activities. There are eight priority sectors identified for GPP implementation in Ireland, and this Plan adopts a target for 50% of procurement in these sectors (both by number of contracts and by value) to include at least core GPP criteria.

Education, Communications and Behaviour Change.

Increase awareness and appreciation of biodiversity and ecosystems services.















Voluntary National Review 2018	263

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
12.b
Develop and implement tools to monitor
DTTAS
People, Place and Policy:

sustainable development impacts for

Growing Tourism to 2025

sustainable tourism that creates jobs and



promotes local culture and products


12.c
Rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies
DCCAE
National Mitigation Plan

that encourage wasteful consumption



by removing market distortions, in



accordance with national circumstances,



including by restructuring taxation and



phasing out those harmful subsidies,



where they exist, to reflect their



environmental impacts, taking fully into



account the specific needs and conditions



of developing countries and minimizing



the possible adverse impacts on their



development in a manner that protects



the poor and the affected communities








Goal 13.

Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts

13.1
Strengthen resilience and adaptive
DCCAE
National Adaptation

capacity to climate-related hazards and

Framework

natural disasters in all countries


































264 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Government will place tourism as a key element of its economic strategy, with development in the tourism sector reflecting the highest standards of environmental and economic sustainability.



Fossil fuel subsidies have the potential to make consumption of fossil fuels more attractive relative to other, more sustainable alternatives. Internationally, the need to phase out fossil fuel subsidies has been recognised particularly by the G20. Where subsidies exist, either directly or indirectly, they may be aimed at addressing other policy objectives rather than simply promoting the use

of fossil fuels. The range of subsidies that are in place in Ireland need to be identified in order to inform a future strategy for addressing such subsidies where they have the potential to act as a barrier to decarbonisation. As a sign of Government commitment to this policy, Public Service Obligation (PSO) support for Bord na M\0xDBnas Edenderry peat-fired generation station expired in December 2015. PSO support for the ESB owned West Offaly and Lough Ree power stations will expire in December 2019. Thereafter, security of supply subsidies for electricity generated from peat will no longer be supported under the PSO.

National Mitigation Plan Proposal: Prepare a report identifying fossil fuel subsidies in place for

consideration by Government. Lead Department: Department of Communications, Climate Action

and Environment. Stakeholders: D/Finance, DPER, EPA, all relevant Government Departments

Timeline: 2019




This Framework aims to strengthen adaptative capacity and to support the transition towards a climate resilient Ireland by 2050 and also includes support adaptation action at sectoral and local level.
































Voluntary National Review 2018	265

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
13.2
Integrate climate change measures into
DPER
Building on Recovery:

national policies, strategies and planning

Infrastructure and Capital



Investment 2016-2021


DCCAE
National Mitigation Plan











National Biodiversity Action

Plan 2017-2021

National Adaptation

Framework






National Policy Position on

Climate Action and Low Carbon

Development

































266 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective





Irelandis first National Mitigation Plan sets out this Governmentis shared approach to reducing our own greenhouse gas emissions. This is a whole-of-Government Plan, reflecting in particular the central roles of the key Ministers responsible for the sectors covered by the Plan n Electricity Generation, the Built Environment, Transport and Agriculture, as well as drawing on the perspectives and responsibilities of a range of other Government Departments. The measures that are and will be implemented through this National Mitigation Plan will lay the foundations for transitioning Ireland to a low carbon, climate resilient and environmentally sustainable economy by 2050. This National Mitigation Plan sets out our vision to achieve this transition in which each and every one of us has a role to play as we work to build this future.



This Framework specifies the strategy for adaptation measures in different sectors and by local authorities to reduce the vulnerability of the State to the negative effects of climate change and to avail of any positive effects that may occur. This Framework and its successors will set out the context to ensure local authorities, regions and key sectors can assess the key risks and vulnerabilities of climate change, implement climate resilience actions and ensure climate adaptation considerations are mainstreamed into all local, regional and national policy-making.

This provides a high-level policy direction for the adoption and implementation by Government of plans to enable the State to move to a low carbon economy by 2050.



































Voluntary National Review 2018	267

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
13.3
Improve education, awarness-raising
DCCAE
National Strategy on Education

and human and institutional capacity

for Sustainable Development in

on climate change mitigation, adaption,

Ireland 2014-2020

impact reduction and early warning

National Mitigation Plan











National Adaptation

Framework






National Policy Position

on Climate Action and Low

Carbon Development











13.a
Implement the commitment undertaken
DCCAE
Govt. Decision

by developed-country parties to the

S180/20/10/1660.

United Nations Framework Convention



on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing



jointly $100 billion annually by 2020
DFAT
One World, One Future

from all sources to address the needs







of developing countries in the context



of meaningful mitigation actions and



transparency on implementation and
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with

fully operationalize the Green Climate





Multilateral Development

Fund through its capitalization as soon





Bank.

as possible






13.b
Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for
DFAT
One World, One Future

effective climate change-related planning

The Global Island

and management in least developed







countries and small island developing



States, including focusing on women, youth



and local and marginalized communities






268 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective





This is a whole-of-Government Plan, reflecting in particular the central roles of the key Ministers responsible for the sectors covered by the Plan n Electricity Generation, the Built Environment, Transport and Agriculture, as well as drawing on the perspectives and responsibilities of a range of other Government Departments. The measures that are and will be implemented will lay the foundations for transitioning Ireland to a low carbon, climate resilient and environmentally sustainable economy by 2050.

This Framework specifies the strategy for adaptation measures in different sectors and by local authorities to reduce the vulnerability of the State to the negative effects of climate change and to avail of any positive effects that may occur. This Framework and its successors will set out the context to ensure local authorities, regions and key sectors can assess the key risks and vulnerabilities of climate change, implement climate resilience actions and ensure climate adaptation considerations are mainstreamed into all local, regional and national policy making.

The extent of the challenge to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in line with our EU and international commitments, is well understood by Government, as reflected in the National Policy Position on Climate Action and Low Carbon Development, published in April 2014, and in the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Bill 2015. The National Policy Position provides a high-level policy direction for the adoption and implementation by Government of plans to enable the State to move to a low carbon economy by 2050. Statutory authority for the plans is set out in the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015. The evolution of climate policy in Ireland will be an iterative process based on the adoption by Government of a series of national plans over the period to 2050. Greenhouse gas mitigation and adaptation to the impacts of climate change are to be addressed in parallel national plans n respectively through National Mitigation Plans and National Climate Change Adaptation Frameworks.

Ireland has also committed to a number of policy measures in relation to international climate finance, through commitments to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), through Government Decision S180/20/10/1660 of 13 January 2016, and under the Programme for a Partnership Government.

The international community has committed to provide $100 billion per annum by 2020 for climate action in developing countries within the ongoing climate change negotiations. Ireland will maintain its engagement with the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol global processes, and strive to meet the obligations arising from these.

Ireland commenced contributions to the Green Climate Fund in 2016.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	269

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy

Goal 14.

Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

14.1
By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce
DHPLG
Water Framework Directive,

marine pollution of all kinds, in particular

Marine Strategy Framework

from land-based activities, including

Directive and OSPAR

marine debris and nutrient pollution

Convention (Northeast



Atlantic) including High Seas



(OSPAR Hazardous Substances



and Eutrophication Strategies



and Marine Litter Regional



Action Plan Apply).


DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
14.2
By 2020, sustainably manage and protect
DHPLG
Marine Strategy Framework

marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid

Directive, OSPAR Northeast

significant adverse impacts, including by

Atlantic Strategy

strengthening their resilience, and take
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

action for their restoration in order to





Plan 2017-2021

achieve healthy and productive oceans






14.3
Minimize and address the impacts of ocean
DAFM
Harnessing Our Ocean Wealth,

acidification, including through enhanced

National Climate Adaptation

scientific cooperation at all levels

Strategy (2018); Ireland



Climate Strategy to 2020 and



beyond; OSPAR Northeast



Atlantic Environmental



Strategy to 2020 and from



2020-2030 (in draft at



present); National Marine



Research and Innovation



Strategy; National Planning



Framework Roadmap


DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
14.4
By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting
DAFM
Sea-fisheries and Maritime

and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and

Jurisdiction Act 2006 and the

unregulated fishing and destructive fishing

Fisheries (Amendment Act)

practices and implement science-based

2003 under the Framework

management plans, in order to restore

of the Common Fisheries

fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at

Policy (CFP); Food Wise 2025;

least to levels that can produce maximum

Harvesting Our Ocean Wealth.

sustainable yield as determined by their
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

biological characteristics





Plan 2017-2021








270 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective


















Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.


Proportion of national exclusive economic zones managed using ecosystem-based approaches. Also OSPAR network of Marine Protected Areas, OSPAR list of threatened and/or declining species and habitats.

Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.



Healthy ecosystems n protect and conserve our rich biodiversity and ecosystems. Four year programme researching ocean acidification being undertaken by the Marine Institute to inform policy at national and regional level.













Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.


Harvesting Our Ocean Wealth sets out to: achieve healthy ecosystems that provide monetary and non-monetary goods and services; ensure that fishing and aquaculture are environmentally and socially sustainable; foster a dynamic fishing industry and ensure a fair standard of living for fishing communities.




Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.





Voluntary National Review 2018	271

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
14.5
By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of
DHPLG
Marine Strategy Framework

coastal and marine areas, consistent with

Directive, Convention for

national and international law and based

Biological Diversity Aichi

on the best available scientific information

Target 11, OSPAR Northeast



Atlantic Environment



Strategy (2010-2020) n new



strategy to 2030 being



drafted.


DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
14.6
By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries
DAFM
Sea-fisheries and Maritime

subsidies which contribute to overcapacity

Jurisdiction Act 2006 and the

and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that

Fisheries (Amendment Act)

contribute to illegal, unreported and

2003 under the Framework

unregulated fishing and refrain from

of the CFP; Food Wise 2025;

introducing new such subsidies, recognizing

Harvesting Our Ocean Wealth.

that appropriate and effective special

National Biodiversity Action

and differential treatment for developing





Plan 2017-2021

and least developed countries should







be an integral part of the World Trade



Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation


14.7
By 2030, increase the economic benefits
DFAT
One World, One Future

to Small Island developing States and least

The Global Island

developed countries from the sustainable







use of marine resources, including through



sustainable management of fisheries,



aquaculture and tourism


14.a
Increase scientific knowledge, develop
DAFM
Harnessing Our Ocean Wealth

research capacity and transfer marine



technology, taking into account the



Intergovernmental Oceanographic



Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the



Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to



improve ocean health and to enhance the



contribution of marine biodiversity to the



development of developing countries, in



particular small island developing States



and least developed countries


14.b
Provide access for small-scale artisanal
DAFM
Sea-fisheries and Maritime

fishers to marine resources and markets

Jurisdiction Act 2006 and the



Fisheries (Amendment Act)



2003 under the Framework



of the CFP, Food Wise 2025;



Harvesting Our Ocean Wealth.




272 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Marine Strategy Framework Directive commits Member States to creating a coherent and representative network of Marine Protected Areas, The OSPAR network of Marine Protected Areas aims for the relevant Convention on Biological Diversity target of 10% coverage.







Expand and improve management of protected areas and species and conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the marine environment.

Ensure that fishing and aquaculture are environmentally and socially sustainable. Foster a dynamic fishing industry and ensure a fair standard of living for fishing communities.






Mainstream biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors.














Enabler n to build capacity, eduction, training and awareness. Ireland is an active member of Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and Partnership for Observation of the Global Oceans.











Ensure that fishing and aquaculture are environmentally and socially sustainable. Foster a dynamic fishing industry and ensure a fair standard of living for fishing communities. Harnessing market opportunities in order to build a thriving maritime economy.








Voluntary National Review 2018	273

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
14.c
Enhance the conservation and sustainable
DFAT
One World, One Future

use of oceans and their resources by

The Global Island

implementing international law as




DHPLG
Northeast Atlantic. High

reflected in UNCLOS, which provides





Seas covered by OSPAR

the legal framework for the conservation





Convention.

and sustainable use of oceans and their







resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of



The Future We Want



Goal 15.

Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss

15.1
By 2020, ensure the conservation,
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial

Plan 2017-2021

and inland freshwater ecosystems and their
DAFM
United Nations Forum on

services, in particular forests, wetlands,





Forestry

mountains and drylands, in line with







obligations under international agreements


15.2
By 2020, promote the implementation
DAFM
National Biodiversity Action

of sustainable management of all types

Plan 2017-2021

of forests, halt deforestation, restore

United Nations Forum on

degraded forests and substantially increase





Forestry

afforestation and reforestation globally






15.3
By 2030, combat desertification, restore
DAFM
National Biodiversity Action

degraded land and soil, including land

Plan 2017-2021

affected by desertification, drought



and floods, and strive to achieve a land



degradation-neutral world


15.4
By 2030, ensure the conservation of
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

mountain ecosystems, including their

Plan 2017-2021

biodiversity, in order to enhance their



capacity to provide benefits that are



essential for sustainable development


15.5
Take urgent and significant action to
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

reduce the degradation of natural habitats,

Plan 2017-2021

halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020,



protect and prevent the extinction of



threatened species


15.6
Promote fair and equitable sharing of
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

the benefits arising from the utilization

Plan 2017-2021

of genetic resources and promote



appropriate access to such resources, as



internationally agreed







274 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

















Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.

Expand and improve management of protected areas and species.

Active and fully participating member.




Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.

Expand and improve management of protected areas and species.

Active and fully participating member.



Expand and improve management of protected areas and species.






Expand and improve management of protected areas and species.






Expand and improve management of protected areas and species.






Mainstream biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors.











Voluntary National Review 2018	275

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
15.7
Take urgent action to end poaching and
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

trafficking of protected species of flora and

Plan 2017-2021

fauna and address both demand and supply



of illegal wildlife products


15.8
By 2020, introduce measures to prevent
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

the introduction and significantly reduce

Plan 2017-2021

the impact of invasive alien species on



land and water ecosystems and control or



eradicate the priority species


15.9
By 2020, integrate ecosystem and
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

biodiversity values into national and local

Plan 2017-2021

planning, development processes, poverty



reduction strategies and accounts


15.a
Mobilize and significantly increase
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

financial resources from all sources to

Plan 2017-2021

conserve and sustainably use biodiversity



and ecosystems






15.b
Mobilize significant resources from
DFAT
One World, One Future

all sources and at all levels to finance

The Global Island

sustainable forest management and




DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with

provide adequate incentives to developing





IFIs.

countries to advance such management,







including for conservation and reforestation
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action



Plan 2017-2021
15.c
Enhance global support for efforts to
DCHG
National Biodiversity Action

combat poaching and trafficking of

Plan 2017-2021

protected species, including by increasing



the capacity of local communities to pursue



sustainable livelihood opportunities



Goal 16.

Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels

16.1
Significantly reduce all forms of violence
DJE
An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na Policing

and related death rates everywhere

Plan 2017.



An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7nais Crime



Prevention and Reduction



Strategy 2017.



An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7nais



Modernisation and Renewal



Programme 2016-2021.



Youth Justice Action Plan



2014-2018.




276 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.

Strengthen international governance for biodiversity and ecosystem services.



Conserve and restore biodiversity and ecosystem services in the wider countryside.






Mainstream biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors.




Mainstream biodiversity into decision-making across all sectors.












Strengthen international governance for biodiversity and ecosystem services.


Strengthen international governance for biodiversity and ecosystem services.











The Mission Statement of An Garda S\0xCCoch\0xB7na is \0xECto deliver professional policing and security services with the trust, confidence and support of the people we serve.
















Voluntary National Review 2018	277

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
16.2
End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all
DJE
Second National Action Plan to

forms of violence against and torture of

Prevent and Combat Trafficking

children

in Human Beings 2016
16.3
Promote the rule of law at the national
DJE


and international levels and ensure equal



access to justice for all


16.4
By 2030, significantly reduce illicit financial
DJE
Irelandis membership of the

and arms flows, strengthen the recovery

Financial Action Task Force,

and return of stolen assets and combat all

an intergovernmental body

forms of organized crime

that sets global standards



regarding anti-money



laundering and counter-



terrorist financing, which are



adopted by the EU through



the Anti-Money Laundering



Directives, the fourth of



which Ireland is currently
16.5


transposing.

Substantially reduce corruption and
DJE
The development and

bribery in all their forms

implementation of anti-



corruption policies does not



rest with any one body in this



jurisdiction.



Regulation of Lobbying



Act 2015



Protected Disclosures



Act 2014



Public Sector Standards Bill



2015 [Currently before the



Oireachtas]




















278 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Continued development of structures to identify and support victims of trafficking and prosecute those responsible.






To further strengthen national defences against money laundering and terrorist financing; and ensure the soundness, integrity and stability, and confidence in the financial system as a whole.














The competence to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute corruption is spread across a number of agencies, including: Council of Europeis Group of States Against Corruption, OECD Anti Bribery Convention and United Nations Convention against Corruption. There is no overarching national anti-corruption policy document.


Designed to provide appropriate transparency on \0xECwho is lobbying whom about what. It allows all sections of society to reach informed evidence-based judgments regarding the extent to which different interest groups are able to access and influence decision-making.

To provide robust statutory protections for workers in both the public and private sectors against the real or potential penalisation by their employers where they have brought concerns about wrongdoing in the workplace to light.

To significantly enhance the existing framework for identifying, disclosing and managing conflicts of interest and minimising corruption risks, to achieve a shift towards a more dynamic and risk-based system of compliance and to ensure that the institutional framework for oversight, investigation and enforcement is robust and effective.


















Voluntary National Review 2018	279

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
16.6
Develop effective, accountable and
DPER
Houses of the Oireachtas

transparent institutions at all levels

(Inquiries, Privileges and



Procedures) Act 2013



Freedom of Information (FOI)



Act 2014



Ombudsman (Amendment)



Act 2012



Corporate Governance



Standard for the Civil Service
16.7
Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory
DPER
2014 Guidelines on

and representative decision-making at all

Appointments to State

levels

Boards



Open Government Partnership



National Action Plan 2016-



2018
16.8
Broaden and strengthen the participation
DFAT
One World, One Future

of developing countries in the institutions

The Global Island

of global governance






16.9
By 2030, provide legal identity for all,
DFAT
One World, One Future

including birth registration

The Global Island




16.10
Ensure public access to information
DPER
Data Sharing and Governance

and protect fundamental freedoms,

Bill [Currently under

in accordance with national legislation

development]

and international agreements

Open Data initiative







Freedom of Information (FOI)



Act 2014
16.a
Strengthen relevant national institutions,
DFAT
One World, One Future

including through international cooperation,

The Global Island

for building capacity at all levels, in particular







in developing countries, to prevent violence



and combat terrorism and crime









280 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

Established a comprehensive statutory framework for the Oireachtas (National Parliament) to conduct inquiries within the current constitutional framework.


This Act covers some 600 Bodies and provides that new public bodies, as they are established, will automatically be subject to FOI, unless they are specifically exempt.

This Act brought some 180 public bodies within the Ombudsmanis remit. This was the most significant extension within 30 years. The Ombudsmanis remit was further extended in to include private nursing homes whose residents are in receipt of state support or subvention, (offering greater accountability and assurance to over 20,000 nursing homes residents and their families). Further extensions will be considered.

To strengthen corporate governance in the Civil Service in line with international best practice. Departments/Offices were required to develop their own governance frameworks in line with the standard which set out how each Department and Office does its work and how it operates to deliver on its mandate and functions.

Providing access to State Board opportunities to as wide a pool of candidates as possible; strengthening the performance of State Boards by identifying and securing high-quality membership; and; attaining a high level of transparency in the selection and appointment of board members by Ministers.

Commits the Government to initiatives to promote inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making. These include the National Dialogue on Climate Action and Public Participation Networks for Local Authorities. This Plan also commits the Government to promoting citizen engagement in policy making and the design of public services.









To provide a generalised legal basis for the sharing of data between public bodies while setting out appropriate principles and safeguards under which such sharing should take place.


Provides a unique opportunity to use and re-use public data, to create the standard infrastructure necessary which fuels economic, governmental and societal activity across many different domains.

This Act covers some 600 Bodies and provides that new public bodies, as they are established, will automatically be subject to FOI, unless they are specifically exempt.














Voluntary National Review 2018	281

Appendices








Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
16.b
Promote and enforce non-discriminatory laws
DJE
Irish Human Rights and

and policies for sustainable development

Equality Commission (IHREC)



Act 2014

Goal 17.

Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development

Finance

17.1
Strengthen domestic resource
DFAT
One World, One Future

mobilization, including through

The Global Island

international support to developing




Revenue
International Capacity

countries, to improve domestic capacity





Building meetings such as the

for tax and other revenue collection





Forum of Tax Administrations







Network or the OECDis



Experts mobilisation meeting.
17.2
Developed countries to implement fully
DFAT


their official development assistance
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement

commitments, including the commitment





with IFIs

by many developed countries to achieve







the target of 0.7 per cent of ODA/GNI



to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20



per cent of ODA/GNI to least developed



countries ODA providers are encouraged



to consider setting a target to provide at



least 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to least



developed countries


17.3
Mobilize additional financial resources
DFAT


for developing countries from multiple
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement

sources





with IFIs




17.4
Assist developing countries in attaining
DFAT


long-term debt sustainability through
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement

coordinated policies aimed at fostering





with IFIs

debt financing, debt relief and debt







restructuring, as appropriate, and address



the external debt of highly indebted poor



countries to reduce debt distress


17.5
Adopt and implement investment promotion
DFAT
One World, One Future

regimes for least developed countries

The Global Island














282 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective

IHREC enpowered to promote best practice, aided by the Public Service Duty commitment.














Responsible for the assessment and collection of taxes and duties. The International Tax Division has responsibility for the development of Revenueis role in capacity building.

















































Voluntary National Review 2018	283

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
Technology


17.6
Enhance North-South, South-South and
DFAT
One World, One Future

triangular regional and international

The Global Island

cooperation on and access to science,







technology and innovation and enhance



knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms,



including through improved coordination



among existing mechanisms, in particular



at the United Nations level, and through a



global technology facilitation mechanism


17.7
Promote the development, transfer,
DFAT
One World, One Future

dissemination and diffusion of

The Global Island

environmentally sound technologies to







developing countries on favourable terms,



including on concessional and preferential



terms, as mutually agreed


17.8
Fully operationalize the technology bank
DFAT
One World, One Future





and science, technology and innovation

The Global Island

capacity-building mechanism for least







developed countries by 2017 and enhance



the use of enabling technology, in particular



information and communications technology


Capacity building


17.9
Enhance international support for
DFAT
One World, One Future

implementing effective and targeted

The Global Island

capacity-building in developing countries







to support national plans to implement



all the sustainable development goals,



including through North-South, South-



South and triangular cooperation


Trade



17.10
Promote a universal, rules-based, open,
DFAT
One World, One Future

non-discriminatory and equitable

The Global Island

multilateral trading system under the







World Trade Organization, including



through the conclusion of negotiations



under its Doha Development Agenda














284 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective




































































Voluntary National Review 2018	285

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
17.11   Significantly increase the exports of
DFAT
One World, One Future
developing countries, in particular with

The Global Island
a view to doubling the least developed





countriesi share of global exports by 2020


17.12   Realize timely implementation of duty-free
DFAT
One World, One Future
and quota-free market access on a lasting

The Global Island
basis for all least developed countries,





consistent with World Trade Organization


decisions, including by ensuring that


preferential rules of origin applicable to


imports from least developed countries are


transparent and simple, and contribute to


facilitating market access















































286 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective





































































Voluntary National Review 2018	287

Appendices

Goals and Targets
DEPT
Relevant National Policy
Systemic issues


Policy and institutional coherence


17.13   Enhance global macroeconomic stability,
DFIN
Finance Statement of
including through policy coordination and

Strategy, 2017-2020
policy coherence


17.14   Enhance policy coherence for sustainable
DCCAE
National Implementation Plan
development

for Sustainable Development
17.15   Respect each countryis policy space and
DFAT
One World, One Future
leadership to establish and implement

The Global Island
policies for poverty eradication and





sustainable development


Multi-stakeholder partnerships


17.16   Enhance the global partnership for
DFAT

sustainable development, complemented
DFIN
Ongoing Engagement with
by multi-stakeholder partnerships that




IFIs
mobilize and share knowledge, expertise,








technology and financial resources, to


support the achievement of the sustainable


development goals in all countries, in


particular developing countries


17.17   Encourage and promote effective
All Depts
One World, One Future
public, public-private and civil society

The Global Island
partnerships, building on the experience





and resourcing strategies of partnerships


Data, monitoring and accountability


17.18   By 2020, enhance capacity-building
DFAT
One World, One Future
support to developing countries, including

The Global Island
for least developed countries and small





island developing States, to increase


significantly the availability of high-quality,


timely and reliable data disaggregated


by income, gender, age, race, ethnicity,


migratory status, disability, geographic


location and other characteristics relevant


in national contexts


17.19   By 2030, build on existing initiatives to
DFAT
One World, One Future
develop measurements of progress on

The Global Island
sustainable development that complement





gross domestic product, and support


statistical capacity-building in developing


countries







288 Voluntary National Review 2018

Appendices








National Policy Key Objective




A stable macroeconomic environment and sound public finances.



One of strategic priorities of the SDG National Implementation Plan is to identify opportunities for enhancing policy coherence.










Ireland encourages cooperation between IFIs and with the private sector and civil society in support of sustainable development.


