In recent years, in one developing or transition economy after another, financial systems seemed suddenly to fail. Instead of smoothly funding production, trade and investment, they became channels of financial instability. Something changed in the financial sectors. Was it financial liberalization? Was it technology? Were the weaknesses always there, hidden below the surface? Or were they new? Were financial systems putting funds in the hands that warranted them? Or just financing the well connected?Some of these concerns are long-standing ones. But their salience was underlined by the unfolding crises of the banks and the frenzied instability in the currency and financial markets in several emerging economies. Distinct weaknesses in the financial systems of several countries in latin_america had been accentuated by the Mexican peso crisis of -, and in east_asia by the crisis that began in Thailand in and spread to other countries in and . In the transition economies, reform of the financial sector had been high in the agenda since the beginning of the transition period in the early s. However, the crisis that erupted in the russian_federation in August highlighted the fact that many financial sector shortcomings remained to be addressed. The unexpected repercussions in September and October in financial and currency markets of developed countries then showed that there were important reform issues even in those countries. And observers noted that, in Africa, countries were spared contagion owing not to the strength of their financial sectors but to a kind of financial marginalization which was part and parcel of the underdeveloped state of most African financial systems.When financial crises occur, they wreak extensive damage. On average, they take over three years to overcome and cause an economic loss of over per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). Their fiscal impact can be especially severe; for example, the fiscal cost of the banking crisis in Chile in -was per cent of GDP. While this was an extreme case, even in the united_states of America, the savings and loan crisis of -raised fiscal expenditures by per cent of GDP. The current financial crises in Japan and in the emerging economies of east_asia are also going to be very costly.These crises are messengers that have directed attention to the evolution of the financial system. And thus it has been realized increasingly that the policy and technology changes, which are often called globalization for short, have been revolutionizing domestic financial sectors and their international linkages. The changes have gone furthest in developed economies,but the developing and transition economies are also feeling their effects. The result is that the strengthening and reform of the financial sector have taken on new urgency in developed, developing and transition economies. So, too, have strengthening and reform of mechanisms for international cooperation in oversight of financial institutions and markets. At the same time, reflecting the greater international attention given to social dimensions of development, questions of equity and development in the financial system are rising in visibility next to the questions of stability.Much of the discussion of financial evolution and reform is highly technical; but as there are important developmental implications of the work, it is important to gain a perspective on how financial systems work, the directions of their change and how the weaknesses and biases can be reduced. The aim of the present part of this Survey is to contribute to such an effort.Because the financial sector has changed so dramatically in recent years, the next section outlines the main institutions and functions of a contemporary financial sector as it may be found in some large developed economies. Financial sectors in other countries, especially developing and transition economies, may have some elements of the financial sector described below, and in the future they will have more of them. Ensuing chapters discuss some of the institutions and markets and related policy concerns in more detail.The financial sector has always been an unusual industry in a number of respects. First, a special feature characterizes many of its transactions. In a typical business, when a purchase is made, a good or service changes hands and money is exchanged in the opposite direction. When a comparable transaction takes place in the financial sector, money is transferred and the provider of the money receives either an ownership share or a promise to repay borrowed funds plus interest. Only the recipient of the funds knows what he really intends to do with them and therefore the provider has to monitor the user. This difference between what the two sides of a financial contract know creates the asymmetric information problem and various methods have arisen for coping with it.A second unusual feature of the financial sectorone that in part grows out of the firstis that it is under a high degree of government oversight because the sector is susceptible to catastrophic failure and abuses of the public trust. The commercial banking sector, in particular, is heavily regulated by the government. Other parts of the financial sector are also subject to varying degrees of official oversight. In addition, the central bank engages in financial interactions with the commercial banks, adding and subtracting liquidity to control the money supply and making sudden infusions of liquidity in crisis situations.A third characteristic of the financial sector is that it comprises a collection of very different institutions and markets. Some evaluate clients and make loans to them, others buy the loans and turn them into securities, and still others create contracts that mimic securities with no paper changing hands. Ultimately, the diversity of the financial sector arises because it intermediates between suppliers and users of financial resources and there are multiple ways in which this can be done.Commercial banks and the dual financial functionCommercial banks are the core of every financial system. They supply the largest part of the means of payment of a monetized economy and operate the payments system. Sometimes joined by other financial institutions, commercial banks make available demand deposits to firms and households, and through their interbank networkswith some transactions passing through the central bankthey clear the payments transactions that are carried out with cheques or other methods of payment.While operation of the payments system is a key activity of banking, it is not traditionally the main source of income of banks. That arises from financial intermediation: funds that firms and households hold as deposits in their bank accounts are lent out to other firms or households as bank loans. The main income for the bank is the difference between the interest it pays its depositors and the interest it charges on its loans. Through most of the modern industrialized period, banks main operation was this transformation of deposits into loans. However, this is one of the functions that has been changing dramatically (see chap. V).Banking has been a viable business because a bank takes in the deposits of many depositors and lends to many borrowers. Lending takes the form of creating a deposit or adding to the account of a borrower. In the process, banks create most of an economys money supply. If for no other reason, this brings them under government supervision and control.To the extent that deposits are in the form of chequing accounts against which customers can write cheques at any time or from which they can make cash withdrawals on demand, the bank needs to have a large number of depositors so as to reduce the probability that a large part of its deposits will be withdrawn at one time. By the same token, in order to reduce the potential impact on the bank of a default by any single borrower, it needs to have a large portfolio of borrowers, which diversifies the risk.This also means that banks have to be of a certain minimum size to be viable, and thus small markets might be able to support only one bank. In this case, the bank would be a natural monopoly; that is to say, left to itself and facing no competitors, the bank might maintain an excessively high margin between the borrowers and depositors interest rates. As a result, Governments have intervened in various ways. They decided that the interest rates on loans and deposits needed to be regulated or that the bank could be run as a State enterprise or that the Government could seek to introduce competition from other financial intermediaries. Each has happened, although under current policy approaches, the first two types of response would now be less common. Moreover, technical change and financial sector liberalization have made small markets more contestable.Financial sector allocation of fundsThe basic activity of a financial sector is to move funds from those who have more than they need to those who need more than they have and can pay for the use of the funds. There is, as already noted, a diverse set of institutions and markets that carry out this function. The role of some of the institutions is changing, as technology, policy and competitive forces evolve.Banks and other deposit-taking institutionsBecause most deposits at commercial banks can be cashed on demand, commercial banks tend to specialize in short-term credits, such as working capital to finance a firms operating costs or commercial credits to help firms while they wait to collect on their accounts receivable or loans to cover the expense of carrying inventories. Commercial banks typically also lend shortterm to other banks to cover their temporary funding needs and to the government, through, for example, the purchase of treasury bills that are issued to allow smooth public expenditure operations when tax revenues follow, say, quarterly cycles.Banks also engage in some medium-term lending. They can do this, first, because banks take in some funds that are less liquid than demand deposits (such as six-month or even multi-year certificates of deposit); and second, because most holders of demand deposits will roughly maintain the size of their account balances, regularly replenishing deposits after they are drawn down. Thus, the bank can count on having a certain stock of funds on deposit and can safely tie up some of its funds in less-than-liquid uses.Loan officers are expected to assess credit applications and the borrowers repayment capacity and to form a judgement about the planned use of the funds. Larger loans are generally extended to clients with which banks have a continuing business relation and whose management ability is known personally to the bank officers.The essence of a commercial banks relationship with its client is trust and monitoring: trust that the borrowed funds will be used for the intended purposes and will be repaid on schedule, as contracted; and monitoring to ensure that this happens. The distinguishing feature of traditional bank lending is the presence of imponderables (such as the outcome of a planned marketing campaign, smoothness of future labour-management relations or prices to be received for goods sold) which in the end make the loan decision rest on the bankers judgement. The borrower has to be trusted to carry out the contract, although the trust is limited.The bank thus demands transparency and reliability in respect of the information provided to it by the client and monitors the borrowers use of the loan. The bank also demands collateral as security for its loans. Collateral reduces the banks net exposure to the borrower and thus its risk, although realizing the collateral in the event of default can be expensive and time-consuming. And, as Japanese banks discovered in recent years, what appears to be prime collateral, such as high-priced real estate, can turn out to be very poor collateral for defaulted loans after a real estate bubble collapses.Commercial banks are not the only financial intermediaries, that is to say, the only deposit-taking and lending institutions. In many countries, other institutions offer time deposits, including savings accounts in which withdrawals may be formally subject to a -day delay, which is rarely invoked. Also, minimum deposit balances are often smaller than in commercial banks. As a group, the institutions offering such accounts are called thrifts and include savings banks, savings and loan associations, building societies, caisses depargne, sparkasse and so forth. Such institutions have historically specialized in housing finance, a very long-term form of lending, which was made feasible by the fact that the deposit base of the lending institution is less liquid than that of a commercial bank. This notwithstanding, thrifts long ago began offering chequing accounts that can compete with household demand deposits at commercial banks.In addition, credit unions are deposit-taking institutions that are cooperative undertakings of members in specific groupings, such as employees in a large firm or government agency or members of a professional association. The credit union takes deposits from and lends exclusively to its members. Also, profits are divided among the members of the union, who are its shareholders.Today, in developed countries, thrift institutions and commercial banks have each so evolved that they are barely different from each other. Banks, like thrifts, offer a range of long-term deposits and mortgage loans. Moreover, neither banks nor thrifts need keep their mortgage loans on their books, particularly in the united_states, which pioneered the securitization of mortgages; that is to say, a special government-backed securitizing agency will issue a bond on the financial market and with the proceeds buy a number of mortgages, using the interest received from the mortgages over time to pay the interest on the bond. In this manner, long-term credits can be moved off the books of banks and thrifts, thereby increasing their liquidity, while providing a long-term savings instrument in the financial markets in the form of the bond. Indeed, banks can also borrow funds outside the deposit nexus, directly from other banks or even by issuing certain types of debt instruments, such as debentures, which are a type of bond.Development bankingThere is an additional category of financial intermediaries that have a public purpose and are usually government-owned. These institutions have been called development banks, although their aim could be more narrowly focused than that encompassed by the term. The largest of the institutions are international in scope and exist to promote the development of developing and transition economies, notably the world_bank and the regional development banks. Five of the largest institutions in the world that are so classified, however, serve developed economies (see table IV.).The modus operandi of all these institutions is to raise funds through the issuance of bonds or mediumand long-term borrowings from banks or loans or transfers of government resources for onlending in policy-determined programmes. The fundamental role of such institutions is to lend to population groups or for uses that the government wishes to promote but that private financial institutions eschew. Even with all the opportunities for private funding that have arisen in the developed financial systems, the public financial institutions still have a niche to fill (albeit oftentimes a smaller one than in earlier decades).Typically, the institution makes an outright loan to a project, or in some cases takes an equity share. Private lenders may co-finance the project, drawn by the reputation of the public institution for high-quality project appraisal and the financial protection from cross-default clauses in lending agreements. In many cases, the financial resources provided are derived entirely from the private sector, with the public institution guaranteeing some or all of the private risk. Moreover, the lending or guaranteeing agency need not even be a freestanding financial institution, but can be part of a larger agency, as is the caseTable IV..NameLocationEquity Assets ( of dollars)world_bankEuropean Investment Bank Inter-American Development Bank Export-Import Bank of Japan Asian Development BankJapan Development Bank European Bank for Reconstruction and DevelopmentKorea Development BankIslamic Development BankIndustrial Development Bank of India African Development Bank Export-Import Bank of Korea Export-Import Bank of the united_states Mediocredito CentraleIndustrial Credit andInvestment Corporationunited_states Luxembourg united_states Japan Philippines Japanunited_kingdom Republic of Korea Saudi Arabia IndiaCote d'Ivoire Republic of Korea united_states ItalyIndia. . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .for the direct lending and loan guarantee programmes of the Small Business Administration of the united_states Government.None of these public providers of financing are themselves deposit-taking institutions. In some countries, however, fully or partially State-owned banks combine a public purpose with a mandate to provide commercial banking or savings services. In addition, in some countries the national postal system offers savings accounts and other financial services. These are utilized mainly by middleand lower-income households. The range of national experiences in operating postal savings systems is wide: in several countries, postbanks have been privatized or abolished, but the Japanese postal savings system has become the largest financial institution in the world. This reflects in part the flight to safety of household accounts in the context of Japans current banking crisis. Revenues accumulated in most postal systems are transferred to the government treasury or placed in the wholesale banking sector, although they also can be transferred to development-oriented financial intermediaries, as in Japan.Institutional investorsPension funds and insurance companies are two of the most familiar examples of non-bank financial institutions. Household or enterprise accounts in pension funds differ from those in banks in that they are contractual in nature, requiring a schedule of payments into the accounts, typically over many years. Purchases from an insurance company, in particular casualty insurance, are of a different nature, as the insured buys a contingent claim for a particular amount of money that lasts a specified length of time. The claim is realized if some named event occurs, such as a death or injury (although life insurance companies offer policies that have contractual saving as well as insurance components). Both contractual saving and insurance purchases lead to the accumulation of large pools of funds in the hands of institutions, which makes them major players in the financial sector. In both cases, the pool of funds needs to be large to ensure that the prospective claims can be paid without difficulty. However, the funds do not need to be as liquid as those of banks, as the probability that they will be drawn can be estimated with greater certainty than in banks.Institutional investors, particularly insurance companies and pension funds, purchase government bonds, corporate bonds or equities, and make investments directly, as in large-scale real estate developments. The securities that they hold may be purchased on an organized exchange, but they are often obtained in private placements; for example, a bond issue might be negotiated directly between the issuer and a set of institutional lenders.A small part of the funds of institutional investors may be placed with firms that in turn invest directly in a selection of high-risk endeavours, in particular the supporting of start-up firms led by innovative entrepreneurs. These venture capital funds are usually private sector activities. Venture capitalists become closely involved in the business strategy of the firms in which they invest, bringing management skills as well as financial resources to the operation. The venture capitalist intends to stay with a company until it reaches a stage of success and maturity at which the firm can be taken public (shares can be sold on a stock market) or become attractive to another corporation which buys it. Most investments do not reach that stage, but the venture capitalist engages in the activity because profits from those that do can make up for all the losses incurred (see chap. VIII).Markets and market-related institutionsIn financial markets, transactions entail a very different relationship between supplier and user of funds than in financial institutions. A buyer in a financial market makes a one-off purchase of a security representing a share of the equity of a firm or a debt obligation. In secondary market purchases, the original issuer is not even party to the transaction (it is merely notified that ownership has changed hands).Securities purchasers, however, face the same asymmetric information problem as loan officers in banks, but without the continuing relationship that makes bank monitoring feasible. Instead, most securities purchasers rely on specialists to monitor the companies whose securities trade in the market and to advise them when to buy or sell a particular security. Indeed, one requirement of a well-functioning securities market is that there be a competitive market of securities analysts.Managers of corporations nevertheless have an advantage over outside investors in respect of access to information about their companies, and it may be in their interest not to disclose all relevant information. Thus, incentives and regulations to ensure proper disclosure are needed. Government policies and market institutions, including a system of supervision and regulation, can create the incentives to ensure an accurate, timely and easily available flow of such information. Appropriate standards for supporting legal and accounting systems are also needed for adequate information disclosure.Thus armed, the secondary market may be said to serve a monitoring function, with the price of a security rising or falling, inter alia, as market assessments of the profitability of the firm change. To the degree that management of a company is judged by the performance of its share priceand compensated accordinglythe market can be said even to discipline management. However, the market is not innocent of fads and is not necessarily a fully informed monitor, so that the firms that are rewarded or punished by the market are not always the most deserving ones. It has also been argued that the monitoring and control of corporations by the market encourage management to focus on shortterm profits at the expense of long-term productivity and earnings.These are usually considered relatively minor concerns set next to the overall advantages of securities markets. The principal attraction to buyers of securities is that they enable diversification of assets into a variety of financial instruments with a wide range of risk and return trade-offs. To the degree that the market is liquid, these securities can be bought and sold at will, albeit at varying prices. For the user of funds, securities markets enlarge the variety of funding alternatives; for example, bonds offer longer original maturities than those banks are usually willing to give on loans.Securities traded on the secondary market first have to be floated on the original issue or primary market and this requires the services of a specialist institution, the investment (or merchant) bank. These institutions help corporations to prepare a public stock issue or help corporations or Governments to issue bonds, bring them to market and underwrite them (in other words, they promise to buy any shares or bonds in the issue that are not purchased by the public). They are intermediaries in the literal sense of the term, bringing largescale users and suppliers of funds together for a transaction, but not themselves making the long-term investment. They also arrange private placements of securities, such as with institutional investors, as noted above, and facilitate mergers and acquisitions.Investment banks thus arrange the supply of securities that are traded on organized bond and stock exchanges or that trade on the over the counter marketformerly a telephone but now a computer screen. Brokers and dealers affiliate with these securities exchanges and facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers of the securities traded on the floor of the exchange (or increasingly in an electronic market).The original issuer receives no funds from the trading of its shares on the secondary market. The benefit of the secondary market to the issuer of publicly traded shares is, rather, twofold. First, when the shares are initially sold to the public, their value is raised by the knowledge of potential buyers that the securities can be later sold on the secondary market (liquidity). Second, when the secondary market raises the price of a firms shares, it signals endorsement of management and raises the creditworthiness of the firm (it lowers the debt-toequity ratio).Finally, another set of institutions has become important in recent years. These are mutual funds or investment trusts or unit trusts and related vehicles whose modus operandi is to sell shares in their funds and combine the proceeds into large pools of resources for placement by professional portfolio managers in any of a variety of financial market instruments. While some such funds cater to corporations and wealthy individuals with an interest in particular types of transactions (such as hedge funds), others serve the small-scale market.They all offer investors the opportunity to diversify their holdings and risks. Mutual funds give small investors opportunities to buy shares in portfolios of securities that meet a wide variety of needs and interests, ranging from the equity shares of high-risk, high-volatility companies to low-risk pools of shortterm government treasury bills. Mutual funds have been set up to pursue an ever-widening range of investment goals (such as appreciation of stock prices, income from dividends and tax-free income). There are also mutual funds designed to purchase securities of particular countries or particular industries, large companies or small ones, equity shares or bonds alone, or even mixtures of types of financial instruments. Some mutual funds even offer a social screen, buying the securities only of firms that meet such criteria as abiding by voluntary labour codes and producing no products that are harmful to health or the environment. Most significantly, both households and corporate financial officers now have many alternatives to putting money in a bank.Financial sector dynamismA central characteristic of the financial sector in the developed countries in recent decades is its rapid pace of innovation. The financial markets, for example, now offer instruments covering the full spectrum of maturities, ranging from commercial paper, which is a market-traded alternative to short-term bank loans for large corporations, to bonds and equity shares. The markets have also developed instruments that combine features of different securities, such as convertible bonds, which are bonds with equity warrants that give the bond-holder the right to exchange the bond for equity shares in the issuing firm during a pre-set time interval and at a pre-arranged swap ratio.Financial instruments have also been developed that change the nature of the payment stream that a borrower has contracted. For example, if a borrower has issued a fixed-rate bond, it can arrange to swap its interest obligations with those of a borrower who issued a bond whose interest rate was tied to a fluctuating benchmark rate. Similarly, a foreign exchange swap can be arranged to change the currency of payment of debt servicing on a bond. These are examples of a large class of financial derivatives, so-called because their valuation is derived from the prices of underlying securities. Created by banks and other financial institutions as off-balance sheet fee-earning, low-cost and lightly regulated contracts, derivatives have been used for speculation and have thus become a focus of concern to those who ask whether financial systems are now routinely taking on excessive exposure to risk (see chap. IX).Indeed, a distinction can be drawn between the above over-the-counter swaps and other derivative contracts that are traded by financial institutions and the standardized futures contracts that are listed on organized exchanges, such as put and call options to buy or sell equity shares at a future date at a preset price, or purchase or sale for future delivery of a commodity or foreign currency at a price agreed today. Whereas the volume and composition of the market for the former type are usually obscure, exchange-traded futures contracts are more transparent (each transaction is posted) and the exchanges are regulated.As derivatives and mortgage-backed securities illustrate, there are now multiple and intimate connections among the main components of the financial sector in a contemporary economy. The commercial banks, thrifts, pension and insurance funds, other non-bank financial institutions and the financial markets constitute an ever more closely integrated and still changing financial industry. This has made the financial system more competitive, as the market has become less segmented, although the plethora of options have reduced the capacity of policy to single out any one part of it for control.In addition, with the lowering of international barriers to capital movements and the speeding up of communications across frontiers, the financial sectors of different nations are more and more closely linked together. As was seen in -, crisis is now easily transmitted from continent to continent. Indeed, realization of the extent of this phenomenon has prompted the myriad proposals for reform of the international financial architecture. It has also raised the importance of an integrated international approach to financial regulation and oversight (see chap. IX).Countries differ greatly in the degree to which their financial sectors are active in each type of financial activity described above. Developing countries, in particular, generally lack well-developed financial markets and thus have tended to rely more heavily on the banking sector than do most developed countries (see, for example, figure IV.).Figure IV..Percentage of gross assets of financial systemsDeveloped marketsEmerging marketsCentral banksDeposit banks Long-term securities Non-bank institutionsNote: Data based on averages of developed and emerging market economies in .One characteristic of the bank-centred systems is that the banks have a greater role than in more market-centred systems in collecting and assessing information about the corporate sector. In economies with more developed capital markets, there are market as well as governmental pressures to provide reliable and timely corporate information, including financial reporting requirements for listing on a stock exchange. There are independent bond-rating agencies whose classification of individual bond issues is required for purchase by various regulated investors (such as pension funds or insurance companies). There is also a host of interested business analysts: sell-side research which provides coherent investor information and buy-side analysts who ferret out investment opportunities. Little of this exists in a bank-dominated system, where the pricing of loans offered to a client firm, for example, depends very much on the banks internal assessment of its client.Nevertheless, over the past decade financial asset managers in developed countries have evinced greater interest in emerging market securities. This has boosted interest in developing and transition economies in welcoming inflows of such funds through the development and liberalization of their local securities markets. Indeed, this is one of the forces pulling these countries towards the complex financial structure described above. Yet, this has also raised the question whether portfolio investment by foreigners in emerging markets is a source of higher financial volatility (see box IX.).Meanwhile, smalland especially poorborrowers have had and continue to have the fewest options for obtaining financial resources. Womenwho have less effective claims than men to property that can be pledged as collateralare distinctly disadvantaged in terms of access to credit. Commercial banks have generally avoided serving the poor or women, and official institutions that lend to rural areas or for enterprise development have had a mixed history of successes and failures. Credit for the poor has been very much in the province of informal finance, although new types of institutions, in particular microfinance organizations, are increasingly playing a role in directing finance to the poor and particularly to women. Microfinance is a promising innovation which has become the focus of considerable policy attention in the development community (see chap. VII).Allocating funds to private investmentUsers of other peoples funds can have a wide range of motivations, but of special interest in this Survey are funds for investment. Bringing savings decisions into equality with investment decisions is accomplished by a range of endogenous economic processes. Total saving in an economy very much depends on developments in income and employment and changes in the balance sheets of households, government and businesses. Investment depends on all the factors that influence profit expectations. The availability and cost of finance can be important in this regard, although a large part of investment by firms and households is financed out of internal savings (retained earnings in the case of firms) and thus does not pass through the financial system.As economies develop, however, there is an increasing use of financial resources external to the firm or household. Indeed, this is reflected in the tendency of the financial sector to encompass a larger share of GDP in higherincome than in lower-income countries (although there is considerable variability in the relationship; see figure IV.). The financial sector thus provides increasing financing opportunities as economies grow, and thereby gains in importance in determining the composition of investment.India provides a case in point. In the s, gross domestic saving in India was about per cent of GDP. Since the late s, the saving rate has been about per cent of GDP. Moreover, from the latter half of the s to the latter s, the share of domestic savings held in financial form rose from about one third to about one half, thus increasing the portion of savings intermediated into private investment by the financial sector. Reflecting this change, Indian corporations have reduced their reliance on internal financing from over per cent of gross investment in the s and s, to about per cent in the s and early s. This reduction came despite the fact that a decrease in the gross profit tax from per cent in the mid-s to about per cent at the end of the s, had significantly reduced the disincentive to declare and retain profits for investment.These data hint at the large changes in India in the savings-investment relationship as the financial sector developed and ideas evolved about development policy. In the early years of independence, savings were largely mobilized by the Government and allocated through official channels. In a second stage of financial development, the Government transferred resources to term-lending institutions that developed the capacity for project appraisal in their disbursement of official funds. The third major step has been the development of the, ,Figure IV..Percentage of GDP (average -)GNP per capita ( US dollars)Note: Average of data shares are for years available in -(data for value added in finance plus insurance sectors of economies; GDP measured before deduction of imputed bank service charges).capital market, including a burgeoning securities market, accompanied by tax reductions and overall loosening of controls on the corporate sector.With investment in India and the developing and transition economies in general now more the result of private decisions and more reliant on financial sector operation, policy makers are paying increasing attention to improving the functioning of the financial sector. The goal is not only to stabilize the financial system, but also to raise the efficiency and equity of access to financial resources. In other words, well-functioning private financial systems embody important roles for government.The role of government: strengthening the financial sectorThroughout history, banks have been prone to take excessive risks with depositors funds, leading to individual bank failures that spread into general and costly banking crises. The gravest fear of monetary authorities begins when depositors in a bank come to believe that their bank has become weak and run to withdraw their funds, leaving the bank short of cash and unable to meet withdrawal demands. If this, in turn, raises fears among the depositors in other banks that they, too, may be unable to withdraw their funds, it can provoke a widespread loss of confidence, a generalized bank run, a severe contraction of liquidity and an economic recession.Governments thus place a high priority on maintaining public confidence in the currency and in the banks. The first line of defence is to require prudent management of banks, such as through maintaining appropriate liquid reserves and eschewing excessively risky lending operations. It is typically recommended that banks be closely regulated by a public authority and frequently inspected by auditors from the authority. In addition to the regulatory function, Governmentsor more precisely, central banksoften promote confidence in the banks by making it known that they stand ready to provide however much emergency credit is required by the banks to assure the liquidity of deposits in the event of a panic; that is to say, the central banks serve as lenders of last resort, a role they can perform because of their role in creating and controlling the domestic money supply. A related option is arranging for most deposits in banks to be insured against loss.Sometimes, emergency credit infusions by the central bank can prevent illiquid banks from entering bankruptcy. When bankruptcies of banks nevertheless occur, Governments often seek to merge the failed bank with a healthy bank or otherwise smooth the exit of the bank from the market. When, as has happened on numerous occasions in economies at all levels of development, many banks become insolvent simultaneously, the Government usually has to develop an emergency rescue programme. Sometimes the Government nationalizes the commercial banks, at least temporarily. Typically, it will force consolidations and reorganizations and help to recapitalize the banks that are still left standing.Aside from concerns about preventing systemic breakdown, financial markets and institutions remain subject to regulation in an otherwise liberalizing world environment because buyers and sellers need protection from unscrupulous operators. The buyer of a corporate security has to rely on the truthfulness of the information about the company reported in the prospectus about the security. There are financial incentives to misrepresent the corporations performance and prospects, and history is replete with cases where this has happened. Thus, regulations to ensure transparency of information and accounting according to established standards are highly valued.In some cases, individual financial markets establish their own regulatory authority and in other cases the task is performed by a government agency, but all such bodies act to maintain public confidence in the financial markets. They are concerned, for example, that prices not be manipulated by market traders. They can also establish automatic circuit-breakers to halt trading in securities when prices plunge by more than a pre-set amount, in order to let a panic pass before trading resumes.A major question is what direction government oversight and guidance should take in the future. Liberalization may have been a juggernaut in the s and s, but the challenges as well as opportunities that it created now seem to have established more room for a plurality of views. To take one example, developing countries have been encouraged in the past to allow their banks to offer a full range of financial services, that is to say, to make those banks universal banks. Such banks are common in Europe, but in the united_states, commercial banks are prohibited from directly engaging in the activities of investment banks and brokerage houses. These are considered higherrisk activities and the concern is to not indirectly extend lender-of-last-resort protection to such activities, which do not warrant it. Indeed, there is an argument that commercial banks should be prohibited from undertaking many of their activities, so as not to burden the lender of last resort with excessive risk. The range of banking models being advocated today thus extends from narrow to universal banking.Another area of concern is the increasing difficulty in managing the net risk exposure of todays complex financial institutions. In fact, one of the questions to emerge from the recent international financial and currency turmoil is whether risk management in banks and regulatory oversight of risk management are sufficiently robust. In the face of the burgeoning markets in derivative instruments and the booming bank lending to financial sector firms that take highly leveraged positions in financial markets, it is not clear that bankseven the most sophisticatedhave adequately managed their overall risk.This is important because the strategy being pursued in recent efforts to strengthen financial regulation of internationally active banks is, in essence, to make all banks follow industry best practices as defined by these banks. The committee at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel that deals with regulatory issues established standards a decade ago that call for banks to have minimum amounts of capital (equity) based on a few broad classifications of their loans and investments. A more recent approach of the committee has been to set guidelines for capital requirements according to overall measures of the value at risk of the bank, as determined by complicated computer models. However, these models were precisely the tools that failed to stop the international banks in the years leading up to the -crisis when their lending became excessively risky.In this light, attention has focused lately on strengthening international standards for capital requirements of banks. This is an area of great importance to global financial stability and to the developing and transition economies, which are increasing their integration into the global system and, being weaker economies, are especially vulnerable to its shocks.The role of government: policy interventionA key goal of the financial institutions that build and hold portfolios of financial placements is to maximize profits, while protecting the value of the funds they have accumulated. They thus hold investments that reward risk. There are, however, investments that warrant financing for social or development reasons, but that market-oriented institutions are unwilling to finance. In many countries, Governments have thus sought to supplement available private financial intermediation by various interventions, including establishing (or supporting privately owned) financial institutions that are mandated to take the additional risks that the private sector eschews. Development banks, as noted earlier, are the most important among such financial institutions, and are still in use in developed as well as in developing countries.Development banks have had a chequered history in developing countries, although in the countries in which they have functioned efficiently they have made major contributions to development. With government financial backing, these institutions provide subsidized credit (offering it for a longer term or at lower interest rates) to a wider clientele and for a broader range of uses than do commercial entities. While resources for the development banks may come from government budgets or loans from multilateral development banks, they may also tap the domestic and international financial system, for example, by issuing government-guaranteed bonds.Governments also seek to fill financing gaps by influencing where private financial resources flow. Such interventions include tax incentives (such as reduced taxation of interest on specified classes of bonds) and guarantees (for example, to encourage bank lending to small enterprises). In addition, Governments have established lending guidelines for banks in order to direct credit into particular industries or geographical regions.Moreover, recalling the inescapable role of judgement in the decisions of loan officers in banks, it has been common for discrimination by gender, race or ethnic group to enter into lending decisions in gross or subtle ways. Loan officers are likely to reflect the social mores around them and reproduce the economic effects of discrimination through the biases they perpetuate in respect of access to financial resources. Policy has to break that link, both in government rule-setting and in management leadership.Governments in an increasing number of countries and their international partners also foster the establishment and growth of new private sector activities to fill gaps in available financial services. One of those gaps entails the need for sufficient risk capital to exploit market opportunities. A once rare, but now increasingly familiar example of such activities is the nurturing of the development of a venture capital industry (see chap. VIII).In most developing countries, Governmentsaided by donors and other public agenciesalso play an important role in the creation and support of financial institutions that serve lower-income people. In many countries, financial services for lower-income populations have been supplied mainly by the informal sector, with some role for non-governmental organizations and public sector institutions, such as rural development agencies and post offices. In a number of countries, however, postal-based services have been privatized or closed, but there has been a revival of interest recently in strengthening them and extending their services (see box IV.).Box VI..Private financial institutions tend to leave some segments of the population under-served, in particular women, rural residents and lower-income people in general, as noted in the present chapter and as discussed in more detail in chapter VII. Official financial institutions and other not-for-profit entities may provide alternative services. In some cases, they do function quite well, but in other cases they do not, although this is not inevitable.One institution that has had a mandate in many countries to provide financial services to all population groups, and hence to those not well served by the private sector, is the postal savings bank (sometimes a free-standing savings bank operates, inter alia, through postal branches). The idea behind this institution is simple: given the extensive network of postal facilities in most countries, including in relatively isolated areas, and the possibility of containing costs through sharing of facilities and staff, it should be possible to make some financial services available to all the people in a country at an acceptable cost through the post office. Indeed, people can usually open and maintain postal savings accounts with very small balances.Postal savings banks became almost ubiquitous in many developed and developing economies more than a century ago. They served an explicit policy goal of encouraging thrift, while providing financial services and mobilizing substantial indigenous resources. The first system was introduced in the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland in , followed by systems in other European countries. The Japanese system was introduced in ; and after Japans leaders observed the foreign indebtedness of the Ottoman and Chinese empires, they decided to utilize accumulating postal savings funds for development financing.In recent decades, in the context of liberalization and the withdrawal of the State from numerous economic activities, a number of postal savings systems were privatized or closed. Others have been neither efficient nor effective. Still others, however, have been quite successful, most notably the Postal Savings Bureau of Japan. Indeed, there are a dozen countries in which there is at least one postal savings account per household (see table).a Half of the countries with the highest density of postal savings accounts are developed countries.According to the Universal Postal Union (UPU), there are postal savings banks in the developing and transition countries, along with giro payments systems which provide a safe means to make financial transfers and one that is much less expensive than those available from commercial banks (which are themselves less widely available than post offices).b In many instances, however, the usage of the postal system for financial services lags far behind the more successful cases shown in the table. In some countries, there is not even account per nor even per , households.This notwithstanding, in recent years there has been a revival of interest in policy circles in a number of countries in the contribution that postal savings might make to filling a gap in the availability of financial services. Indeed, both the world_bank and the Japanese Postal Savings Bureau provide assistance in improving postal systems. Moreover, the united_nations Development Programme (UNDP) has been exploring the concept of promoting small-scale savings through postal systems in arrangements that could be linked to credit extended through microfinance institutions.cFurthermore, the World Savings Banks Institute, of whose members are postal savings banks, has recently sought to bolster these institutions. Thus, the Institute formed the Postal Savings Banks Forum in as a mechanism for annual exchanges of views among top management of these banks and with outside entities on best practices and opportunities for cooperation. This kind of networking can be very important in raising the awareness of postal savings officials of the possibilities for strengthening their programmes and serving their target populations more effectively. It also provides useful information which postal savings officials can bring home to use in their efforts to reform their institutions and win greater political support for their activities.The success of a postal savings programme depends, after all, on convincing the governmental authorities that the institution can make an important and unique contribution. In fact, postal savings banks can be not only a tool of an equitable financial policy, but also an effective part of development financing.In other words, one can conceive of ways and means to intermediate accumulated postal savings into investments in development ranging from infrastructure projects to policy-based credit institutions serving the poor, such as microfinance institutions. The resources mobilized by postal savings could be channelled to industrial development banks, agricultural and rural development banks, facilities to promote development of specific regions of a country, or even venture capital funds.Individual accounts in postal savings banks are typically small; but efficiently collected by a widespread system, they can add up to considerable sums. If the resources are appropriately deployed and their use effectively monitored, a new constituency can be expected to take an interest in the effective operation of these institutions. Furthermore, synergy can be built with the collection of savings, through, for example, marketing campaigns (along such lines as Safeguard your savings and build the country through postal accounts). This can produceand has producedsignificant additions to development finance.dBox IV. (continued)Twenty largest countriesJapanHungaryNorwaySamoaIrelandFranceRepublic of Korea Finlandunited_kingdom Tunisia MauritiusIndiaGabonAlgeriaZimbabweItalyTrinidad and Tobago AustriaGermany Bahamas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Postal savings operate on the collection side of financial intermediation. The poor have also not been well served on the lending side of the ledger. The cost of lending to the poor and to women is relatively high, owing to the small size of the loans and the usual unavailability of collateral. Recent innovations, in particular the growth of microfinance institutions, have made lending to them more cost-effective, but public support is required as a catalyst, to cover set-up costs, give technical assistance and establish a legal and regulatory framework (see chap. VII).Once these institutions are running, policy makers have to confront another dilemma: if the microfinance institutions are asked to become self-sustaining, they are likely to focus on serving the less poor of the poor. If so, who services the poorest of the poor? The poorest also have a need for financial services, encompassing, for example, deposit of very modest savings and access to emergency loans. Today, this is mainly the province of informal finance. Formal institutions, such as postal savings facilities, may help at the margin, but a development strategy for the poorest of the poor requires a broader and bolder approach.Since , roughly two thirds of the member countries of the united_nations experienced significant banking sector problems, notably more than in the s and many more than in the more tranquil period of the s and s. The recent turbulence has been especially great in the developing world and is thought to be related to advances in technology and liberalization of restrictions on financial institutions. In exchange for the turbulence, countries are presumed to have more effective banking systems.The present chapter deals with various aspects of how banks actually function in their new and changing environment and the implications for policy. The analysis is first directed at recent experiences in developed countries, where the changes and challenges may point out the path for the development of the banking sector globally, but this chapter examines as well selected issues in banking in developing countries and in the economies in transition, where commercial banking as such did not exist until recently.Banking is an unusual industry, first because of its role in operating a countrys monetary system, but also because of how it handles the asymmetric information problem noted in chapter IV. That is to say, when a bank lends money, it has to monitor the borrower to ensure repayment, since it cannot know with certainty what the borrower will do with the funds.In a regular business transaction, both parties can walk away after completing an exchange and need have no further contact. In practice, suppliers and purchasers usually seek to develop continuing relationships in most businessto-business and business-to-household transactions. Like his or her industrial or commercial counterpart, the banker may see each transaction as part of a series with the customer. Yet in fact, loan contracts have traditionally entailed a continuing relationship with the borrower because the bank requires that the money that it loans be returned. The bank has to make an assessment of the borrowers three Cscapital, character and capacityand come to a judgement that the borrower will repay. The purported ability of banks to carry out the required monitoring function isalong with operating the payments system at the heart of why banks are considered to be a special part of the financial sector. Yet, this is changing.The matter of credit assessmentIn the light of the asymmetric information problem, the first question for the lending banker is how to choose the applicants to which to lend. Banking analysts have conceptualized the solutions to the problem into two broad models that may be called arms-length credit assessment and relationship banking.The first model posits a bank-loan officer who examines a formal credit application in which the prospective borrowing firm gives background information on its creditworthiness, its plans for using the funds, its prospective collateral for the loan and so on. There is no presumption in the model that the loan officer personally knows the representative of the applicant firm. The assessment is to be made against formal and informal benchmarks, applying standardized formulas (for example, involving calculations of the prospective rate of return on a project). The job of the banker is to decide whether or not to make the loan and to then monitor the timely payment of interest and principal, as well as the overall economic condition of the borrower (which gives information on future repayment capacity).The second model presumes a continuing relationship between the borrowing firm and its bank. Here, the bank official knows the client, is likely to have made loans to the firm in the past, and can form a judgement about the business acumen of management and its capacity to repay. According to this model, the assessment of the projected use of a particular loan may be based on relatively intimate knowledge of the operations of the borrower. In addition, in making the loan, the borrower may have expectations that the bank would extend additional credit in case of need, rather than foreclose for non-payment. The banker might demand closer monitoring of the firm as a price of attempting to rescue it, but this would be part of the relationship. Indeed, one strength in the relationship model is alleged to be its capacity for monitoring client firms. Moreover, the information that the banking relationship produces over time about the client is privately held by the bank. It not only informally ties the client firm to its bank, but also ties the bank to its client.In practice, lending decisions of banks embody aspects of both models. Even though loan officers may formally analyse loan requests, the better they know the operations of the applicant, the greater their ability to make a more informed judgement. This knowledge may arise from having provided other banking services to the applicant (chequing accounts, short-term credit and earlier loans). Indeed, there is evidence, for example, from the united_states of America, that the longer a bank has had a relationship with a small firm, the more funds the bank is likely to lend to the firm.Although each model solves the asymmetric information problem, at least in principle, each also lends itself to certain socially and economically undesirable banking practices. In the arms-length model, rules of thumb for lending decisionsif not formal decision rulesare seen to be rational techniques of assistance in making decisions in an inescapably uncertain environment. But sometimes these rules fall back on gender, racial or ethnic stereotyping. These latter decision rules substitute prejudice for credit evaluation, are unjust, and are economically inefficient in that promising projects will go unfunded.Crony capitalism is todays popular name for the most common abuse of the relationship banking model. The idea here is that the human relationships into which the banker enters with the client can evolve into personal obligations that cloud instead of clarify the lending decision process. Thus, the relationship banker may make loans to friends that would not pass muster under an arms-length assessment. Similarly, bankers may feel obligated or find it opportune to make loans to enterprises that are affiliated with politically important figures. As in the case of the stereotyping rules of thumb, these are unjust and inefficient practices.Strength into weakness: banking in JapanThe banking system in Japan has been characterized as an extreme form of relationship banking and one reason for Japans successful economic development. However, by the mid-s, the purported strengths of that system looked more like sources of weakness that were so deep that the continued viability of the system was no longer assured. The extent of the erosion of public confidence in the banks could be seen from the shifting of household deposits out of banks and into the already large Postal Savings Bureau (Yubin Chokin, popularly called Yucho), which turned it into the largest financial institution in the world.To understand the crisis in the Japanese banking system, it is necessary to see the system in the context of the corporate groups that emerged after the Second World War. When the war ended, the large zaibatsu holding companies were disbanded. Each one had held shares in and controlled a group of firms, many of which held controlling interests in other firms. For example, the Mitsui zaibatsu controlled companies in industry, agriculture and the service sector, including banking, life insurance and real estate; some of these firms, in turn, controlled other firms (for example, Mitsui Steamship held shares in nine other companies). Ownership was often in the form of a minority stake and there were numerous instances of one subsidiarys owning shares in another. The structure that emerged after the war in essence replaced the vertical link to the holding company with horizontal links among the top-level firms, forming a corporate grouping called kigyo shudan (see figure V.). The second-tier vertical links (called keiretsu, a term often misapplied to the horizontal group structure) remained. The groups main bank (sometimes along with a trading company) would be in the centre of the kigyo shudan.While the groups trading company supported project planning, development and marketing, which might be undertaken as a joint venture with other group members, the main bank supplied financial expertise and short-term and long-term finance. It organized lending consortia to finance investment of client firms in good times and coordinated rescheduling of loans of clients in bad times. It may appear that this structure re-created the zaibatsu, but in fact the kigyo shudan companies acted with more independence and traded far less with each other than under the zaibatsu. This became especially important in the light of changes in the Japanese financial system in the s and s.As the most pressing problem of Japanese banks today is the crushing amount of bad debt that has accumulated on their books, it may be asked if the monitoring function that banks must perform had broken down. It was expected that owing to the cross-shareholding built into the kigyo shudan and keiretsu structure, the main bank would have access to inside information about its clients, thereby reducing its asymmetric information problem. This informationFor a complete listing of the Mitsui interests as of January , see Mark J. Scher, Japanese Interfirm Networks and Their Main Banks (London and New York, Macmillan Press and St. Martins Press, ), pp. -.Not all the post-war groups were formed out of the former zaibatsu, but they all had main banks.The group might also have a trust bank which would supply long-term financing and an insurance company which might also supply financing, as well as underwrite property and casualty insurance for a project (see Scher, op. cit.).Figure V..Indicates former zaibatsu ties Indicates present-day relationshipswas thought to be indirectly shared with other banks; that is to say, as large firms regularly drew credit from outside their group as well as from inside, there was said to be an implicit contract among main banks by which continued support of a client firm by its main bank was a signal to all the banks of its confidence in the creditworthiness of their mutual client firm.Whether or not this is how the system once worked, it was not operating this way by the early s. Domestic and international policy changes in a technologically dynamic global industry altered the nature of competition in the domestic banking market. Liberalization of the domestic regulatory regime led to reduced spreads between deposit and loan interest rates, adversely impacting profits. The result was increased competition among banks, which focused them on capturing more of the financial business of the large corporations. Each major firm had relations with a hierarchy of banks, their main bank being at the top. The main banks thus found themselves facing increasing competition from the other banks in the hierarchy or from outsiders which were only too eager to gain a foothold in the banking business of the client firm. In addition, with deregulation, large firms had more access to new forms of non-bank finance, in particular market finance, such as commercial paper.The heightened competition among banks led them to offer more and more credit to their client firms, but not in order to raise lending volume and interest income. Rather, banks used loanseven if the low spreads made them loss leadersto promote other sources of income for the banks. If one bank could displace another and become the main bank of a client, it would win the right to service the main depository accounts of the firm and hold a large number of employee accounts. It would also hold the largest non-interest bearing compensating balances and more low-interest time deposits, and earn a disproportionate share of the clients commission and fee-based business (such as foreign exchange transactions or letters of credit).In this situation, not only did large-scale potential borrowers have to worry less about convincing their creditors of the soundness of their proposed loan, but visits to a client firm by a banks monitoring team took on a different orientation than that of traditional monitoring. The teams main purpose was to obtain information about the firms future plans in order to promote sales of the banks services. Indeed, given the alternative sources of credit, the monitoring team would in any case have little leverage over the client.Thus, when the Japanese bubble economy burst as the s began, banks found themselves holding assets of rapidly deteriorating quality, particularly on real estate-related lending. Bank management strongly desired to compensate for these losses with earnings elsewhere, as in East and South-east_asia, where they helped to create the asset inflation bubble whose bursting triggered the Asian financial crisis.There is still, however, the puzzle why the banks continued to extend loans in Japan to what turned out to be increasingly troubled clients. A first reason seems to be that the banks did not obtain significant inside information about their client firms through their cross-shareholding. Management of the client firms appear to have regarded their main banks as rather low in the ranking of stakeholders that were entitled to monitor their activities. Also, the banks themselves viewed the shares they held in a client not so much as an information channel but rather as a way to maintain relational access to the firm as a client. Cross-shareholding was viewed not as a mechanism for monitoring the borrower, but as another instance of essentially the same relational cross-shareholding that existed between firms and their main suppliers and corporate customers across many economic sectors. In short, the banks appear not to have had any special insight into their major borrowers operations.A second reason for continued lending to weak clients may have lain in what was perceived to be the main source of profits to the main bank, namely, selling financial services to the client. Moreover, as many banks were simultaneously lending to the client, any negative signal sent by main-bank expressions of concern about the client might discourage the other creditor banks. Were they to withdraw, the pressure would be great on the main bank to replace the withdrawing banks and increase its own exposure, thereby adversely changing the risk/reward mix for the main bank.A third reason for poor-quality lending and monitoring by the Japanese banks, at least at first, may have been the psychology of the bubble economy: having grown accustomed to rapid economic growth, few people expected conditions to change. The possibility of economic recession was seen to threaten only a temporary pause in the strong economic expansion. Bank management may thus have underappreciated the risk it was taking on.A fourth reason is that even if bank management understood the risk, they might well have discounted it on the expectation that the Japanese Ministry of Finance would bail out any large troubled banks. This is an instance of the moral hazard problem of taking on excessive risk in the expectation that a lender of last resort will render assistance if needed (see box V.). In fact,The firm would request its employees to open accounts at the chosen bank so as to facilitate direct deposit of their salary. The bank would then have a near-captive market to which to sell other banking services.By the same token, the client firm might have been willing to take larger risks than otherwise because of the expectation that, in the event of need, its main bank would extend new loans rather than see the firm collapse, this being an intra-corporate group version of the moral hazard problem.Box V..In recognition of the special role that banks play in market economies, Governments generally accord banks a safety net that goes beyond the protection of other parts of the financial system or of other actors in the economy. However, the safety net entails a moral hazard; that is to say, it invites excessively risky bank behaviour because bank management is less afraid than it would otherwise be of the possibilities of failure. Yet, this does not mean that the safety net was a mistake: even if taking away the safety net were to eliminate the moral hazard, it would only return the economy to the earlier state of excessive vulnerability. The solution lies in identifying the proper tools for creating a safety net and how to best combine them with appropriate regulatory principles so as to minimize moral hazard.The basic aim of a bank safety net is to prevent or quell a generalized run on the banks which might force strong banks as well as weak ones to close, contract the supply of money and credit and cause an economic recession. But runs are an instance of herd behaviour in economics and one reason why a herd instinct might be found among depositors and might spread contagion from weak banks to strong ones is that the publicabove all small depositorscannot easily assess the riskiness of the banks balance sheet. This uncertainty leaves banks open to panic. In the midst of a panic, moreover, an otherwise solvent bank might not be able to raise sufficient cash from selling assets at fire sale prices to meet its depositors demands.More fundamentally, however, the possibility of a bank run is created by two key features of banking systems: intermediation and leverage. Intermediation is the operation whereby banks collect deposits and lend them out. While the deposits are liquid, many of the loans (or securities that banks might purchase) are not. As noted in chapter IV, this is usually safe, that is to say, there is a small chance (the liquidity risk) that it is not safe.In addition, the banking system as a whole is typically highly leveraged. As depositors in a bank roughly maintain the size of their deposit balances, the bank can use a large proportion of the deposited funds to make loans (or purchase securities), retaining only a small proportion of the deposits in the form of liquid assets to meet the usual daily demand for cash. As this applies to all banks in the system, total loans (and securities held by banks) are a substantial multiple of the cash reserves.Such a fractional reserve banking system may be seen as a wonderfully efficient financial engine. But it is equally efficient at multiplying the credit contraction consequences of a sudden withdrawal of cash from the banks. That is to say, banks liquidity risks are magnified by their leverage and vice versa. Therefore, banks need a safety net under them to protect the economy from the systemic risk that a bank run might pose for the economy at large: should a bank default on its obligations to its depositors, the resultant contagion might lead to a collapse of the banking and payment system and take the rest of the economy with it. This is not merely theory, as it used to happen periodically before there were any safety nets.Tools for making a safety netThe classic bank safety net is the lender of last resort, as formulated by Walter Bagehot in his book Lombard Street (). The policy is meant to be preventive and curative. The central bank announces well before a panic starts that, should a banking panic begin, it would be willing to make very large loans to banks against good collateral (valued at pre-panic prices) but at a penalty rate of interest (to discourage abuse of the credit line). The announcement is aimed at bolstering the confidence of depositors, but the central bank also provides the emergency liquidity in case an actual bank run begins. It appears that when this concept was consistently applied (albeit generally using market interest rates) in the late nineteenth century and after, as in England, France, Germany, Sweden and Canada, it worked successfully.aBagehots lender-of-last-resort system is not, however, uniformly in use today. For example, during the financial scare in the united_states of America in the autumn of , the Federal Reserve System took two types of action, neither of which was the classical lender of last resort.That is to say, concerned that liquidity was disappearing from the united_states economy owing to financial market reaction to the Russian devaluation and suspension of debt servicing, the Fed engaged in open-market operations (it bought government bonds on the open market) and thereby pushed additional cash into the banking system. In this way, the Fed very quickly supplied liquidity to the banking sector, but without the frown costs that normally accompany the classical mechanism of emergency lending through the discount window and, moreover, not at a penalty rate. On the other hand, one could also argue that the open-market operation was less vulnerable to moral hazard, as individual banks could not be sure how much liquidity would come to them in any episode.Second, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York sought to resolve the looming liquidity crisis at Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), a hedge fund that had borrowed and lost large sums from several major banks. If each of LTCMs creditors had tried individually to recover as much as possible of its loans, the firm would certainly have failed, there would have been a major disruption in the financial markets in which LTCM operated and most of the banks would have faced grave losses, not only from their loans to LTCM, but also from their exposures to the same markets as those to which LTCM had been exposed. Under these circumstances, the New York Fed coordinated a major infusion of private bank credit (and losses were imposed on the shareholders of LTCM) and the firm began to unwind its complicated and highly leveraged financial positions. In other words, the New York Fed managed the situation through action directly involving the crisis institution.By mid-, it appeared that LTCM would survive and that the creditors would ultimately receive their funds back. Although creditors might conclude that they would be protected from default on loans to hedge funds (a moral hazard result), they also have to face the likelihood that stricter regulations will be imposed, as was being discussed in the summer of by the authorities of the united_states and other major countries.Box V. (continued)Box V. (continued)There is a third tool for creating the modern safety net in addition to the lender of last resort and crisis management. This is a scheme of deposit insurance which protects at least small deposits from losses if a bank fails. Whether for household or small or medium-sized business, such risk reduction is a socially and economically valuable service, addressing what had been felt to be a serious problem whenin the united_states in the midst of the Great Depressiondeposit insurance was first introduced. Deposit insurance is possibly open, however, to moral hazard, as banks know that at least their insured obligations would be covered by the insurance in the event of bankruptcy.bMoreover, an additional practice which also has a moral hazard dimension gradually found its way into the safety tool kit. This arose from the doctrine that some banks were too big to fail: a Government might bail out even an insolvent bank if not doing so would have adverse systemic effects.c Such assistance could take the form of morethan-usual access to credit from the central bank and regulatory forbearance, wherein regulators would make exceptions to otherwise prohibited practices of a bank.However, while central bank lending according to the too big to fail doctrine clearly violates Bagehots admonition about lending against bad collateral, the fact that the intention of the practice is to protect the banking system from systemic risk only brings us back to the issue of the relative costs (in terms of increased moral hazard) and benefits (in terms of protection from systemic risk) of a bank safety net. Moreover, we should not confuse the dangers of moral hazard with the dangers of lax financial regulation.Dealing with perverse incentivesIt has been argued that, taken together, these and similar banking oversight policies created the perverse incentives that led banks to slip into the spate of crises in the s and s in developed and developing countries.d In fact, both greater instability in the global economy and the competitive winds of liberalization made banking a more volatile and risky business. This notwithstanding, perverse incentives may have exacerbated banking problems and thus efforts aimed at a reduction of moral hazard became a major focus of regulatory and safety net reform in the s.eWith the benefit of hindsight, it can be noted that moral hazard in banking is sometimes increased as an inadvertent side effect of policies taken for reasons unrelated to prudential concerns. The Republic of Korea, for instance, raised the moral hazard in banking through liberalization. Banking in the Republic of Korea had been an intimate part of an industrial policy system that was dismantled in the s. The banks were then expected to change their mode of operation to that found in a more decentralized and competitive market, while under a legacy of poor management and credit analysis skills, as well as large exposures to the highly leveraged chaebols (conglomerates).f The banks also remained under official pressure to extend loans and they helped finance the global expansion of the chaebols, in part with short-term foreign funds that the banks were able to access following liberalization.After the Republic of Koreas financial and economic collapse at the end of , the shortcomings became easy to see. Official regulation had been weak,with regulatory forbearance granted in one area after another. To meet competition from less-regulated non-bank financial institutions, banks were allowed to offer trust accounts that were kept off their balance sheetsand thus were not subject to standard capital backing rulesalthough they increased bank riskiness. In addition, loan-loss reserves, which had been per cent of doubtful loans at the start of , were lowered to per cent and provisions for losses from revaluation of securities holdings were dropped from per cent of exposure to per cent.One lesson for the future is the importance of strengthening regulatory rules.g In addition, new policy directions of the Republic of Korea included closure of some of the banks, reorganization and recapitalization of others and invigoration of official oversight capacity, beginning with the establishment of a new Financial Supervisory Commission.hGlobally, the new intellectual ferment over regulatory reform is producing some interesting proposals, although certain of them require a level of financial sector sophistication that seems to limit their applicability. One, for example, would require banks to issue subordinated debt instruments (such as uninsured certificates of deposit) and to require that the yield on them be less than, say, half of a percentage point above a risk-free debt instrument, such as a treasury bill. The instruments would have to be rolled over regularly and the bank would have to maintain a pre-set ratio of these instruments to total loans outstanding. If the market assessed the bank as becoming too risky, not all the subordinated debt would be rolled over and the bank would have to contract its loans and/or change its behaviour so as to regain market confidence.i The proposal depends, however, on there being an adequate supply of experienced securities analysts who would presumably be in a better position to judge the riskiness of bank balance sheets than are small depositors.Other proposals seek to counter moral hazard by altering the risk/return calculus facing bank management. One proposal is to introduce uncertainty into whether or not a failed bank will actually be rescued. More direct is the proposal to raise the cost of bank insolvency by making it clear that members of management will always lose their jobs and that shareholders (in the bank) will always lose their capital in the event of a failure.j Such threats would have to be credible, and this is not a trivial requirement. Even under existing practices, regulators are often under very considerable political pressure from the banks that they regulate, whose management is often very influential (again, this is an issue of poor regulation and not of moral hazard).Such difficulties notwithstanding, reform of banking regulation and safety nets have become a high globalas well as nationalpriority, and there has been a flurry of international activity in trying to reach agreed directions for policy reform. One focus is to make stronger prudential regulation a quid pro quo for safety net protection at the national level and to establish minimum regulatory standards across countries. There are also important questions for policy makers, however, in respect of removing excess volatility from the economic and financial environment in which banks function, that involve policies beyond those narrowly focused on banks per se (see chap. IX).Box V. (continued)after some delay and with increasing appreciation of the severity the situation, the Government adopted a massive restructuring and bailout plan in October . It is hoped that this will result in a considerable consolidation of banks and changes in management.One consequence of this sequence of developments is that in Japan, as elsewhere in the world economy, the prospect is now for an increasing share of credit to be provided through financial market instruments and a decline in the share of bank credit. Indeed, there was a flurry of mergers in early among Japanese trust banks, which are institutional investors that intermediate funds through the capital markets (for example, pension fund management). It remains to be seen, however, how the small and medium-sized enterprises in Japan will fare in this new financial environment. They were hit especially hard by the contraction of bank lending that accompanied the final burgeoning of the financial crisis and they have fewer of the financial market options available to the larger firms with respect to raising funds.Is there a future for commercial banking?The changes in Japan that led up to its banking crisis had their roots in developments in banking and finance that had begun some three decades before in the united_states. By the s, the depth of the changes that had begun there were beginning to be perceived. A prominent book on the united_states banking industry that appeared at that time began with a chapter entitled The revolution and ended with one entitled Living on the edge of an abyss. The author worried about the increasing fragility of the financial system that the revolution was creating. The united_states subsequently went through a number of banking scaresmost notably the s debt crisis of developing countries which threatened the viability of several New York money-centre banks and an actual crisis in the savings and loan industry, but in the s banking scholars published articles with titles such as Are banks dead? Does this presage what is to be the future of banking in the united_states or in the world at large?One important part of the initial change in the united_states, as in Japan decades later, was a diminution in the relational aspects of bank lending. That is to say, banks in the united_states became more and more transaction-oriented. Many banks stopped seeing the extension and monitoring of loans as their main function. However, while Japanese banks made and held loans in order to gain other business of their clients, the strategy of banks in the united_states emphasized making a loan and then selling it to someone else. Today, banks in the united_states not only off-load mortgages that are then bundled together into mortgage-backed securities, as discussed in chapter IV, but also sell almost any type of loan, including credit-card debt, automobile and consumer finance loans and corporate debt.In addition, while various types of loans are bundled together and sold for securitization, individual loans may also be sold to other banks or investors who wish to hold assets with the particular characteristics of the loan. Indeed, in the s, commercial banks from the United Statesjoined by banks from other developed countrieseven sold non-performing credit obligations of the Governments of developing and transition economies that were in debt crisis,creating an actively traded secondary market in emerging economy distressed debt.When loans are sold by banks, it relieves loan officers of further responsibility to monitor the loans. The credit decision facing the loan officer changes from one of entering into a contract that will last as long as the loan is outstanding to one of entering into a contract that will look attractive enough to a potential purchaser of the contract. The purchaser of the loanfor example, a mortgage company in a housing casewill take over responsibility for the monitoring. Indeed, what the originating bank sells is a bundle of mortgages which the buyer understands contains a variety of different credit risks. In this context, the relationship between the borrower and the ultimate lender inevitably becomes less personal.Moreover, as the financial industry became more complex and competitive, with more financial market alternatives to bank loans and with more banks able to contest other banks individual markets, banks had to confront the fact that their largest customers had ever more alternative ways to obtain credit. These customers thus became less-and-less tied to individual banks. As a result, banks lost a considerable amount of their traditional business, although they compensated with new, fee-earning off balance-sheet activity.In other words, banks in the united_states have increasingly sought to sell a full range of financial services to their corporate and household customers. Like their non-bank financial services counterparts, banks have sought to boost income from fee-earning activity and sales of ancillary services. However, they still provide the overwhelming bulk of short-term credit and demand deposits, although these are no longer a dynamic part of banking, owing, inter alia, to spreading electronic means of payment.Another aspect of the changing banking industry in the united_states is the fall in the number of banks by almost per cent during the s and the rise in the share of banking assets held by the eight largest banking organizations from to per cent of the total, significantly larger changes than in other parts of the financial sector (other than savings, owing to the crisis therein). The decline in the number of banks came about mainly through mergers, as the number of newly created banks in this period exceeded the number of bank failures. Certain mergers, particularly in , were among very large banks, and in one case involved a bank with a major insurance company.It does not appear, however, that this merger wave has reduced competition at the local levelthe total number of bank offices rose. Moreover, there is little evidence of a diminution of services to small customers. While the large banking organizations lend less than before to small businesses, it appears that new banks enter and serve this market (although the evidence is limited). Moreover, the market for lending to small firms has recently seen new competition from non-bank financial services companies that have begun to offer loans as part of efforts to cement their relations with the firms to which they sell their main services. In this regard, non-bank companies in the united_states are reproducing on a small scale an approachof loan-as-marketingdevicethat resembles what the large commercial banks of Japan employed earlier this decade.This seems to indicate both that there may still be a niche for small banks in the world of mega-banks, and that small firms will be less dependent onFor a brief history of that market, see wess, (united_nations publication, Sales No. E..II.C.), chap. XII.Data pertain to the period -(see Allen Berger, Rebecca Demsetz and Philip Strahan, The consolidation of the financial services industry: causes, consequences, and implications for the future, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. (December ), p. and table ).Ibid., pp. -and .these or other banks than was the case in the past. Banks will have to compete on the basis of a range of services offered even to small firms, not just access to credit.In addition, there still seem to be some things that banks can do that the market will not do, things that grow out of the unique ability of a bank to form an ongoing relationship with a client on the basis of which the bank may lend in unusual circumstances. Historically, it has been the role of banks to fund complex positions, the major difference today being that the range of credits that cannot be securitized or sold has narrowed considerably. But that role has not disappeared. In particular, it is expected that banks, especially large banks, will continue to innovate in the design of lending vehicles for corporate customers, supplying non-standard financial products that customers would utilize in conjunction with informal contracts, wherein the bank implicitly agrees to provide further financial flows so as to unwind any unexpected negative outcomes from the innovative programmes.The conclusion here is thus that there is still a role in the united_states and even more of a role in the rest of the worldfor commercial banks, which can be expected to supply a diverse mixture of financial services, along with traditional loans. However, it also follows that as banks, even small banks, increasingly offer non-traditional services, the burden grows on the supervisory authorities to ensure their prudential operation. It is also important that policy makers monitor the state of competition in the banking sector to ensure that the market for banking services is contestable and fairthat they determine, for example, if it is warranted that newcomers or alternative services should be encouraged to replace banks that merge and then withdraw from serving individual communities.The picture of banking in the developed countries presented above is one of a very dynamic and innovative industry, albeit an industry vulnerable to crisis. It requires strong prudential oversight, as well as monitoring, with a view to promoting effective competition and equitable (non-discriminatory) provision of banking services. This applies equally to banking in the developing economies, especially as globalization brings competition from the international banking industry to their doorstep. There are additional policy considerations, however, that are particularly salient for developing countries.Policy on liberalizationEver since the Third World debt crisis broke in August, , debtor countries have been called on to adjust as their contribution to resolving the debt problem. This is how the book began that tried to define the basic propositions that make up what has come to be called the Washington consensus on appropriate domestic economic policy adjustments. Although the focus at the time was on latin_america, the Washington, D.C.-based institutions have offered basically the same prescription to all developing countries, with little change for at least two decades (albeit with new prescriptions added, such as those concerning transparency, as discussed below). Three sections of theWashington consensus pertain to the banking sector: one on interest rates, another on privatization and a third on foreign direct investment (FDI).The advice on interest rates was to remove policy controls and let the market determine their level. The concern was that interest rates were kept artificially low in developing countrieseven negative in real terms in some countries in some periodsand that the economy was underutilizing and misallocating money and credit as a result. Developed countries also used controls on interest rates but these had been largely lifted by the end of the s and the developing countries were being urged to do the same.The advice on privatization was simple: do it. There was considerable criticism of the operation of State enterprises in developing countries and many banks were State-owned. They were seen to be inefficient, and overstaffed; they unnecessarily absorbed subsidies; and they were subject to political influence in allocating credit. Banks (and other firms) in which management sought to maximize profitsor more precisely, shareholder valuewould not be subject to these failings, in the view of the Washington consensus.The advice on FDI was also simple: remove restrictions. The focus here was not mainly on mainly attracting foreign financial flowsindeed, the original Washington consensus had not included the liberalization of external capital flows, which was introduced only in the sbut rather on how foreign entry would add competition to local markets, bring technology (and some funds) and facilitate integration into the international economy (in the case of banking, this pertained mainly to facilitating access to financial instruments and services that were available overseas).While each of the aforementioned parts of the Washington consensus has been more or less embraced by the developing countries, in the end there is less consensus about some parts than others. In the case of ceilings on interest rates, the argument for their removal is now widely considered to have been flawed, although there is no broad interest in reasserting the controls.The argument on interest rates was somewhat confounded by a mixing of macroeconomic and structural concerns, but the central focus was on monetary stabilization. Indeed, inflation rates have fallen across the developing world and have averaged about per cent a year since , in contrast to tripledigit figures earlier (see table A.). In addition, a large number of countries have removed interest-rate ceilings on loans and deposits, in particular in the period -, a period that one author described as the golden age of interest rate reform.The results of the interest-rate liberalization, however, were not always what had been expected. In some countries, real interest rates not only became positive, as desired, but rose to destructively high levels during the anti-inflation struggles and again in conjunction with the events surrounding the financial and currency crises in several emerging market economies, particularly in Asia and latin_america. In Africa, on the other hand, real interest rates in some countries did not even become positive following liberalization, while the spread between lending and deposit rates grew, owing to the monopoly power of the decontrolled banks. Apparentlyand a reminder of the continuing relevance of the general theory of the second bestthe efficacy of interestrate liberalization is contingent on other policies being also adopted.Concerns about interest-rate liberalization, however, ran deeper, even at the level of economic theory. There has been an increasing questioning of the contribution that can reasonably be expected from interest-rate liberalization in raising economic efficiency and growth, which are especially important in developing economies. The kernel of the argument is that banking markets are not efficient in the theoretical sense because banking markets do not clear. That is to say, because of the asymmetric information problem, which, as noted in chapter IV, is inherent in banking, there is an adverse selection problem that confronts banks. Their rational response is to hold interest rates below the maximum that would equalize supply and demand. Instead, banks ration the credit among prospective borrowers. This is important because the original critique of interest-rate ceilings was that they created a credit rationing problem: the ceiling prevented the price of credit from rising until demand for credit equalled supply. It is now believed that credit will be rationed even without the ceilings being set by policy.The most important conclusion from this controversy is that there should be no presumption that private commercial banks, left to themselves, produce an allocation of credit that can be called optimal in any developmental sense. Governments may still find it useful to privatize their State-run banks and to withdraw from direct intervention in banking markets; but they should not presume that a totally passive policy on bankingor a policy limited to prudential concernswould be sufficiently pro-development.On the other hand, it does not follow either that Governments will necessarily do a better job than private banks of allocating credit. In a great many cases, government direction of credit allocation was far from effective and in some cases hardly in the public interest. Nevertheless, a recent assessment of programmes in which Governments intruded into lending decisions of banksin particular in directed credit programmesis that those programmes can indeed achieve their intended goals, at least for a certain time and under certain conditions. When they work well, they seem to be part of an array of tools that a government employs, as other factors are required in combination with direction of credit for such mechanisms to be successful.These complementary factors were not consistent with the main thrust of national and international policy and financial sector development in developing countries at the end of the twentieth century, namely, fostering a highly liberalized domestic financial environment and deepening integration into the international banking and financial universe. At least, it seems unlikely that finance ministries and central banks in developing countriesnot to mention the commercial banking sector that has had to learn how to operate in the new global financial environment, sometimes at great costwould countenance any time soon a reversal of the liberalization strategies of the past decade. Some new policy instruments may thus need to be developed for this new environment.Policy on information and competitionOne question that policy makers concerned with the functioning of the liberalized banking sector have to confront is how to ensure effective competition in the domestic market for loans. Large and well-established firms are likely to have an advantage over new or small firms in this regard, as they will be known to a larger circle of potential creditors and thus can negotiate better lending terms. In small countries with a limited number of large businesses and banking groups, this can be a major factor in the allocation of credit (without warranting the appellation of crony capitalism).The reputational capital of well-known firms can be important, but it is especially significant when standards of accounting and reporting are low and information supplied by firms is not trustworthy. It has been argued that firms that gain reputational capital will have a financial incentive to maintain this through responsible behaviour, such as eschewing excessive risk. This may well be the case, but from a policy perspective the most important task seems to be to create conditions in which creditors will be less dependent on reputational indications of creditworthiness and thus more open to newcomers.In other words, the economic services of the financial sector can be enhanced to the degree that the information needed to make a loan decision about a prospective borrower can be standardized and depersonalized. Important ways include establishing and enforcing codes of business transparency, especially as regards adoption of agreed standards of accounting and reporting. These standards can always be evaded and so there also needs to be a culture of abiding by the standards. In countries where this does not already exist, the process of building such standards can take considerable time. By the same token, zero tolerance in credit allocation for discrimination by gender, race or ethnicity is requiredas well as non-interference by government in the lending decisions of banksso as to create and then bolster a culture of equality of treatment.Expectations for improved information and transparency should, however, not be exaggerated. The experience of foreign direct investors, for example, is that in some countries in which they operate, information is available and reliable, if expensive to obtain. But its interpretation also requires local knowledge. In other countries, information is deemed poor and unreliable, and interpretation requires access to informal networks. A single piece of information, moreover, may mean different things in different national circumstances. There is, in other words, a contextual complexity that is often not transparent, especially to the foreign investor.Thus, while adoption of internationally agreed codes on transparency, reliability and timeliness of information needs to be encouraged, they will not per se draw aside the cultural curtain and homogenize business practices on the norms of any one country or group of countries (indeed, there are important differences in business culture among the countries of the Group of Seven). Adoption of international standards will not eliminate all distinct cultural norms ... and it would be presumptuous to say that they should.Policy on foreign entryThere has been a range of attitudes towards the participation of foreign banks in domestic economies and a range of practices. In the mid-s in the developed countries, for example, foreign banks accounted for less than per cent of total bank assets in Japan, and for less than per cent in Germany, but for per cent in the united_states. The range in developing countries has been similar: from zero in Israel and per cent in Mexico and Venezuela, through per cent in Colombia, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, and Taiwan Province of China, and -per cent in Brazil, India and Thailand, per cent in Malaysia, but to over per cent in Argentina and Chile.It appears from the above that Governments find very different mixtures of foreign bank participation in their domestic banking markets to be desirable. Developments in east_asia since the financial crisis began there and in latin_america since mid-decade suggest that policy is shifting towards a greater role for foreign investment in banking. How a Government undertakes to welcome such a larger foreign presence, however, appears to be an important determinant of how successful it will be.Multinational banks (MNBs) traditionally serve market segments in which their multinational presence gives them a clear competitive advantage. One of the main reasons that MNBs seek to enter a new economy is to provide services to transnational corporations that are already their customers in other parts of the world. Further, MNBs provide services that other banks either are less familiar with or cannot provide. Such services include loans in foreign currency, acceptances and guarantees related to international trade, internationally syndicated loans and derivative products. Owing to the nature of these services, large domestic corporations become MNB clients, whereas smaller enterprises are less likely to require these services. Finally, MNBs offer their services to high net worth individuals to attract new deposits and to provide consumer finance. Such retail banking services include brokerage services, savings products, mortgages, credit cards and consumer loans.In most cases, MNBs have not expanded their activities beyond these market segments, although this seems to be changing. In particular, as home banking markets became saturated and profit opportunities seemed still large in emerging economies, some MNBs began to expand into foreign markets to service medium-sized enterprises and middle-income households. This has been the case recently, for instance, in latin_america, where entry of international banks into domestic banking poses competitive challenges for the local banks (see box V.).Both the traditional type of MNB entry into a market and the newer, direct competition entry are expected to improve competitive conditions in the local sector and the robustness of the banks. That is to say, policy makers usually seek to attract the foreign entry in order to bring foreign expertise and capital into local banking, while strengthening market discipline. It is possible, however, that foreign entryparticularly, the traditional typemay weaken the domestic banking sector and push it either to raise the risk and lower the quality of its lending portfolio or to curtail its lending, possibly leaving small and medium-sized enterprises with less access to credit than before.The steps by which such unintended results may arise begin with liberalization policies, wherein domestic banks find themselves newcomers to an unregulated market environment, one into which powerful new banks suddenly enter. The local banks need new capital to compete with the MNBs, but the presence of MNBs limits the options for raising capital through retained profits. This is because more competition lowers the margin of interest rates charged on loans over interest rates paid on deposits and thus it lowers domestic bank profits and retained earnings. Retained earnings are the main source of new capital, as official capital injections are generally eschewed and arranging new equity issues may be difficult.The problem for the domestic banks is that not only will overall earnings on loans be lower, but some of their former low-risk credits will be siphoned offThere is a long history of foreign banking in latin_america; but there is also a new interest on the part of foreign banks in coming to the region. It appears that they will participate in the domestic market in a different way than their predecessors and are likely to have different effects.The surge in foreign entryWhile a number of foreign banks have long had branch networks in latin_america, there has been a strong new inflow of foreign direct investment (FDI) in Latin American banking since around . Two Spanish banks (Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV) and Banco Santander Central Hispano) were the first to aggressively enter these markets, aided by the competitive advantage of their cultural affinities. But they were closely followed by Canadian banks (Bank of Nova Scotia and Bank of Montreal), the Italian Sudameris, the Dutch ABN Amro and HSBC, the London-based parent of Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. In addition, some Latin American banking groups (especially from Chile) are also building regional networks.As of early , several foreign banks that are relatively new in latin_america had established sizeable operations in a number of countries and were outpacing other long-established financial institutions. For instance, BBV now has holdings in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. On average, it controls per cent of the institutions in which it has invested in the region. It employed more than , people in more than , branches as of October . This presence contrasts dramatically with that of Citibank, which has been in the region more than years, but at the end of had less than , bank employees and close to branches.aThe recent surge of foreign banks has no precedent in latin_america, although the size of the foreign presence varies sharply from country to country.b As of September , Peru had the highest foreign penetration among the major Latin American countries. Foreign banks there were estimated to control per cent of total loans in the system. Foreign financial institutions had expanded substantially in Peru during , as in Argentina, and that growth accelerated during . Mexico, on the other hand, had a relatively low foreign presence, owing to regulations that limited foreign ownership of the three largest domestic banks, which accounted for about one third of the financial systems loans (these restrictions were removed at the end of ).This trend is likely to continue. Even during the last half of , when the economic environment in the region became increasingly difficult because of the international financial turmoil swirling especially around Brazil, foreign banks still made acquisitions, albeit fewer ones. Some foreign banks saw that episode as, in other words, an opportunity to expand by taking advantage of the very low stock market valuation of financial firms in latin_america at the time. Indeed, foreign banks have diversified from standard banking operations into private pension funds and the insurance sector.The attraction to international banksThe new entrants into Latin American banking were encouraged by the turn to privatization and liberalization policies, the resolution of the foreign debt crises of the region and improved economic growth prospects. Also, with the end of high inflation and the maintenance of macroeconomic stability, the demand for financialBox V..Box V. (continued)services in latin_america is spreading. The foreign banks have thus chosen to compete for the middle-income customers and are investing for the long term, so as to be able to profit from the expected growth in banking in the region. Their quickest way into the market has been to acquire a large domestic bank, immediately giving a significant market share. They have also sought to create extensive branch networks through which to introduce new products. In the case of the Spanish banks, interviews suggest that they seek management control because they believe they can raise efficiency, introduce skills and experience and improve cash flow.cThe strategy of the new entrants differs from that of the long-established foreign-owned banks, which largely confined themselves to the top of the market, servicing multinational companies, local blue-chip firms and rich individuals. Now, however, the long-established foreign banks have begun to respond to the new competition by moving down-market in order to target middle-class retail consumers and medium-sized businesses. The goal is to be able to offer each customer a wide variety of financial services.The attraction to local banks and policy makersIn some Latin American countries, such as Mexico, large domestic banking institutions have been actively seeking financial support from big foreign entities in order to be better able to compete. It is expected that most of the small and medium-sized banks will not be able to adapt to the new situation and will become acquisition opportunities for the foreign banks. Both of these developments illustrate a point made in this chapter about the impact of foreign entry on the capital needs of local banks. Indeed, financial authorities in latin_america have promoted the entry of foreign banks to strengthen the capital bases of ailing domestic banks through merger and acquisition and to increase competition and overall performance of the domestic banking system.Also, foreign bank entry is seen to decrease the riskiness of the local financial sector. Local banks that are affiliated with a foreign institution are perceived to be less vulnerable during a domestic liquidity crisis, as they can generally call on support from their overseas parents. Moreover, the growing presence of foreign or foreign-controlled banks may increase the confidence of the Latin American public in the use of financial institutions and limit the number of occasions of panic withdrawals of deposits. Foreign banks are usually associated in the public mind with sound management and performance and are normally ranked high in terms of service and, consequently, the public perceives them as less risky than domestic institutions. This is important in latin_america, as many segments of the population still lack confidence in the financial system, owing to the high personal losses of small-scale depositors and investors resulting from the many banking crises of the past.Moreover, foreign banks seem to have put pressures on domestic banks in the region to modernize, to reduce inefficiencies and to adopt new technology so as to be able to offer new products. Besides, as a result of increased banking competition, the net interest margin (the difference between what banks pay for deposits and what they charge for loans) has been falling in many Latin American countries.However, although interest rates for domestic credit may have declined, this has mostly benefited the large firms, which are perceived as lower-risk clients. The challenge is to lower the cost and spread financial intermediation activity in latin_america to the economic agents that are now excluded from these services, extending both credits for small and medium-sized local enterprises and mortgages for households.by the new MNB entrants. Credit to transnational corporations or to large, internationally-oriented domestic corporations is generally counted among lower-risk lending and these are precisely the customers that the MNBs have a competitive advantage in serving (capturing these clients is called cherrypicking in the financial community). Moreover, liberalization would likely raise the overall real interest rate initially, which would in any case discourage the low-risk, low-return borrowers and skew loan demand towards the higherrisk borrowers.To maintain their level of lending, then, domestic banks would have to take on more of the higher-risk clients. If their capital backing were adequate to the task, this rise in the overall riskiness of their loan portfolios would not be a concern; however, the premise is that they are unable to add to their capital. Moreover, competition would in any case reduce the profitability of the domestic banks and thus the value of their equity. For a bank that begins the process inadequately capitalized, the ratio of loans to capital might fall perilously low. Such banks would have little to lose from adding higher-risk loans and raising the overall riskiness of the domestic banking system.Banks that start off the liberalization process with stronger capital backing might respond with more caution to the loss of low-risk business. Evidence from some liberalizing emerging economies facing new MNB competition is, in fact, that domestic banks are more likely to curtail their lending. This means that not only do they lose large clients to the MNBs, but they choose to serve fewer of their smaller clients than before. The problem is that, while they might have had a prudent level of capital for the amount and composition of lending undertaken in the pre-deregulation environment, that capital is sufficient to back only a smaller level of loans in the more competitive environment once the best credits are no longer available.The policy question thus comes down to how best to prepare domestic banks for the impact of deregulation and foreign entry and how to assure continued availability of banking services to domestic banking clients. Regarding the latter, domestic banks in many cases served smaller, less profitable clients as a required part of a business that included substantial earnings on big clients. After liberalization, there may well be fewer banks left operating and one has to ask whether the smaller clients will still be served by the remaining banks and, if not, what alternative sources will be supplied?One aspect of preparing domestic banks for liberalization is prompting or helping them raise capital sufficient to withstand the shock of opening the market to new competition. By the same token, policy needs to ensure that domestic banks can access capital adequately after deregulation and foreign entry, so as to be able to appropriately respond to the competitive challenge of the foreign banks. Neither the ability of domestic banks to compete nor their ability to raise capital is assured. In this light, one option has been formation of strategic alliances (a limited form of corporate partnership) or joint ventures between domestic and foreign banks. Another is to anticipate that domestic banks will increasingly become takeover targets for aggressive foreign banks, as appears to have been happening in latin_america, as noted in box V.. There is no single correct answer to the question how to proceed, but it is imperative that the question be asked.Case studies of Hungary, Poland and the Republic of Korea, as well as cross-sectional econometric exercises, point in this direction (see Weller, loc. cit.).That is to say, before deregulation, serving small clients (or serving rural areas) might have been implicitly subsidized by earnings on the big customers who will now switch to the MNBs. In some cases, there may have been explicit subsidies (or a State-owned bank might have used now-disappearing profits from its big customers to cover losses on its small customers).Although the formerly centrally planned economies had institutions that were called banks, there were no commercial banks in the sense, used here, of independent institutions that receive deposits and loan out the proceeds for shortand medium-term use, mainly by the business sector. Banking reform in the economies in transition was thus a project for building banks, almost ab ovo, out of institutions that had been very little like banks.The central planning authorities had mobilized the great bulk of investable resources, mainly from the enterprise sector, and allocated them to investment programmes that were decided upon centrally. The banking system was little more than a large accounting and payment service that passively carried out the central directives. It advanced working capital to enterprises and returned profits to the central accounts, where they offset losses of other enterprises and were used for new investment.The economic and social transition that the planned economies embarked upon thus entailed a complete switch of methods of economic organization and development. This is not to say, however, that the system of central planning had functioned smoothly or without criticism before being jettisoned. Indeed, through much of the post-war era, reform of the planning mechanism was debated and various reforms were adopted by the centrally planned economies. However, the repeatedly unsuccessful efforts to reform the planning system compromised its legitimacy without changing its essence until the political and economic eruptions in Europe and the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in the s. Meanwhile, deep economic reforms began in China at the end of the s and released the economic forces that have raised average incomes so dramatically in that country over the past two decades.Whether undertaken gradually or suddenly, or in a context of economic growth or contraction, certain tasks have been essential to the introduction of commercial banking in transition economies. They involve institutional development (such as setting up new banks and supervisory and regulatory agencies) and human development (such as upgrading and developing the skills needed for conducting market-based banking business). They also involve questions of refining institutional structures, alleviating inherited burdens and increasing the autonomy of the new commercial banking institutions.Reforming institutional structuresThe first step in financial reform was typically to break apart the monobank system of central planning into a two-tier financial system that comprised a central bank and a group of commercial banks. The central bank was then to serve as the monetary authority and provide services to and oversee the commercial banks. They, in turn, were to become profit-seeking institutions that made loans, especially to companiesand these based on assessments of the firms and their projectsand charged them a realistic rate of interest that had to be paid. In all the countries, the introduction of such institutions was a major step, requiring new management goals and operating procedures not only in the new banks themselves, but throughout a new and evolving enterprise sector itself.The formal establishment of the two-tier banking system took place relatively early in the overall reform process in most countries. China was the first case. The Peoples Bank of China transformed itself into a central bank and transferred its deposit-taking and lending functions to the newly established Industrial and Commercial Bank of China on January , as sanctioned by a September State Council decision. Hungary established a two-tier banking system in and also introduced a relatively liberal policy to license new entrants to the banking sector, although it protected the banks from foreign competition.In the Soviet Union, liberalization of banking started in , ahead of most other economic sectors. As a result, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, all of its successor States boasted a large number of banks. For instance, the russian_federation already had , commercial banks at the outset of the transition in early . The rapid expansion in the number of banks continued during the first years of transition in virtually all countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).Viet Nam followed, as the State Bank of Viet Nam started to withdraw from commercial banking activities in . However, it only stopped direct lending to the productive sectors and direct financing of the state budget in , thus gradually evolving into an institution primarily discharging central banking functions. Poland followed the Hungarian banking example in and the other countries in the region adopted similar structures thereafter in the context of the political and economic upheavals of the s. Mongolia adopted its two-tier system in , carving five commercial banks from the original monobank, and creating nine new ones (although they were small).Of course, it is a simplification to focus only on the conversion of the single State bank into a central and commercial banking system. Other, more specialized financial institutions also existed under central planning and new ones were added under the reforms. For example, Chinas pre-reform banking system consisted of the Peoples Bank of China, the main bank that conducted both central and commercial banking activities, the Bank of China (the part of the Peoples Bank in charge of foreign exchange and international payment transactions), the Construction Bank (a subsidiary of the Ministry of Finance, disbursing investment funds for construction projects under the State economic plan and financed by the central budget) and a network of rural credit cooperatives. In , the Agricultural Bank of China was established and the Bank of China officially separated from the Peoples Bank, while also widening its business scope to include issuing bonds on the international capital market in support of Chinas open-door policy. The Construction Bank also gained independence from the Ministry of Finance in , and was authorized to take deposits and make loans to finance investment projects outside the State budget in . The China Investment Bank was created in to handle project finance funded by international financial organizations such as the world_bank and the Asian Development Bank. As already noted, when the Peoples Bank became the central bank in , the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China was created to take over the commercial banking activities of the Peoples Bank. Beginning in the mid-s, the Government of China instituted regulations to allow the establishment of joint-stock banks and non-bank financial institutions such as urban credit cooperatives, trust and investment companies, and finance companies affiliated with State-owned conglomerates.In other words, over time the institutional structure filled out. China has been quite cautious, however, in respect of the number of banks that it has allowed to open. Foreign banks, with better technology and more expertise in commercial banking than Chinas relatively new banks, have been especially restricted. Representative offices of foreign banks are limited to foreign currency transactions, except that local currency business is allowed in the economic development zone of Pudong in Shanghai, albeit only in transactions involving foreign companies that invested locally.In any event, a large number of banking institutions operating in a transition economy does not necessarily indicate a high degree of competition in financial activity. One can compare China, for example, where in four Stateowned commercial banks accounted for over per cent of total financial assets, with Viet Nam, which has a far greater number of non-State banking institutions. There, however, the four State-owned commercial banks accounted for about per cent of banking system assets.The growth in the number of banks also does not necessarily indicate a healthy situation. Kazakhstans experience, which is typical for countries in CIS, can illustrate this point. At the time of independence in , the banking system consisted of the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK), which had been a branch of the Soviet Gosbank, and the five specialized banksthe Savings Bank (renamed Peoples Bank, following independence), the Bank for Foreign Trade (Vneshekonombank), the Agricultural Bank (Agroprombank), the Industry and Construction Bank (Promstroibank) and the Social Investment Bank (Zhilsotsbank). In addition, enterprises had established commercial banks. There then followed a period of rapid expansion of the banking system. Immediately, four of the five specialized banks (all except Peoples Bank) were re-established as joint-stock companies and new commercial banks were licensed, increasing the number of financial institutions to by end-, including private banks.Most of the banks established by State enterprises did not play a significant role in mobilizing domestic deposits, but merely channelled NBK credits to the parent enterprises. A large portion of their total credits reflected insider lending to shareholders. Moreover, accelerating inflation and falling real output led to severe financial disintermediation, as the private sector shifted its money holdings from rubles into foreign currency held outside the banking system. The deposit base fell from per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) at end-to only per cent at the end of .This reflected in part the low level of confidence that people had in the viability of the banks. Commercial banks, on the other hand, had little incentive to attract private deposits for lending to firms that they considered to be of uncertain creditworthiness, owing, inter alia, to the weak accounting practices and poor state of financial information. Rather, banks had an incentive to concentrate their portfolios in relatively risk-free assets such as treasury bills and short-term trade financing; however, as the scope for increasing their holdings of such assets was limited, there was little incentive to try to increase their deposits.In short, the rapid growth of the banking system in and did not increase financial intermediation in Kazakhstan. It was also soon clear that the newly born banking system needed to be streamlined. Indeed, NBK at first allowed banks to operate that did not comply with prudential regulations. This changed after , especially once NBK began to impose more effective regulatory requirements. By , the number of banks had fallen to .Finally, it may be noted that the ownership structure of banks has not thus far figured in the discussion. Most of the banks began life in the transition period as State enterprises, although in several countries a number of new private banks arose. Two factors, however, seem more important than ownership structure in assessing bank performance. One is the structure of incentives given to management by the oversight regime. Indeed, the very low quality of regulations and supervision in the early years of transition in some countries may even have acted as an invitation to corruption. The second factor is the capacity of banks to become learning institutions, in particular as they had not heretofore engaged in the basic functions that banks perform in market economies neither as traditional banks nor as the contemporary multi-service banks discussed earlier in this chapter. To hasten their internal reform, some banks have formed strategic alliances or twinning arrangements with foreign banks or became joint ventures. In other cases, banks remained wholly domestic institutions and policy focused on consolidating the number of banks through merger in order to create more viable institutions. As in the case of the developing countries discussed above, there are benefits and costs to foreign involvement, and easy and more difficult mixing of foreign and domestic business cultures, and thus no hard-and-fast conclusion may be drawn about the role of such involvement.The burden inherited by the new banksEach commercial bank that was carved out of a monobank inherited the loan portfolio and deposit baseindeed, the clientsthat it had as a branch of the monobank. These banks thus remained under pressure to continue operating as before. Also, since this was a wholesale transfer operation based mainly on bureaucratic and political considerations, the composition of the asset portfolios of the newly created banks was usually very far from what might have been selected on business principles. In particular, whereas it is prudent for banks to have highly diversified loan portfolios, the portfolios of these banks were excessively concentrated either in individual industries or geographical regions, or in both.One particular problem was the large and growing stock of non-performing loans on the books of the new banks. These loans had arisen under the planning system when the cash flow of the State enterprises had not met their payment needs. The State bank would automatically renew maturing credits and almost routinely capitalize interest obligations when the firms had difficulty making the payments. Had this taken place in a market economy, considerations of the banks own profitability and regulatory restraints would have limited the degree to which it could be done. However, there were no effective limits in the transition economies; the opposite was more the case, as there was political pressure to extend the practice. The result was the rapid build-up of the stock of bad loans, which quickly created solvency difficulties for the banks.There have been three main approaches to treating the problem (perhaps four, if inflating away the debt is included). Poland followed a so-called decentralized approach to resolution of the debt burden. It put the banks in charge of loan recovery from their clients, while providing assistance. Within a year of the adoption of the March law on financial restructuring of enterprises and banks, the debt of about enterprises accounting for most of the bad loans had been restructured through negotiated settlements with the banks, including debt-equity swaps and liquidation. Non-performing loans went from per cent of total bank loans in -to per cent of the loan portfolio of banks by , while the average capital adequacy ratio reached per cent, well above international standards. Behind these statistics, however, a number of weak banks held equity in weak firms to which they made weak loans, and enterprise restructuring was delayed.The Czech Republic (then part of Czechoslovakia) followed a centralized approach. In March , the Government established the Konsolidachni Banka as a loan hospital to work out the non-performing loans of major banks. The banks swapped their non-performing loans for government bonds at a discount, and it was left to the loan hospital to arrange a work-out with the firms.One may see that this approach made it quite easy for the banks to clean their books of bad debt, thereby creating a moral hazard problem. Indeed, a similar rescue was required again in . The centralized asset recovery approach is useful when the scale of the problem is overwhelming for the banks and the skills are thin. It allows them to immediately concentrate on developing normal banking business. However, such rescue programmes have to be designed so as to discourage bank management from assuming that they will be relieved of the responsibility for future bad debt. Also, this can be a costly approach and can threaten the macroeconomic situation. In the Czech case, the financial cost of the two rescues reached $ billion, or -per cent of GDP in those years.A third approach is explicitly aimed to buy time: policy makes it possible for banks to carry large amounts of bad debt on their books and not fail. This has been the case, for example, in China. The initial stock of bad loans had resulted from lending to State-owned enterprises (SOEs) before economic reforms were put in the agenda. However, government direction of credit allocation continued during the reform period (through the national credit plan before ), which led to the ballooning of this debt. Indeed, the difficult situation of the State enterprises continues.Given that State-owned commercial banks in China are still burdened by problem loans to SOEs and that their primary borrowers remain SOEs, the entry of new banks with a clean slate and no obligation to support inefficient SOEs would have put the existing banks at a competitive disadvantage. Even new State-owned banks without the burden of inherited non-performing loans were more competitive than existing ones. These new banks might have tried to use their operating profits to offer higher deposit rates in order to attract deposits for expansion, except that they could not: interest rates were controlled. In short, banking market regulations prevent State banks from collapsing under the weight of their bad loans, at least for the time being.In the russian_federation, some mixture of the second and the third approaches has been pursued. After the August crisis caused the collapse of financial intermediation in the economy, the state Agency for the Restructuring of Credit Organizations was set up to acquire controlling stakes in troubled banks, manage bad assets and initiate bank liquidations. However,it lacks the necessary financial resources and skills, and has limited legal powers, and its activities thus far have not been significant. Meanwhile, the bulk of household deposits at the commercial banks were transferred to the Stateowned Sberbank (savings bank), although there was no sign as of early that the commercial banks were compensating Sberbank for assuming their deposit liabilities. On its part, the Central Bank has provided stabilization credits to the largest commercial banks with little control over the use of the funds and no clear definition of the basis on which the selection of banks was made. At the same time, the Central Bank has been slow to take administrative control of insolvent banks and to withdraw bank licences. As a result, the process of commercial bank decay continues, with many banks said to have engaged in asset-stripping.Policy environment and operational autonomyAside from their inherited burdens, many of the new commercial banks in transition economies were constrained by policy guidelines and, in particular, by government expectations that they would lend to SOEs that were probably insolvent, as noted above. Thus, not only did these new banks need to overcome their inexperience in acting as independent financial intermediaries, but they also needed to expand the realm in which they were free to make autonomous lending decisions.Indeed, banks in Belarus, the russian_federation and Ukraine are operating under firm State guidance, both formal and informal, despite having been privatized. Their major functions are tax enforcement, managing and channelling State funds, and financing State debts: largely what their functions were in Soviet times.In China, commercial banks were required to support politically important enterprises or economic endeavours through what was called policy lending. It was realized, however, that the practice was impeding the commercialization of the banks. Thus, the Government established three policy banks the State Development Bank, the Import-Export Bank and the Agricultural Development Bankto relieve the commercial banks of their bad debt and of the need to make further policy loans.Policy lending thus began to decline in , although as of most of the outstanding loans on the books of the commercial banks had not been transferred. Then, in February , the Government announced a plan to reorganize the four large State-owned commercial banks, splitting off their trust and investment subsidiaries and organizing them into asset management companies. These were meant to take over the bank loans of SOEs that had been overdue by two or more years.Vietnamese banks were also required to lend to troubled SOEs. Such lending accounted for per cent of total bank lending in Viet Nam in . It was reduced to per cent by late , but this still left the financial health of the banking system closely tied to that of the State enterprises. Moreover, having allowed a large number of new banks to be established, some of which were quite weak, Viet Nam faced a nascent banking crisis by . In autumn , the central bank was forced to close some of the weakest banks and placed In Ukraine, of the five large banks, which together account for about per cent of all bank assets, two are State-owned and the senior management of the other three banks remain closely associated with the Government. Those banks have been most often targeted for government-directed lending operations. In Belarus, the four former specialized banks account for more than per cent of all deposits and loans. One of them is per cent State-owned, while the shares of the State and State-related entities in the statutory capital of the other three vary from to per cent. And in the russian_federation, although formally more independent, private commercial banks are largely functioning as an extension of the State and local administrations (on the role of the State in the development of Russian commercial banks, see, for instance, William Thompson, Old habits die hard: fiscal imperatives, state regulation and the role of Russias banks, Europe-Asia Studies, vol. , No. (), pp. ,,).The State Development Bank, the largest of the three, was to finance long-term infrastructure investment and support strategic or pillar industries. The Agricultural Development Bank would provide short-term loans to State agencies for agricultural procurement and it would fund projects for assisting the rural poor and for agricultural development in general. The ImportExport Banks primary responsibility would be in external trade promotion. As envisaged, however, the policy banks were unlikely to be sustainable and would require repeated State injections of new resources. This has happened, both in the form of central bank loans and in mandatory purchase of their bonds by other financial institutions, which was meeting resistance (Ping Xie, A theoretical analysis of difficult problems in the next stage of our countrys financial system reform (in Chinese), in Guoji Jingrong Yanjiu (International Finance Research), -May ).In addition, the securities business of these subsidiaries was to be merged into a new entity under the State Development Bank.commercial banks under special supervision, while strengthening prudential requirements.In a market economy, banks can decline to lend to some firms and charge higher interest rates on loans to others that they deem to be high-risk borrowers. This was not the case in Viet Nam. Interest rates were liberalized, but only partially. Controls were lifted on deposit rates to allow banks to compete for depositors, but interest-rate ceilings were maintained on loan rates, squeezing earnings. Thus, banking policy had in a sense exacerbated what would have in any event been a difficult situation.An important source of the banking problem in Viet Nam and China, as elsewhere, was outside the banks. That is to say, until the financial performance of the main clients of the banks improved, the banks would be hard-pressed to become more robust institutions. Of importance in this regard is not only managerial capacity and management incentives to increase enterprise profits, but also the overall environment for business. The CIS countries may be an extreme case in point: in those countries, the main competitors of the banks were not other banks, but firms through their ability to increase their arrears to suppliers, tax collectors or workers. These arrears were expected to be forgiven at a later time, or at worst repaid without any interest charges. Loans from commercial banks could hardly compete in this situation.While policy environments such as have been discussed in this section were initially pervasive, in some countries they were changed relatively quickly in the transition period. In Estonia, for example, an externally initiated financial crisis severely disrupted the financial sector and a widespread appreciation of vulnerability gave credence to the argument of the authorities that there was no alternative to strong reform measures (which also would mark a sharp break with the past).In other words, the Estonian banks, which could be characterized at the start by weak and sometimes corrupt management and an ineffective regulatory regime, had to absorb two shocks in : the freezing of the assets of nonRussian banks held in Moscow at Sberbank and Vneshekonombank, and the commitment to establish a currency board for foreign exchange management, which removed the possibility of easy credit infusions from the Bank of Estonia (BOE). Any assistance would have had to come from the government budget and the Prime Minister said that there was no room in the budget for a bank bailout. The BOE thus closed or merged local banks, reducing their total number from to by mid-, removing management and imposing significant losses on shareholders and depositors (significantly, there were relatively few small depositors in these banks, as the crisis came early in transition and most household deposits were in the Savings Bank). In addition, the tough approach taken to the banks was mirrored in the approach taken in the business sector, where many State enterprises were placed into bankruptcy (and State banks were given no priority over other creditors in recovering funds). Indeed, the hard-budget constraint in the enterprise sector, combined with the knowledge that bank bailouts would not be forthcoming, led to much more cautious bank lending.This approach was not without broader consequence, as the Estonian economy collapsed (output plummeted per cent in and another per cent in ). Economic recovery began, however, in and in a stronger institutional environment and with a deepening financial system. Other transition economies have seen equivalentindeed, deepereconomic declines without the same degree of institutional reform, albeit in political environments that precluded consensus over policy directions and how the burden of adjustment would be shared. In yet other countries, reform of the policy environment has been spread out over many years, with new departures sometimes first introduced as experiments and then adopted more broadly, and without the punishing decline in living standards that the people of some countries have had to bear. Clearly, the political economy of reform does not lend itself to simple formulas, but without reform the development of the banking sector in transition economies will be severely constrained.If there is a common subtext in the review of banking in developed, developing and transition economies undertaken in this chapter, it is that even with government increasingly withdrawing from traditional roles in the banking sector, government retains an essential role. That role is more systemic than operational, a role more of oversight than of intervention, and more in the style of creating incentives for markets to produce socially desired ends than of erecting administrative barriers that markets seek to overcome.In addition, the analysis of banks in this chapter has been from the viewpoint that banks need to be seen as complex institutions whose decision-making processes are to be explicitly taken into account in the analysis. Indeed banks allocate funds, forming judgements of the likelihood of success of the project, not unlike a process that might occur within a government bureaucracy evaluating proposals. There are, of course, important differences: first, banks pay for poor decisions through bankruptcy (assuming, one could add, the bank is not too big to fail), while governments do not; and second, banks look only at private returns in making decisions while Governments look at social and developmental dimensions, which may differ from such returns.Government organizations can and have acted in a commercial and entrepreneurial way in various countries, but even if Governments wish to withdraw from such activities, the public purpose is best served when Governments undertake an active policy of financial sector monitoring and development. It may be important to know, for example, whether various population groups can access financial services through the banking sector or if not from that sector then through other financial institutions or markets, or whether innovative entrepreneurs can raise financial resources, and whether resources are impeded from being allocated to one economic sector or another (and if so whether it is economically warranted), and so on. The starting point in the current economic and political reality is that the banking sector is being increasingly liberalized and privatized and the challenge for policy is to oversee the banking sector in such a way as to strengthen it while also ensuring that it serves societal goals.The trading of financial securities on exchanges began hundreds of years ago, but it has had varying degrees of importance in the financial systems and economic growth of the developed economies. As part of the global expansion and innovation in securities markets in the s which were noted in chapter IV, securities markets have expanded very rapidly in some developing and transition economies, although often from very small bases. Having domestic capital marketsespecially a stock exchangehas even taken on a symbolic value and has become an emblem of modern capitalism in certain economies. Experiences in capital-market development have been diverse, as they have occurred against very different economic backgrounds. The present chapter thus examines a range of experiences in the growth of capital markets in developing and transition economies, and seeks pointers towards a policy on capital-market development.Domestic equity marketsEquity markets in emerging developing and transition economies grew rapidly in the s. Their market capitalizationthe market value of the shares of all companies listed on the exchangesincreased more than threefold between and , the peak year. This reflected strong expansion in Asia and latin_america, as well as in Africa and the economies in transition. Price increases were substantialalthough the index in united_states dollar terms peaked in (see figure VI.). The number of listed companies also grew rapidly, fed by privatization of State enterprises and the decisions of privately held companies to issue shares to the public. As a result, the share of these markets in the capitalization of world stock markets increased from about per cent in to almost per cent in . With the several financial crises since , this share dropped to under per cent in , the last year for which comprehensive data were available at the time of writing.The development of several markets in Eastern and Southern Asia began to take off in the s and their expansion continued at a rapid pace in the s, at least until . Indeed, the data shown in table VI. for are after a fall of more than half from in overall market capitalization in that region. The acceleration in stock market growth in the s was most pronounced in latin_america, where capitalization of the major markets increased almost eightfold in the -period (see table VI.). Selected markets in Africa grew sigFigure VI..Price index, = Capitalization, US$ Price index CapitalizationNote: Capitalization and price index are for dollar values, converted from local currencies at market exchange rates, of all markets in the International Finance Corporation composite index.nificantly but, with the exception of northern African countries and South Africa, this was from a very small base (see table VI.). The history of such markets in the transition economies is the shortest overall, but quite dynamic (see table VI.).While the total market value of the companies listed on a stock exchange says something about the role of publicly held companies in the corporate life of individual countries, it would be a misleading indicator of how much finance is raised through new equity capital. Compared with market value, the latter has been quite modest, although it has represented a significant share of fixed investment in some developing countries, as discussed below. According to one estimate, the total value of new share issuance in the major East Asian markets from to ranged from per cent of market capitalization in the Republic of Korea and Malaysia to per cent in Thailand and per cent in Indonesia. The average ratio for a sample of Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Venezuela) was even lower, about . per cent.There is also a wide variation among the regions in the liquidity of stock markets. An indicator of liquidity is the turnover ratio, which is the ratio of traded value in a period to market capitalization. By , the turnover ratios in Asian markets were generally per cent or higher, having increased significantly from the s. Turnover in Latin American countries was lower, with the exceptions of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. African markets, with the exception of South Africa and some of the northern African countries, showed much less trading activity, with turnover ratios rarely exceeding per cent. Turnover in the transition economy markets has been relatively high.Table VI..Northern AfricaEgypt Morocco TunisiaSubtotalSub-Saharan Africa (excluding South Africa)Botswana Cote d'Ivoire Ghana Kenya Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Swaziland Zambia ZimbabweSubtotalSouth Africa TotalMarket capitalizationaNumber of companies listedTraded value( of dollars)Turnover ratio (Percentage)In many of the emerging economies, a large number of the listed companies are infrequently traded. In addition, in many countries, only a small proportion, often less than half, of the total shares of a listed company are traded, owing to the high concentration of insider shareholders who do not trade their shares. Examples of this are the large holdings by founding families of conglomerates and government holdings of partially privatized companies.Moreover, despite the growth of market capitalization and the number of listed companies, a small number of companies usually account for a disproportionate share of the market (see table VI.). Asian markets are generally the least concentrated, with the share of the largest stocks accounting for about to per cent of total market capitalization. They are also least concentrated in terms of total value traded. In latin_america, the share of the largestTable VI..Czech Republic HungaryPolandrussian_federation SlovakiaMarket capitalizationaNumber of companies listedTraded valueb ( of dollars)Turnover ratioc (Percentage)Note: M$: of dollars; %GDP: Percentage of GDP.stocks in market capitalization is somewhat higher and concentration in turnover is even higher. This reflects the slow growth in the number of listed companies in most countries and the importance of new issues by a small number of large, well-known, often privatized State enterprises, including oil companies, mining companies, utilities, major State banks and telecommunications giants. The increase in market capitalization in most African countries is also associated with the increased value of the shares of a limited number of wellknown companies in the natural resources, finance and infrastructure sectors. The corresponding ratios for the transition economies reflect the different privatization policies followed in those countries, as discussed below.Domestic bond marketsThe market value of bonds listed on domestic markets in the developing economies is substantially smaller than that of equities, even in the largest markets. The value of domestic bonds outstanding in Asian, Latin American and the transition economies, is about per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and in Africa about per cent of GDP (see table VI.). In Africa, domestic bonds are largely accounted for by South Africa and some northern African countries.In general, government bonds dominate the market, although corporate bonds have come to represent a sizeable share of the total in a number of countries. As bonds are mainly purchased and held, liquidity in the secondary market for bonds is highly limited.Most bond markets in Eastern and Southern Asia began to grow significantly in the s as a number of Governments began to actively encourage their development. During the period -, the aggregate East Asian bond market grew by almost per cent annually, but from a very small base. Despite these attempts to expand the bond markets, they are not extensivelyTable VI..Percentage of largest stocks in total market capitalizationPercentage of largest stocks in total value tradedlatin_americaArgentina Brazil Chile Colombia Mexico Peru VenezuelaEast and South AsiaIndiaIndonesiaKorea, Republic of Malaysia Philippines ThailandChinaAfricaEgypt Morocco Nigeria South Africa ZimbabweEconomies in transitionCzech Republic HungaryPolandSlovakiarussian_federation. . . . ... .. . . . . ..... . .. .. . . . . . .. . . . . .... . . . .. . . . .. . . . ... .. . . . . ..... . .. .. . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . .. . . . .used by corporations. The vast majority of the bonds are issued by Governments and State-owned enterprises.The development of most Latin American bond markets also accelerated in the s with the end of the foreign debt crisis, but they are still small relative to equity markets. Within latin_america, Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Chile have developed the largest bond markets. As in Asia, bond issuance in most of these markets is dominated by government except for Chile, which has the most well-developed corporate bond market in the region, and Mexico, where corporate issues represent nearly half of total bonds outstanding.Table VI..of dollarsEast and South Asia (excluding China)latin_america and the CaribbeanAfricaNorthern Africa Sub-Saharan AfricaEconomies in transitionSelected countriesBrazilSouth AfricaIndiarussian_federation ChinaMalaysiaPolandMexicoTurkeyChileDomestic of which:External (total)Percentage of GDPTotal bondsDomestic bondsTotalSovereignCorporate. . .. . . .. . . . . .. . .. . . .. . . . . .While equity markets have begun growing in many countries in Africa, bond markets are still in the incipient stage in most countries, except South Africa. A survey of African countries found that about half of them have neither primary nor secondary markets for long-term bonds. Secondary markets exist only in seven countries and trade mainly government bonds. Only markets for large issues such as South Africa are liquid.The South African bond market is the largest and the only well-established market in Africa. Government debt accounts for about per cent of the total value outstanding, the rest being State-controlled utilities and a few corporate bonds. Non-resident investment into the domestic bond market has been substantial since the early s, attracted by the ending of the anti-apartheid sanctions, the abolition of the dual currency system, and increased transparency and liquidity in the market. A central depository and an electronic clearing house have been operational since , and by , bond settlement procedures had met international standards.In the transition economies, bond markets are almost exclusively for sovereign issues. There have been a few private corporate issues, particularly private placements, but overall domestic bond markets have not been a major source of enterprise financing.International flows into emerging marketsAs part of their financial liberalization drive, many developing and transition economies relaxed restrictions on foreign purchases of the securities traded on their domestic markets in the late s and early s. At the same time, with the resolution of the Latin American external debt crisis, Latin American government and private borrowers joined increasing numbers of borrowers from other regions in floating international bond issues. International equity issues also burgeoned. The net result, as may be seen in table VI., was a substantial increase in foreign financial inflows into the stocks and bonds of these countries. While there were large inflows into the domestic securities markets of several countries, there was also a burgeoning of international issues of equities and bonds (see tables VI. and VI.).International equity issues take place mainly in a special financial instrument. Companies from developing and transition economies generally do not meet fully the accounting and reporting standards required for listing on the exchange of a major developed economy, although this is improving. A mechTable VI..NET FOREIGN FLOWS INTO PORTFOLIO EQUITY AND BONDS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES,a -of dollarsPortfolio equity flows All developing countries of which:latin_america East andSouth Asia AfricaBondsAll developing countries of which:latin_america East andSouth Asia Africa. .-. -.. .. .. .. -.. .. -.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .anism was thus developed that indirectly allowed such companies to tap the equity market, first in the united_states of America (the American Depositary Receipt, or ADR) and then in Europe (the Global Depositary Receipt, or GDR). An ADR, for example, is a negotiable certificate issued by a bank in the united_states that represents a certain number of a companys shares that are held by the bank as depositary. New depositary receipts can be issued either from existing company shares or by creating new shares.Companies listing depositary receipts on a foreign stock exchange have to meet certain regulatory requirements determined by the supervisory authority of the exchange. This not only permits trading in the deep markets of developed countries, but also boosts investor confidence. Transaction costs are lower than in the home market owing to the more efficient settlement and custody of shares in the developed-country stock markets. Finally, for the dollar-based investor, currency exchange costs are eliminated, as the depositary receipts trade in the currency of the host stock market.Issues of depositary receipts by emerging market companies grew from an average of about $ billion annually from to to $. billion in . Latin American companies have been the most active issuers, particularly those of Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico. Issuers are attracted because this form of equity instrument overcomes the low liquidity and partial restrictions on foreign investment in domestic equity markets. Chiles ADRs, for example, have an average daily traded value that is more than four times that of the entire Santiago stock exchange, where some companies are listed. Similarly, traded value in some Argentine ADRs is several times greater than that of domestically listed shares of the same company. In Asian countries, in contrast, the value of international equity issues was only per cent of the value of issues in domestic markets.International bond issues by developing economies grew rapidly in the s. At mid-decade, the total outstanding value of these bonds was largest by far in latin_america, equivalent to about per cent of GDP and almost as large as the value of domestic bonds (see table VI.). Although sovereign bond issues predominate, averaging about per cent of total issues, corporate issues have grown enormously, particularly those of Latin American countries.Table VI..INTERNATIONAL EQUITY ISSUES OF EMERGING ECONOMIES, -of dollarsTotal equity issuesAsiaAfricalatin_america EuropeTable VI..INTERNATIONAL BOND ISSUES OF EMERGING ECONOMIES, -of dollarsTotal bond issuesAsiaAfricalatin_america EuropeThe level of participation of these countries in the international bond market has fluctuated with their access to international finance in general. International bond issues surged with the return of Latin American countries to the international debt market in the early s. They continued to grow until the Mexican crisis (see table VI.). Issues then recovered strongly in and, in spite of the Asian crisis, continued to increase in along with substantial narrowing of interest rate spreads of these bonds over a riskless benchmark, a united_states Treasury bond of equivalent maturity. In , investors shifted their investments from Asian to Latin American debt, but by the full brunt of the Asian and Russian crises was felt and bond issues fell sharply from levels.The rapid growth of financial markets in developing countries noted above was primarily the result of a shift towards an increased market orientation in economic development policy. As part of that shift, Governments sought to promote the domestic market for finance, both equities and bonds.Factors pushing capital-market growthEquity market development was given a major boost by the privatization of State enterprises, which has been an important component in structural adjustment policies, especially in latin_america. Privatization of State enterprises and in some countries a desire of the owners of closely held companies to cash in some of their capital gains by a public offeringhas provided a supply of new shares to the market. On the demand side, the development of contributory pension funds in a growing number of countries, particularly in latin_america and Asia, has channelled contractual household savings to institutional investors who place the funds in the securities market. However, the generally small size of these funds and restrictions on their asset allocations in many countries have limited their role in boosting liquidity in equity and bond markets, as discussed below.Governments have taken various specific measures to promote the development of equity markets. These include public education programmes on securities ownership and government requirements that companies distribute share offerings to their employees. Tax incentives were also given in some cases to both issuers and investors. A number of Asian and Latin American countries modernized the infrastructure for trading, clearing and settlement and custody of equities. This improves the speed and lowers the transaction cost of the equity market. The cost and requirements for listing a company on an exchange have also been reduced and streamlined over time. Intensive efforts have been made to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory system of capital markets. These efforts have helped to build investor confidence in the markets, although much remains to be done.With the enormous infrastructure needs that emerged in the s, Asian Governments have also actively promoted domestic bond markets. In some cases, this included issuing government debt instruments, since the extended period of fiscal balance or surplus in a number of countries in east_asia meant that there was only a small government bond market. This in turn hindered the development of a corporate bond market insofar as the yield (and thus the price) of a corporate bond is usually determined as a risk premium to be added to the interest rate on a comparable risk-free government bond. With a limited number of government securities to serve as benchmarks, there would be more uncertainty about whether the market pricing of a specific corporate bond was appropriate. As a result, a number of economies in the region, such as Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR), Malaysia and Thailand, issued government bonds to serve as benchmarks that would facilitate development of the market.In Latin American countries, the growing number of privatized companies and the generally low leverage of corporations (with the exception of those in Chile) have prompted recent development of the bond markets. Furthermore, the sharp decline in inflation in the region in the s has also improved conditions for bond market development. In Argentina, small and medium-sized companies have recently started to participate in the bond market, encouraged by tax incentives, declining trading costs and the easing of rating requirements for such companies.Foreign financial inflows have also spurred growth of equity markets in developing countries, particularly in Asia and latin_america in the s. The surge in foreign inflows was prompted by improvements in economic and institutional conditions and changes in the international financial environment, as well as advances in information technology. The end of the debt crisis, the intensive market-oriented reforms in several countries in latin_america and macroeconomic stabilization fostered a favourable environment for corporate growth and profits. In Asia, trade dynamism fuelled strong growth and thus profits in the first half of the decade. As a result, rising returns to equities, reinforced by reduction in restrictions on foreign ownership of equities in a growing number of economies and varying degrees of liberalization of the capital account for external transactions, attracted large flows of foreign funds. Meanwhile, low interest rates and slow economic growth in the developed countries reinforced the attractiveness of investments in developing-country markets.Factors impeding capital-market growthThe institutional factors making for strong growth of securities markets in some developing countries were absent in other countries whose markets have not taken off. Inefficient infrastructure for clearance and settlement procedures, for example, delays transactions and raises the risk that settlement will not be correct. This and generally weak regulatory and supervisory systems and inadequate protection of the interests of minority shareholdersthe safeguards usually sought by portfolio investorshave also undermined investor confidence.Compounding the problem is the dearth of companies for listing, especially in low-income countries. The high cost of issuing public shares deters small companies everywhere from going public. In addition, the dilution of insider control of the corporation and disclosure requirements may also be disincentives for public share issues. At the same time, financial and technical weaknesses of investment banks limit their capacity to perform underwriting functions and contribute to illiquidity in the market.A further limitation in the case of bond markets is the weakness of credit rating agencies. Bond ratings are important in helping investors estimate the risk premiums to be demanded as compensation for taking on the risk of default on debt payments. Also, some institutional investors are restricted to purchases of bonds with certain minimum ratings. In developing countries, most independent rating agencies are still struggling to fully establish themselves. The problem for these agencies is that, owing primarily to a lack of market confidence, the demand for their services is not yet large. In Asian countries, moreover, it has been argued that political interference in their functioning has constrained their development and independence.The legal and regulatory framework has also constrained the growth of bond markets in many countries. Generally weak disclosure, financial reporting and accounting practices in developing countries reduce the confidence of potential bond buyers even more than that of potential stock purchasers who accept that their investment involves high risk. Bonds are less in the nature of a speculative purchase, although high-risk (junk) bonds have a more speculative following.Pension funds and capital marketsContractual savingsmainly pension funds and insurance planshave been important vehicles for channelling domestic savings into capital markets in many developed countries. The recent development of these non-bank savings institutions, in particular pension funds, in a number of developing countries can also foster development of the securities markets in these countries.On the other hand, the buy-and-hold investment strategy of pension funds limits their impact on equity and bond market liquidity. Also, regulations aimed at curbing the riskiness of their portfolios restrict the share of pension fund assets invested in equities. Moreover, most of these pension funds are small and do not yet generate substantial demand for private market instruments, investing their assets primarily in government bonds. However, as they grow, they can be expected to invest larger amounts and engage in more active trading in the markets.Developments are perhaps most advanced, in this regard, in latin_america, where pension fund reform began mostly in the early s (except in Chile where it was initiated in ). Growth of assets has been substantial but the average size of pension fund assets is still below per cent of GDP, with the exception of Chile where it has reached per cent of GDP. This compares with a size of pension fund assets of over per cent of GDP in many developed countries.The common element of pension reform in latin_america is the shift from a public pay-as-you-go system to a privately managed and funded one wherein the amount of retirement income depends, inter alia, on the earnings of the payments into the fund. The first country implementing such a reform was Chile in , where the new system is based on individual mandatory retirement accounts for each insured individual. A group of private pension fund management companies, the Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (AFPs), administer the funds under strict government regulations. Portfolio composition, while tightly controlled, has evolved pari passu with the system.The recent reforms adopted by several other countries of the region consist of multi-pillar systems, where the reduced pay-as-you-go system is kept as the first pillar. Another pillar is usually a voluntary or mandatory scheme to collect payments from employees and/or employers which are then privately or publicly managed.Pension funds assets in Chile, where the experience is longest, increased from just over $ million in to nearly $ billion in . A significant part of the resources have been invested in capital markets, thus becoming a source for their expansion. The value of their equity and bond holdings rose from a negligible amount in the mid-s to $ billion at the beginning of the s and to $ billion in . This reflects both the growth in funds mobilized and the significant shift in asset allocation from bank deposits, bank bonds and mortgages to equities and, to a lesser extent, corporate bonds. The concurrent deepening of capital markets is evident from the growth of stock market capitalization, the number of listed companies and the growth of bond markets.The positive effect of pension funds in the development of Chilean financial markets was abetted by certain preliminary developments. First, reforms took place when there was already a relatively well-developed banking sector with a strong regulatory and supervisory system. During the five years preceding the pension reform, several other reform and liberalization measures were implemented, which increased new issues and made financial markets deeper and more liquid. Another factor is that the Chilean pension system reform was conducted simultaneously with an extensive privatization programme. These two processes acted in a mutually reinforcing way in developing the supply of bluechip equities and debentures and the institutional demand for these instruments. Moreover, macroeconomic stability and strengthened investor confidence, fostered by sustained and prudent macroeconomic policies and sustained growth of GDP, further boosted pension fund growth and financial market growth.The private component of the Argentine pension scheme has attracted two thirds of all workers who participate in the new integrated system and thus total funds mobilized by the pension system are growing rapidly. Nevertheless, they are currently still under per cent of GDP. Moreover, the investment strategies of the countrys pension funds have been quite conservative: in , per cent of their assets were held in government securities and term deposits. As a result, the impact on capital markets has not been large.Assets of pension funds in Colombia and Peru are also small. In Colombia, the diversification of the pension fund portfolio has been slow as a consequence of the attraction of high yields on Government bonds and the underdeveloped state of the stock market, even though investment in equities was permitted from the beginning of reform. Perus financial markets were thin and underdeveloped at the beginning of the reform. In recent years, a more stable macroeconomic environment, together with new capital market legislation and the privatization of public enterprises, contributed to the expansion of Peruvian capital markets. Equity market capitalization reached per cent of GDP in (see table VI.). As pension funds are still small in both countries, their evolution was probably just one of several factors contributing to capital-market development.Besides performing their role as buyer of securities, pension funds and other institutional investors can strengthen the markets in various ways. One is through their development of a greater capacity for evaluation of financial information and risk assessment and their ability as a large player in the market to effectively demand that such information be reliable. Another emerges if they push for improved market infrastructure which can reduce transaction costs and payment risks. Yet another, as the Chilean experience shows, is through development of new financial instruments and institutions, used mainly by institutional investors, such as rating agencies, which enhance the sophistication and functioning of capital markets and promote the availability of information.Privatization and capital marketsA Government that intends to privatize a State enterprise has several options, some of which facilitate the development of the domestic equity market. One such method is a public offering on the stock market of some or all of the equity in the enterprise. Another method, used extensively in transition economies (see below), but rarely in developing countries, is to issue vouchers, to selected groups of people (for example, employees) or the general public, which could be exchanged for shares in a newly privatized company.The main alternative is sale of some or all of a State enterprise to a strategic investor, either a domestic or a foreign firm or group which directly takes over its operation. The main advantage is that the strategic investor can transfer technology and management skills, along with a commitment to bring additional financial resources to the acquired enterprises (it can be made part of the sales agreement). However, though price-setting of the companies to be divested is normally carried out through a competitive bidding process, the Government needs to have the capacity to make a proper valuation of the assets that it intends to sell.Compared with a private sale, public offerings of shares to the public entail a higher cost in respect of preparing the offering, resulting from prospectus preparation, underwriting and marketing, which are justified only by large transactions. However, issuing shares of privatized companies on a local stock exchange provides access to domestic investors and may be seen as preferable to direct sale to foreign interests in some cases.While privatization through public offering is a way to transfer State assets to the public, increasing the supply of blue chip securities also contributes to development of the domestic stock market (although some public offerings have also been placed in international equity markets).Among developing countries, privatization revenues have been highest in latin_america, totalling an estimated $ billion between and . Direct sales, such as public auctions and tender offers, accounted for per cent of all privatization revenues and about per cent of all privatization transactions. These sales were an important factor in the large flow of foreign direct investment particularly in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Colombia. Public offerings in the stock market, however, accounted for another third of total revenues and some per cent of all transactions. Given the relatively small base, this became reflected in the extraordinary increase in market capitalization in several Latin American equity markets in the s noted earlier (see table VI.). Privatized companies represent today a substantial part of stock market capitalization in several countries (over per cent in Argentina and Peru and and per cent, respectively, in Chile and Mexico).The divestiture of State telecommunication companies, very large firms, some of whose stock had already been actively traded, was implemented largely through full or partial public offerings in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Peru. In Argentina, many of the largest divestitures followed a scheme in which a controlling share was first offered through public bidding. The Government retained another portion, which was offered on the stock exchange at a later stage. Finally, a portion (usually about per cent) was made available to the companys employees. In Brazil, a minority of the shares of the telecommunication company were listed for purchase on the stock exchange in . The remaining government holdings were subsequently sold to large corporate interests in .In Chile, privatization took place in two stages. In the first stage, in the s, as the stock market was not adequately developed, the Government sold controlling stakes of enterprises in auctions. This concentrated ownership in a few conglomerates. In contrast, in the s, public offers in the stock market, in combination with other methods, were most common. In this second phase, the timely combination of the privatization process with the establishment of pension funds that needed to invest in equity shares created, as noted above, a mutually reinforcing process and resulted in increased domestic ownership of privatized shares.Since the early s, there has been an intensification of privatization in Africa. Between and , Egypt, for example, partially divested several State enterprises, with public offerings accounting for about per cent of the privatization revenues. In many cases, public offerings were oversubscribed by both local and foreign investors, reflecting the progress of overall economic reform as well as equity market reforms.In the initial stage of privatization in Egypt, divestiture was effected mainly by offering share subscriptions to employees. In the next stage, privatization by public offerings was introduced. This was followed by new capital-market reform measures which included the removal of the capital gains tax from most stocks and bonds, strengthened requirements for financial disclosure for listed corporations, the allowance of full access to the market for foreign investors, the elimination of interest ceilings on corporate bonds, and the establishment of a regulatory authority for supervising the securities industry. The reform was accelerated in the later stage by reducing the cost of listing on the stock exchange and the establishment of a new clearing and settlement company.In Morocco, the first public offerings of privatized companies were in , and in one of the largest banks in Morocco (Banque marocaine du commerce exterieur) was privatized through a public offering. Between and , about a quarter of the State enterprises, including hotels, banks and investment companies, were wholly or partially privatized using a combination of public offerings and direct sales. Some of the most popular offerings were oversubscribed more than six times. Offerings were targeted to the general public by setting a ceiling on shares per applicant to avoid the accumulation of large holdings by individual or institutional investors.Privatization law and special-purpose institutions were created as a framework for privatization. At the same time, a number of reforms have supported the privatization process: introduction of new regulations on disclosure requirements and new accounting standards, new legislation such as laws governing mutual funds, and allowing unrestricted repatriation of capital gains and dividends by foreign investors.In sub-Saharan Africa, some large privatizations have also been effected through public offerings on the local stock markets. In Cote dIvoire, a major power company was listed on the domestic stock exchange, with per cent of shares sold to small investors. In Ghana and Kenya, shares of major public companies, the Ashanti Goldfields and Kenya Airways, were floated on the local stock exchanges. Both issues had the effect of greatly deepening the equity market: market capitalization of the Ghana Stock Exchange increased from $ million in to almost $ billion in . About a quarter of Ghanas privatizations between and was effected through public offerings, including listing of shares in Ashanti Goldfields on the London Stock Exchange. In Zambia, a stock exchange opened in February and six privatized companies were listed by the end of . One of the most important was the Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines.This variety of experience points to a number of conclusions. First, wellfunctioning financial systems broaden the set of privatization options. Second, as companies being privatized need capital infusions, not just ownership transfer, success depends on being able to bring adequate sources of funds into the market (for example, from pensions or foreign investors). Third, the methods of implementing privatization appear to have made some direct contribution to the growth of capital markets.Who raises which funds in the capital markets?While most of the activity in securities markets is the trading of already issued stocks and bonds, a key developmental question is whether this liquidity function also facilitates the flow of long-term capital resources to companies. The experiences of developing countries have been mixed on whether the rapid development of stock markets has yielded such benefits.In Asia, the data suggest a positive effect. The growth of new issues has been substantial and equity financing has constituted a significant share of investment finance in some countries. In -, new issues in Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand ranged from to per cent of domestic private investment. The increase in the number of listed companies in equity markets in many Asian economies and in a number of Latin American and African economies, as noted earlier, also suggests that such companies will (if they do not already) have growing access to equity finance in the future.However, the improved access has benefited mainly the largest companies. Smaller firms are usually deterred by the high cost of listing shares on the stock exchange and their generally low recognition levellow reputational capitalin local markets. A study of the largest publicly listed companies in a sample of developing countries showed that those companies relied quite heavily on equity finance in the s: in of the sample countries, more than per cent of the growth in assets of these firms was financed by new share issues. However, when the scope of analysis is widened to the whole corporate sector, the results change; for example, analyses of the sources of finance in India and the Republic of Korea found that, for the corporate sector as a whole, while equity finance is growing, it still represents a small share of financing, even excluding retained earnings and counting only the funds external to the firm. In India, public issue of equity as a proportion of total financing external to the firm increased from about per cent in the early s to per cent by the early s. In addition, private placement of shares, which are shares that are not expected to trade subsequently on the stock market, was an important source of external financing. The share of longer-term borrowing remained stable at about per cent, although the share of debentures (bonds) increased while that of bank loans declined. In the Republic of Korea, the share of equity finance increased sharply in the s but much less so in the s and averaged about per cent in the first half of this decade. Bond financing followed a similar trend so that by bonds and equity accounted for about per cent of external corporate financing.In latin_america, bank credit remains the predominant source of corporate external financing. The new equity issues in the region in the s have been primarily in privatized utility, telecommunications and transport companies. In sub-Saharan Africa, equity and bond financing is generally an insignificant source of investment funding. Most of the funds in stock markets have been raised by privatized financial companies, or mining or infrastructure concerns and stock markets are currently unlikely to finance investment in smaller-scale manufacturing companies.While the funding contribution has been positive but modest, it is increasingly appreciated, especially in the light of the Asian financial crisis, that more developed capital marketscorporate bond markets in particularwould have been beneficial in a number of ways. Bond markets would have provided an alternative source of corporate credit, reducing the concentration of risk of debt default in the banking system. Also, bonds are generally longer-term credit instruments, albeit available under stricter reporting requirements, than bank loans. In addition, by providing an attractive domestic security (before the Asian crisis dampened the prospects of the corporate sector), bonds would have helped retain more of the regions large pool of savings for domestic uses and reduced the exposure of the currency market to turmoil when savings left the countries of the region for foreign placement and regional firms borrowed abroad. Finally, had there been more reliance on financial markets and thus exposure to sharper market analysis of the financial situation of corporations, the excessive leveraging might have been reduced. With a lower debt-equity ratio, companies encountering earnings setbacks can cut dividends while meeting smaller interest payments, which are contractual obligations.Corporate governance and equity marketsIt has long been understood that large corporations with considerable oligopoly power and diffuse ownership may be under less pressure than small, closely held and competitive companies to follow high-profit business strategies. In the former situations, management may pursue its own agenda. One question is the extent to which equity markets operate so as to return control and a high-profit orientation to the owners of publicly traded companies, that is to say, to the shareholders, when management does not act effectively as their agent.There is, in general, a range of factors that affect the degree to which shareholders control management. These include ownership concentration, the extent and enforcement of legal protection of minority shareholders, the reliability and timeliness of company information in the public domain, the strength and enforcement of financial contracts, and the incentive for large shareholders to enforce discipline of managers. The conditions conducive to adequate monitoring of corporate performance by outsiders are generally not fulfilled in most developing countries or even in some developed countries.In east_asia, insider ownership concentration is high, as many founding families hold large shares of equity. The concentration is even higher as a result of cross-shareholding between conglomerates with ultimate control in the hands of the founding family. In this sense, management is the owner to a large degree and thus management probably does act effectively as the agent of the majority owners.Outside owners can have a large majority of shares but still not exert control because of their wide dispersal. The growth of institutional investors in developing-country capital markets, however, offer a new opportunity for outsideowner control, as these investors tend to accumulate significant blocks of shares. Nevertheless, evidence on the effectiveness of large institutional investors in corporate governance even in industrialized countries has been inconclusive, although their increased activism in the s has been notable. In developing countries, the role of institutional investors in this regard is far less significant. Besides the fact that they are limited in size and number, until recently they have not invested heavily in stocks. The privatized pension funds in Chile, for example, were limited in their investment in equities until the early s, although they have played a role in the development of the mortgage and corporate bond markets since the s. The centralized provident funds, such as those in Malaysia, have held mainly government bonds or other low-risk instruments.The growing presence in developing countries of institutional investors from developed economies has yet to translate into a more active governance role.Besides being characterized by passive financial investment goals, they would be hindered from taking a more active governance role by the lack of familiarity with local legal conditions and practices.Direct inputs into the governing of corporations aside, the main mechanism by which shareholders influence corporate management in developed economies is through collectively bidding up or reducing the prices of their companys shares. Moreover, to the extent that management is compensated with options to buy shares in the company at a pre-set price, management can be given a pecuniary interest in raising the stock price; and if management is perceived as weak and this is reflected in the share price, the company becomes more of a target for takeover through purchase of a large block of shares. Such mechanisms are only beginning to play a role in developing countries.The development of a market-based financial system in place of one that relied on administrative fiat under the previous centrally planned economic system is an integral part of the economic reform programme in China. As one part of this programme, the Government has implemented new policies and institutional changes since the s that have focused on reform of the banking system (see chap. V) and, more recently, on developing capital markets. Policy development has reflected the gradualist approach in the strategy of overall economic transformation which has maintained the centrality of public ownership. Because of these historical factors, the experience of capital-market development in China differs significantly from that in other developing countries in Asia as well as from the experience of the economies in transition.Domestic equity marketsChinas capital markets have grown rapidly in the s, primarily owing to the growth of equity markets. However, capital markets as a whole remain small relative to the banking sector which is the mainstay of the financial system. Equity share issues were authorized only in and two stock exchanges, one in Shanghai and the other in Shenzhen, were opened. A network of over regional trading centres have since been established. The number of companies listed on the two stock exchanges increased from in to by the end of and market capitalization grew from $ billion to over $ billion (see table VI.).The growth of Chinas equity market accelerated after when the State Council approved the plan to revitalize State-owned enterprises (SOEs) through gradual corporatization, that is to say, turning of SOEs into jointstock companies. The number of listed companies jumped by per cent in alone, to reach by the end of the year, while market capitalization increased by per cent. During , the value of new shares issued on the two exchanges totalled . billion yuan (about $. billion), about a quarter of market capitalization by year-end.China has also made special provision for foreign participation in Chinese stock markets. Chinese listed companies can secure approval to issue a special class of shares, labelled B shares, which can be bought only by non-residents with united_states dollars on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and with Hong Kong dollars on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (A shares are issued in local currency to local investors). Although the two classes of shares bear the same legal rights except as regards who can own them, the fact that domestic investors pay a threefold premium for the A shares of a company that also issues B shares indicates a high degree of market segmentation. This may reflect a dearth of alternative financial assets for domestic residents. Also, foreign investors may value holding equities of Chinese companies less than do domestic investors, as they are less familiar with the environment and less trustful of company information disclosure.As the equity market is regarded as an experiment in resource mobilization, not a means of privatization of ownership, the Government retains controlling shares in the SOEs now listed on the stock exchanges. Shares available to the general public for trading in the stock market are rather limited, compared with the capitalizations of listed companies. As savings of households have increased significantly during the reform period, along with the growth of personal income, the many investors (individuals as well as financial institutions) have been chasing a limited number of available shares, bidding up prices. Thus, during the period December to December , the mean percentage change in the total return index of Chinas equity market was the highest among South and East Asian emerging markets tracked by the International Finance Corporation (IFC). Also, rising stock prices attract more individuals with hopes of making a quick profit in stocks. As a result, the turnover ratio is very high, almost per cent in . This contrasts with the behaviour in the Chinese bond market, where individual investors generally buy and hold.Domestic bond marketsThe value of bond issues in China has experienced phenomenal growth during the reform period, particularly in the s. In the s, government bonds were administratively allocated to State-owned banks, SOEs and government agencies; thus, a bond market did not really exist. In the s, the administrative placement of government bonds was abolished. Bond issues grew rapidly and became a means to finance public investment projects, enterprise expansion and bank recapitalization, as well as the fiscal deficit. The rapid increase in fiscal deficits reflected the decline in central government revenues that accompanied fiscal decentralization and the purpose of financing the deficit with bonds was to avoid inflationary financing. Today, government bonds that carry administratively determined coupon rates that are greater than the interest rate on savings deposits of comparable maturity are the mainstay of the Chinese bond market.Enterprises may also issue bonds, although these make up a small share of the total value of bond issues, as the Government tightly controls the approval process for the issuance of enterprise bonds. This policy has hindered the development of the market for non-government bonds. Moreover, speculation and fraudulent activities in the bond market led to a government clampdown in which closed one large securities company and temporarily shut the secondary market for government bonds.Households held about per cent of the government bonds outstanding at the end of . Given the high rate of savings and the lack of alternative investment instruments, the safety of the higher return offered on government bonds compared with savings deposits makes them very attractive to individual investors. Moreover, institutional investors other than banks, such as pension funds, insurance companies and mutual funds, are still in their infancy as China experiments with pension reform and other components of a social safety net.Access to international capital marketsIn addition to development of its domestic capital market, China has sought to develop its access to international capital markets. Forty-one SOEs that are publicly traded in China have also been approved to issue H class shares which can be purchased and traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. In addition to companies issuing H shares, there are also so-called red-chip companies listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. These are companies incorporated in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) and traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, but controlled by Chinese central or local governments. This has opened an avenue to Chinese companies for raising international funds while not having to meet the stringent regulatory and accounting standards of stock markets in New York or London.Large Chinese corporations have also raised equity funds overseas through the issuance of ADRs. Between and , Chinese companies issued ADRs that were approved for public trading on the New York Stock Exchange, the largest number among Asian countries during this period. In addition, firms issued ADRs for private placement by . In alone, Chinese companies issued $. billion of ADRs, but the amount of issues in was only $. billion, as the Asian financial crisis eroded investor confidence in emerging market stocks.Chinese corporations have also been successful in raising debt capital in the Eurobond market. They issued $. billion of bonds from to Functioning of capital marketsCapital markets in China are in an early stage of development, with limited scope and functions. The Governments primary motivation in developing the markets has been to mobilize financial resources and in this they have been successful. The bond market has become an important source of non-inflationary financing of government fiscal deficits. State enterprises also raise funds through the stock and bond markets, albeit in limited amounts (for example, about per cent of total fixed investment in ). Thus, capital markets have primarily channelled funds to the government sector.In China, approval for public listing of equity shares is subject to a system of regional quotas, in addition to certain financial and disclosure standards. Which companies succeed in raising finance through equity issues largely depends on bureaucratic decisions, rather than on transparent, well-defined standards of performance. The protection of shareholder rights is not yet clearly legislated. Moreover, disclosure of enterprise information is uneven, and the rules of corporate governance are not formalized. The lack of a legal framework regulating transfer of ownership, mergers and acquisitions, and bankruptcy proceedings further compromises the role of the equity market.The Government is committed to furthering the development of a financial sector compatible with a market-oriented socialist economy. However, the equity market of China, which is similar to many other economies in this respect, was established before all the institutions and infrastructure for markets had been fully put in place. The Asian financial crisis highlighted the need to act with a new sense of urgency, as was reflected in the passage in December of the National Securities Law (to enter into force on July ). Before adoption of this law, the countrys security markets were governed by a combination of regulations, some of which, formulated at the central level, applied nationally while others applied only locally. Efforts are also being made to strengthen the enforcement of financial disclosure rules of listed companies. In an attempt to improve transparency, regulatory authorities have started to hold accountants and lawyers employed by listed companies responsible for the accuracy of disclosed information.While various regulatory provisions will be consolidated under the new National Securities Law, the compartmentalization of regulatory authorities is also being addressed. For example, the licensing of securities dealers used to be under the purview of the central bank, while dealers activities on the secondary market were regulated by the State Council Securities Committee; the approval for issuing different types of securities belonged among the responsibilities of different government departments. The new law transfers regulatory authority over all aspects of the securities market to the China Securities Regulatory Commission.The passage of the new National Securities Law is therefore a very important step in the consolidation and strengthening of the regulatory framework. However, having improved regulations on the books for equity listings will not guarantee either transparency or compliance. Enforcement will remain key to improved capital-market regulation, which will require continuing efforts to strengthen institutional and human capacity.Financial sector development has been one of the most important steps in the transformation of the economies in transition in Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. In the earlier, centrally planned economic system of these countries, the mobilization and allocation of financial resources were largely conducted by administrative measures and there were few market-oriented financial institutions. Reform of the financial system has focused on the development of such institutions, with emphasis on the banking system (see chap. V). Capital markets, particularly equity markets, have emerged very quickly, driven by the rapid privatization of State-owned companies. For such developments, these countries have been unique, although these markets are still small and not very liquid.Domestic equity marketsWhile equity markets operate in transition economies, market capitalization is a small fraction of GDP in almost all of them. The Czech Republic has the highest capitalization ratio among the transition economies (it peaked at per cent in ). The Russian stock market grew rapidly in and , albeit from a small initial level. Total market capitalization doubled in and tripled in , reflecting the soaring prices of shares, particularly of a number of large resource companies. In some other transition countries with large equity markets, the capitalization ratios are about per cent of GDP (see table VI.).In several cases, market capitalization is dominated by just a handful of large companies (see table VI.). Even in those countries with larger markets, the largest stocks account for almost to per cent of total capitalization. Poland is an exception: the share was per cent at the end of but has since become somewhat less concentrated. Four of the largest companies on the Polish stock exchange at the end of were banks. Several banks had been privatized with initial public offerings on the Warsaw exchange, which attracted a great deal of investor interest.Foreign investment in equities in the transition economies was modest until . Stocks in the transition economies surged in the following years as capital inflows pushed up prices until the Russian crisis. In Poland, the Czech Republic, the russian_federation and particularly Hungary, foreign stock holdings account for substantial shares of the total. While improvement in regulatory institutions and increased listings attracted international investor interest, the soaring interest in investing in emerging markets in general was also an important factor.The development of equity markets in the transition economies is related to the privatization process. Mass privatization placed ownership of shares in firms in the hands of large numbers of citizens very quickly. The stock markets were opened to provide some means of allocating and trading the ownership rights that came with privatization. Even in countries with more gradual privatization strategies, such as Hungary and Poland, the pace accelerated in the mid-s and generated an increase in the number of share listings.There were suddenly enormous numbers of publicly listed companies, but there was little market activity in the vast majority of them. The existence of a public listing was no guarantee of liquidity, let alone transparency in corporate governance. This was especially marked in the Czech Republic, where many of these companies have since been de-listed. Whereas over , companies were listed on the Czech exchange in , only were listed in , although market capitalization of these firms was almost $ billion, compared with less than $ billion in the earlier year (see table VI.). This curious development was a direct consequence of the mass privatization programme that started in . Most large enterprises were privatized in two waves of voucher privatization in -. Ownership tended to be very diffuse except that large blocks of shares are owned by investment privatization funds (IPFs).Russian equities markets date back to the initial stages of transition, , when a number of Russian firms, mostly banks and trading companies, were established as joint-stock companies and began to sell shares to the public. The extensive mass privatization programme in -spurred the development of trading in equity and in privatization vouchers on the regional markets and through over-the-counter arrangements.Widespread stock ownership emerged in many transition economies before there was an effective regulatory and supervisory framework or functioning market infrastructure. This undermined investor confidence and limited the depth and liquidity of these markets.Throughout the transition countries, reform of the banking sector was the first element of financial sector reform, as bank reform was needed to assure operation of the payments system and to end soft budget constraints on enterprises, wherein banks would extend credit as needed to cover company operating losses. Reform of existing banking institutions thus preceded new institutional development in the equity markets. It was only as of in the russian_federation and in the Czech Republic that regulatory institutions for equity markets were put in place. By , development of the Russian equity market seemed very promising, as extensive reform of the trading system and regulatory structure promised to bring transparency of prices and to eliminate registration problems that had existed earlier. In the Czech Republic as well, regulatory reforms began to strengthen investor confidence. In Poland, more gradual privatization enabled market institutions to develop along with the increase in listings. Improvements in securities regulations in helped to bolster market growth.Domestic bond marketsDespite their limitations, equity markets in the transition economies are more advanced than bond markets which, with the exception of markets for government bonds, are all very small. Few issues of private debt instruments have been sold locally in the transition economies and those that exist were usually private placements rather than public issues. Secondary markets for private debt are virtually non-existent. The domestic bond market in the Czech Republic is the biggest in the region, but by mid-there were only eight socalled blue-chip corporate bond issues with a total of about $. billion outstanding and there was little secondary market trading.There have also been instances of debt financing by Hungarian companies, with issues in local currency purchased by foreign and domestic investors, although there is little evidence of a secondary market emerging for such issues either. In , corporate bonds accounted for . per cent of trading on the Budapest Stock Exchange. The domestic corporate bond market in Poland is also very small. Some large companies have issued bonds internationally but there have been fewer than domestic issues with maturities of more than one year. Nevertheless, with the economy growing rapidly, there are indications that the domestic bond market might begin to grow and expand to include issuances by smaller enterprises.Private sector domestic debt instruments (other than the interbank market) are virtually non-existent in the russian_federation. There have been a few issues of collateralized debt by companies but there are no domestic corporate bond issues.Most of the factors that hindered the development of equity markets have also slowed the growth of private bond markets. In addition, the macroeconomic environment in some countries has not been sufficiently stable to encourage much long-term bond financing of firms. In some countries, the slow pace of banking sector reform inhibited the development of local bond markets: if bank financing is available without any serious judgements of credit quality, there is no reason to expect market-oriented domestic or international lending channels to emerge. Capital-market development will get started only when traditional bank lending arrangements are replaced by market-oriented credit standards. After that, investor reluctance might be overcome through experience. In this regard, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is considering issuance of its own bonds in domestic currency on transition economy markets as a means of developing the local capital market. It has made one local currency bond issue in Hungary.Access to international capital marketsIt is common for both Governments and the largest and most successful enterprises in the transition economies to tap international capital markets directly. There is a surprisingly large number of issues by the advanced transition countries and privately placed and publicly traded issues are common and substantial.Hungarian and Russian companies have been the most active issuers of depositary receipts. Hungary was the first issuer and the russian_federation followed suit in . There are now Russian ADRs, including three with listings on the New York Stock Exchange. In addition, at least six Russian companies have depositary receipts issued in the russian_federation (RDRs) for trading in Europe. Russian depositary receipts in the amount of almost $ billion have been issued, mostly in , and little since then. Receipts for a similar amount of shares of Hungarian companies have been issued. Also, at least four big Czech companies are listed as having global depositary receipts in London.The issuance of depositary receipts by companies in transition economies has advantages and disadvantages. On one hand, it is an indicator of the attractiveness of these companies to foreign equity investors. Notably, Russian companies were able to use depositary receipts to access international capital markets even though Russian corporate governance and disclosure standards lagged Western standards. On the other hand, increased use of depositary receipts might inhibit the development of local equity markets. If the largest and strongest companies floated share issues exclusively on international equity markets, then the local market would be restricted to small and illiquid issues.The Polish Government was not able to tap international bond markets until when it restructured its pre-transition foreign debts. The Czech Government has tapped foreign bond markets throughout the s, in the amount of about $ million per year from to . Hungary is by far the largest sovereign borrower in the region, having raised almost $ billion in .For several years the Russian Government was able to actively tap international capital markets for substantial sums, beginning with the issuance of Eurobonds in November . Many local government authorities in the russian_federation have also issued their own bonds.As firms commenced restructuring in the advanced transition economies, bond issues in eurodollars began to appear. Among the first were issues in by a Polish and a Czech bank. Foreign capital market access by Czech firms has outpaced domestic market development, where only a few bond issues have been made. The foreign capital market has also been tapped indirectly byCzech companies. There is an offshore market for Eurokrona bonds which have been issued mostly by banks that onlend the funds to Czech entities. By mid, there were $ billion in such liabilities (similar markets in Poland and Hungary had about $ million and $ million respectively).The Russian Governments entry into the international market was followed quickly by private sector borrowing. The first Russian companies to directly access world debt markets were three Russian banks which sold three-year dollar bonds in . The yields were very high but the deals were viewed as a way to gain international exposure for Russian institutions which obtained credit ratings and had their reputations enhanced by the deals. Over $ billion was raised in international capital markets in , but such borrowing ended in the summer of .Functioning of capital marketsThe capital markets in the transition economies are not yet used intensively, largely because these markets arose from specific institutional features of the transition process rather than as institutional responses to a demand for the financial services that such markets perform. At the same time, the brief life of these markets has to be taken into account in the assessment of their performance.Even in relatively large markets, weakness of the market infrastructure and regulatory institutions has prevented the market from pricing assets efficiently. For example, the stock market in the Czech Republic has been widely criticized for a lack of transparency in trading activity. The poor reputation of the Czech market stemmed from its being an over-the-counter market (rather than a formal market where all trades are posted) where the absence of any regulatory structure led to practices that would have been considered fraudulent in most places.Developments in the russian_federation are illustrative. Once the privatization programme ended there in mid-, trading on the stock exchanges diminished, prices were often manipulated by insider trading of blocks of shares, and there was little confidence in reported stock prices. The lack of a reliable institutional structure for trading, clearing, settlement, registration or oversight of brokers and dealers made it problematical to register share purchases. In -, most companies in the russian_federation, including the large, internationally known natural resource companies, were trading at a fraction of book value. There are several explanations for this. It was feared first, that the firms might have hidden liabilities, such as social obligations to workers or unspecified taxes and regulations; second, that the assets of the firm could be looted by managers and others without any respect for the rights of shareholders; and third, that share sales would not be properly registered and shareholders would be unable to prove share ownership.A regulatory agencythe Federal Commission on Securities and the Capital Marketwas established in and assisted in the establishment of the Russian Trading System in mid-. It is a self-regulating national electronic market which links various markets and brokers and brought market infrastructure to a new level of development. The system has become the main price-setting mechanism and has added a great deal of transparency to the pricing of stocks in the russian_federation. The world_bank reports that the system has been very successful in improving the stock trading environment in the russian_federation.More generally, the incipient markets in some countries have provided a market orientation for some privatization activity, particularly in instances where market initial public offerings (IPOs) have priced and distributed large blocks of stock that were held by the State. A case in point is Poland, where a number of privatizations have taken place with IPOs that have used the Polish equity market to determine the value of the firm. The IPO privatizations have been made possibleand have raised more revenue than would otherwise have been possiblebecause of the improved liquidity of the Polish equity market. In addition, there have been a few successful equity offerings by new enterprises in Poland. In this sense, the markets are becoming a potentially important mechanism for spreading and transferring share ownership.One particular concern in the transition from central planning to market institutions has been that of transferring the governance of enterprises from the State (sometimes together with workers councils) to more centralized mechanisms. Up to now, the boards of directors, representing the interests of the shareholders, have operated with considerable autonomy, especially when management groups have a controlling interest in the firm. In fact, corporate boards are rarely responsive to signals from the market.A drawback of mass privatization was that it usually led to very diffuse ownership of shares which enabled the existing management to retain control of the enterprise. Entrenched management may be unwilling or unable to work in the best interests of the firm. If managers from the pre-transition era lack the pecuniary incentive to restructure the firms activities, they may choose to not do so, and to retain their positions.In the Czech Republic, for example, one of the intentions underlying the establishment of IPFs was to create significant outside ownership which would push the firms to restructure. However, the banks large ownership interest in the IPFs meant that the IPFs would continue traditional business relationships between the banks and the enterprises rather than undertake any radical restructuring which would endanger their positions or their control of the firms.In , the Government of the Czech Republic and the financial community began to respond to this situation by taking steps to create a regulatory structure for the equity markets and to introduce some rules for corporate governance. Next, changes in banking law in limited the banks ability to hold controlling interests in non-financial firms, and placed limits on shareholding by banks and on the activities of bank managers in other companies. The Government also approved legislation that limited the holdings by an IPF in any one company in order to clearly distinguish between investment funds and holding companies. The effect has been to put limits on the influence of bank-owned IPFs. This should promote enterprise-restructuring. On the other hand, the fact that these limits are also likely to prevent any large shareholder from emerging and seeking to exercise control over the firm may inhibit restructuring.In the russian_federation, the extensive control by Russian financial groups and interlocking ownership by these groups have inhibited the development of transparent financial markets. Many of the problems with Russian equity markets stem from the privatization procedures of the mid-s. Privatization often solidified the power of managers by transferring controlling blocks of shares to employees who supported manager control. Insiders thus controlled almost three quarters of the privatized firms and in some cases outside ownership was less than per cent. Expectations that the sale of residual Stateowned shares and the development of markets for shares would transform corporate control turned out to be unrealistic. Ownership of the largest companies is much less concentrated than the average; but while insiders tend not to have a controlling interest, they are, along with the banking groups, able to maintain control of management.Over time, increased market liquidity, it is hoped, will provide important mechanisms for disciplining management. The equity markets in most countries now facilitate ownership transfers. A related function of equity markets is to facilitate corporate changes through mergers and acquisitions. Thus far, there has been little use of the stock markets for such changes in corporate control through takeovers, buyouts or mergers, but they will develop in time.CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS: CAPITAL MARKETS AND BANKSCapital-market development in many developing countries and in the economies in transition is a work in progress and any assessment of the performance of these markets has to take this into account.The experiences of developing countries, while diverse, suggest that capital markets can and do channel financing to corporate investment. Stock markets have also facilitated the privatization of public ownership in many countries. However, most markets had been established before a strong banking sector was in place and other supporting structures of the market and regulatory and legal frameworks remained weak. This constrained the functioning of the markets and limited the benefits that they yielded with respect to the allocation of finance and improved corporate governance. Nevertheless, in countries where market development reached a certain level, the diversification of the financial system has been beneficial. Further development should focus on strengthening market infrastructure and regulatory and legal institutions.At the same time, the development of capital markets should not detract from the priority of strengthening the banking system. In addition, inasmuch as a strong commercial banking system underpins the development of capital markets by providing liquidity for market transactions and an efficient payment system to support trading and settlement, the development of the banking sector and that of capital markets can be seen as complementary. Moreover, weak banking systems can amplify the spillover effect of stock market volatility on the real economy.Besides the development of the banking sector, the growth of non-bank financial institutions such as pension funds is also an important complement to capital-market development. As they mature in size and investment expertise, such institutions channel savings into the capital markets, creating a demand for securities while contributing to innovations in financial instruments and improved information-generation and -dissemination.The resources needed for the development of capital markets suggest that it may not be feasible for most small, low-income countries to develop sufficiently deep domestic markets. Initially, they may wish to establish regional capital markets collaboratively among countries with strong economic links. Capacity in developing the requisite infrastructure and regulatory institutions for capital markets can also be acquired through these efforts.In economies undergoing transformation from central planning to a marketbased economic system, newly established capital markets cannot thus far be said to have channelled significant finance to investment or to have improved the efficiency of resource allocation. Their primary function has been to give effect to the partial or wholesale privatization of State enterprises. The necessary institutions of capital markets have been slow to develop, although there has recently been significant progress in this area in some countries.This wide range of experiences in financial sector development appears to underline the argument made elsewhere in the present Survey that the focus in the early stages of financial development should be on the strengthening of the banking sector. As the financial system develops, however, capital markets should be encouraged to play an increasing role in the mobilization and allocation of financial resources. There is no clear agreement on the speed at which they should develop, but they are a natural part of a full financial system in the contemporary worldindeed (as discussed in chap. IV), an increasingly important part.Some groups of people have limited or no access to the kinds of formal commercial finance discussed in previous chapters. These people are generally poor and reside mostly in developing countries. Groups in other countries also have difficulties obtaining commercial finance, but those groups are relatively smaller in developed countries and in most economies in transition (although little is known about finance outside formal channels in the latter).Poor people require credit for several reasons. Many are, or can become, entrepreneurs, as either farmers or traders or as producers of goods. For this they need credit to purchase inputs, such as seeds, to start a production cycle, or to invest and expand production. The poor sometimes seek credit also for consumption because some expendituresfor example, expenditures on health care, education, housing and life cycle events such as weddings and funeralsarise unexpectedly or are lumpy. However, credit is not the only way to pay for expenditures that exceed current income. Savings and various insurance mechanisms can also fulfil the role of smoothing consumption and reducing risk. Moreover, access to a safe and liquid placement of their savings is an important financial service to offer the poor.Several arrangements offer credit where formal financial institutions do not. Family, friends, moneylenders and other sources of informal finance have traditionally played an important role in all parts of the world but they have limitations which curtail their expansion. Semi-formal institutions, such as microcredit facilities operated by non-governmental organizations, have expanded their role in recent years. They have been able to deliver financial services to the poor partly because they have imitated and adapted characteristics from the informal sector. Recently, even a few commercial banks have ventured into lending to the poor by adopting microfinance practices. The present chapter examines various arrangements for providing financial services to the poor. The question is whether these modalities adequately meet their needs.In nearly every society, there are groups that are unable to access formal finance from financial institutions and markets. Sometimes this is the result of discrimination, but in most cases it reflects economic factors.For several reasons, commercial banks, in particular, are hesitant to lend to certain groups. As discussed in earlier chapters, banks face an information asymmetry in that they do not have knowledge of the ability and willingness to repay. Banks, to ensure that loans will be repaid, take actions to reduce the likelihood of default. They do not lend to everybody and they are likely to exclude risky borrowers. Banks might lend less to farmers, for example, because their income fluctuates more than that of groups in other sectors and the risk to the bank is thus higher. Banks can also restrict loans to geographical areas, or bankers might lend only to their own kinship group because of better knowledge. Banks can also use the reputation of the borrower, which makes new loans dependent on past behaviour. In addition, banks ask for collateral because collateral encourages the borrower not to default and reduces the cost of default to the lender. Moreover, safer borrowers are willing to put up more collateral. Although it is uncommon, some banks require that the output of some of their borrowers be sold to them, making repayment less uncertain.Besides screening loan applicants, a lender needs to monitor the behaviour of the borrower after the loan is disbursed and to enforce regular repayments. This can be costly and is a particular disincentive to small-scale lending because it costs virtually as much to monitor small loans as large ones (if not more). Moreover, there are fewer companies that track credit histories in developing countries, and with poor communication and transportation infrastructure, especially in rural areas, transaction costs can be very high.For example, a study of informal loans to farmers in Pakistan found that screening takes one day on average and costs Pakistan rupees (PR ) ($.) in transportation expenses, while the costs of pursuing delinquent loans, overhead and the opportunity cost of capital (including the loss from unrecoverable loans) amount to between and per cent of the loan. Screening, monitoring and enforcement costs to service the same community can be expected to be even higher for a formal institution, as it has less knowledge about the local circumstances and is often further away, making transportation costs higher. In addition, delinquency rates are usually much higher for formal than for informal loans.The high screening, monitoring and transaction costs per loan and the high share of rejected loan applications partly explain the low density of formal financial institutions in poor and rural areas. Banks prefer urban areas because they generally have higher population density, higher income, a more diversified deposit base, better communication and transportation infrastructure and less seasonality in income and borrowing demands.There are also disincentives from the demand side to borrowing by the poor. Demand by rural residents can be limited because obtaining a formal loan requires travel and waiting time, finding a lender, filling out forms, negotiating a loan (which might be difficult for the illiterate) and providing references and titles of assets for collateral. Moreover, in some countries, the borrower may have also to pay bribes and entertainment costs to secure a loan. In addition, the terms of loans that banks are willing to offer are usually inflexible and the approval process can be lengthy. All this discourages formal borrowing.Who is excluded from bank loans?The screening devices used by lenders cause certain groups to have little or no access to loans from formal financial institutions. Nearly everyone without collateral will be excluded. The poor are almost by definition part of this group, as are micro-entrepreneurs, the landless and smallholder farmers who do not have a title to their land. Women, whose rights to own land or other property are often legally restricted, are also largely excluded.There are a number of characteristics peculiar to the agricultural sector that discourage lending to farmers, such as geographical dispersion, high risk and lack of collateral. Risk is high as a result of the price volatility of crops and the possibility of adverse weather, often affecting many debtors simultaneously. In addition, the seasonal nature of agriculture leads to the concentration of loan applications and repayment during certain periods of the year, resulting in peak demands on lenders and an irregular cash flow.Rural and urban microand small enterprises (MSEs) usually do not keep records that would be accepted by banks to assess creditworthiness. New entrepreneurs also have difficulties securing finance because they have not built up a reputation with a lender. In sum, the poor, smallholder farmers, the landless, many women, small traders, informal sector participants and owners of MSEs would probably have difficulty getting a formal loan because of the high screening, monitoring and enforcement costs.This has economic and social consequences. First, the production of smallholder farms or micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises is curtailed. Many studies have shown that credit is one of the most important constraints on the adoption of new technology, such as high-yield seed varieties, as this step involves the use of more purchased inputs than is the case for traditional agriculture. Other studies have emphasized the negative effect of a lack of credit on nutrition and education. Likewise, small entrepreneurs often list the lack of access to finance as the first and most important constraint on expansion. Indeed, micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises obtain most of their finance from personal savings or loans from family and friends.INFORMAL INSTITUTIONS: PARTLY FILLING THE GAPSeveral informal financial institutions have emerged over time to meet a part of the demand of poor people for financial services (see table VII.). Most of them pre-date the creation of formal financial institutions and some, like rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs), even pre-date monetization. What informal loans have in common is that they are usually unsecured, small and short-term; they also have lower transaction (screening, monitoring and enforcement) costs and a lower risk of default than formal loans (see table VII.). Most of these institutions are part of the community they lend to and are therefore able to use their knowledge about borrowers to screen loan applicants. Peer pressure and social sanctions can be important in reducing the monitoring and enforcement costs. Lending is cheaper, as little or no office space or paperwork is involved and decentralized decision-making ensures a quick approval process.Table VII..Small VariesVery flexible None or low NoLow No OwnCosts in informal institutions can be lower than in formal institutions also because the former are often not regulated and have no reserve requirements. However, some of these informal institutions are not completely outside the formal legal and monetary systems. Some ROSCAs, like the chit funds in India, are now regulated. Some countries have legislation pertaining to the informal sector, including usury laws, restrictions on deposit-taking and requirements on lending to certain sectors.Informal finance accounts for a large share ofand often dominates finance in rural areas of Africa and Asia, but its share is less in latin_america. In Africa and Asia, this share is nearly always larger than one third and often reaches two thirds in rural areas. The share generally declines with development, although it rarely vanishes. In some countries, such as India and the Republic of Korea, the informal sector was reduced by government action. In others, informal institutions have become formal or were absorbed by the formal sector. Yet, this process is not automatic and not monotonic.Types of informal financial institutionsSeveral types of informal financial institutions can be found all over the world, although their relative sizes differ considerably across countries.Little comprehensive information is available on loans from friends and family, although they appear to be quantitatively important in developing countries and also exist in developed and transition economies. Surveys in Madagascar and Pakistan show that they accounted for about a third of all informal credit in the early s; this share was generally higher for poorer households, which generally relied more on informal credit. Loans from friends and family are usually small, unsecured and very flexible with regard to the term, interest rates and repayment conditions. Interest rates are usually low or non-existent and repayment is often contingent on borrowers andLoan size Loan term Terms Interest rate CollateralTransaction costs DepositsSource of fundsFriends and familySmallShort-termFlexibleMediumNo; group peer pressureLowFixed amount MembersMoneylenderSmall Short-term Flexible High SometimesMediumUsually notOwn, some borrowedPawnbrokerSmall Short-term Flexible Less high YesLowSometimesOwn, some borrowedTied creditSmallVariesFlexibleLowEconomic relationLowUsually notOwn, some borrowed lenders economic circumstances. Social sanctions and reciprocity are very important.Some of these loans come from relatives or friends who have moved to urban areas or abroad. As reciprocity is important, it is not always clear to an outsider whether a transfer is a loan, a gift or a repayment of a loan. Migration is often financed by relatives, particularly when it involves international migration, the cost of which can be substantial. A financial transfer from abroad or from an urban area can be a repayment of the loan that financed the migration. These transfers can be large and have a significant impact on household behaviour, alleviating a credit constraint, and allowing consumption smoothing, investment in human and physical capital, insurance and risk sharing.ROSCAs are found all over the world, including in the developed countries. They are known under different names, for example, as susu in Ghana, tontineTable VII..ExamplesCharacteristics Loan sizeLoan term TermsInterest rate CollateralTransaction costs of small loanFor lender For borrowerDeposits Main Clients UseFinancial intermediation LinkageseFormalSemi-formalInformalCommercial bankRegulated LargeAll terms RigidLow UsuallyHigh HighYes CorporationsFixed investment, working capitalLarge SmallMicrocredit non-governmental organizationOften not regulatedVery small mediumMediumand short-termLess rigidMediumNo; group peer pressure, character lendingMedium Medium highSometimes; compulsory savings Poor, women, MSEsc SMEsdConsumption, working capital, fixed investmentSmall, but growth potential Small, but growth potentialNot regulated Very small Short-term Flexible MediumNo; group peer pressureLowb LowbFixed amountPoor, women, MSEscConsumption, working capital, fixed investmentSmallSmall, but growth potential lenders or traders who onlend are more common.in the Niger and Senegal, hui in China, kye in the Republic of Korea, tanda in Mexico and san in the Dominican Republic. A ROSCA is a group, usually comprising to people, in which each individual periodically puts a certain small amount of money into a pot. The pot is then allocated to one member randomly, by bidding or through negotiation. The bid payments by those who received the pot in earlier rounds (net borrowers) can be viewed as interest payments to the net lenders who receive the pot in later rounds. Each member receives the pot only once and the process repeats itself during each period until all the members have won the pot.Membership is usually restricted to people with a common interest or background, like an office or a village, and local knowledge is used to select the members. This gives the ROSCA the opportunity to use mutual trust and social sanctions to enforce contributions, even from someone who has already received the pot. The fact that ROSCAs select their own members and do not screen the loans reduces transaction costs. ROSCAs are common in developing countries, although comprehensive data on them are lacking. Some studies have found that half the adult urban residents in several African countries belong to a ROSCA.Other group-based institutions, such as savings and credit associations (SCAs), self-help groups and mutual assistance groups, direct savings to community needs or specific activities. An SCA collects savings and pays depositors high real interest rates; in a manner similar to a credit union, the SCA lends proceeds to its members. The extent of financial intermediation is thus much larger than in other informal financial institutions. Yet, membership is usually restricted and loans are usually small and short-term.Informal moneylending is one of the most ubiquitous forms of informal finance in the developing world. Moneylenders are often notorious because of the fact that they charge high interest rates ( to per cent per month), which are thought to be a product of their presumed monopoly. Yet, research has shown that high interest rates largely reflect high costs and risks, although moneylenders often have some market power based on their informational and enforcement advantages.Moneylenders usually do not accept deposits. They lend their own money or money that they have borrowed (often from formal sources but also from other moneylenders). They lend mostly for a rather short-term period, which is sometimes as short as a workday. To the extent that moneylenders borrow money from banks, they provide an important linkage with the formal financial sectors. Moneylenders sometimes demand land as collateral but because land titling and land markets are less common in Africa than in Asia, moneylenders are more prevalent in the latter.Many Governments and scholars have depicted the high interest rates of moneylenders as usurious. In India, for example, the Government attempted to displace the village moneylender by promoting cooperatives in the s and expanding branches of banks in the s. The role of the moneylender declined over the decades but did not disappear, partly because the commercialization of agriculture led to higher demand for the services of the trader-moneylender.Pawnbrokers take tangible property, such as jewellery, as collateral for a loan. If, after an agreed period, the loan and the interest are not repaid, the pawnbroker keeps the property. The advantage of the pawnbroker over collateralized loans is that with the former there are no costs involved and no uncertainty in regard to seizing the collateral. The pawnbroker wants only assets that he or she can appraise quickly and easily before a loan is given. However, selling the property might involve some costs. Nonetheless, transaction costs are low; interest rates are therefore lower than those of moneylenders but usually higher than those of the other forms of informal finance.Pawnbrokers sometimes also act as money keepers, mostly without paying interest, and sometimes they even charge a fee. Money keepers, who just keep money safe for a small fee, often also lend money to their customers, usually at no interest and in amounts smaller than the borrowers savings.There are also indigenous banks that are considered part of the informal sector. They are similar to moneylenders but offer more services, including savings facilities and trade finance. They are able to keep transaction costs down owing to simple offices and procedures and because of their information advantages. They have been particularly prevalent in Asia. At independence, India had a sophisticated indigenous banking system which had developed over centuries. Indigenous bankers in India have often combined several activities and lent their own money. Some Governments, such as those of India and the Republic of Korea, suppressed indigenous banks but in other countries they were absorbed or developed into formal banks.A final informal financial transaction is one where extension of credit by a miller, trader, shopkeeper, employer or landlord is tied to other economic transactions. It is common in Asia, but also exists in, for example, West Africa. In one form of the transaction, a loan for seeds and fertilizers is tied to future sales of the crop. Another possibility is one where farm workers obtain a loan from a farmer during the slack season for a promise to work during the peak season. The lender has particular advantages because of the information gained as a result of the trade or renting relation with the borrower. This relation also makes enforcement easier. Transaction costs are also low for the borrower and effective interest rates are about the same as, or lower than, those of formal loans. The terms are flexible, ranging from four months to three harvests, should the yield be poor. Such lenders normally do not accept deposits and most lending is conducted from their own resources; but they do borrow from the formal sector and sometimes accept deposits.Advantages and disadvantages of informal financeInformal finance is very flexible and has low transaction costs but the extent of financial intermediation is small and has limited potential. Most informal financial institutions lend only small amounts of their own resources and do not take deposits. Saving and lending are usually performed by different institutions. Moreover, the geographical area serviced by any informal institution is often restricted, for example, to the village, and very littleif anyfinancial intermediation takes place over large distances. Reliance on social sanctions for enforcement limits the size of the group, while the lack of collateral leads to small and short-term loans, and the lack of deposit mobilization and accumulation limits the possibilities for expansion of informal finance. Nevertheless, many moneylenders, pawnbrokers, merchants and landowners borrow part of the money they lend from formal financial institutions. Informal finance can therefore be a link in a larger national chain of financial intermediation.There are several means to overcome at least partly the limitations of informal finance. Governments have long directed formal institutions to provide financial services to the poor. More recently, other initiatives, especially ones involving microfinance, have come to the fore. Semi-formal microcredit-dispensing institutions have borrowed those features of the informal sector that allow them to keep transaction costs and the risk of default low. Most of these institutions, however, require government intervention.Bringing traditional formal institutions to the poorBetween the s and s, many Governments in the developing world directly intervened in financial markets, particularly in rural areas, to ease finance constraints, address equity issues and counter the urban bias in other policies. Governments nationalized commercial banks or required private banks to make loans of a certain amount to specific sectors or target groups, guaranteed the loans and subsidized the interest rates. Governments also created development and agricultural banks and cooperatives to provide financial services and reach their development goals, following the example of some of the developed countries during the nineteenth century. Agricultural development institutions often provided credit, seeds, extension services, technology and other services as a package.These institutions have had a mixed record. Several suffered from high loan default rates, were not able to become financially sustainable, did not reach the targeted population and were a drain on the government budget or were dependent on foreign aid. High default rates resulted from the weak pressures on borrowers to repay, which arose from weak incentives on loan officers to enforce repayment. Loans often went to wealthy and influential people who could divert the funds to unintended purposes, did not feel a need to repay, could use their influence to delay repayment or could avert the seizure of collateral.However, this experience was not universal. For example, the Badan Kredit Kecamatan in Indonesia and the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) in Thailand have been very successful in reaching the poor and making a profit. In other countries, reforms, often modelled on microfinancing principles, have allowed development and agricultural banks and cooperatives to continue to play an important role in providing financial services to the poor. Some evidence suggests that government-sponsored schemes can be as successful as semi-formal ones, as long as techniques are adopted that take into account the information, screening and enforcement problems discussed above.Postal savingsThe experience of postal savings systems in developing countries has been mixed and in some countries the system has been abolished or privatized.However, in other cases, these institutions have been efficient collection points for savings and have offered financial services to people who might otherwise not have been serviced.Some postal savings systems have acted merely as conduits for the flow of funds to the national Treasury; in other cases, funds may be redeposited in the commercial banking sector or in the wholesale money market. In yet other countries, such as France, Italy and Japan, postal savings funds have been used for developmental purposes. There are significantly higher rates of savings deposits and public participation in the postal savings system in such countries than in countries that pass the resources to the Treasury. In the case of Japans -year-old postal savings system, the funds were dedicated to modernization and development, and the elimination of foreign borrowing. Publicity for postal savings accounts historically stressed development themes. In Japans post-war period, postal savings resources were channelled, inter alia, through public institutions such as the Japan Development Bank to domestic regional development banks. In addition, the Government of Japan established public corporations to lend to small and medium-sized businesses, and for housing finance and household mortgages, and infrastructure construction. In the light of such success, this is a model that might be revisited (see box IV.).Credit cooperatives or unionsGovernments have also often played a role in the establishment of credit cooperatives or credit unions. Credit unions are owned by their members, who are tied together by employment, village, profession or other forms of association. Credit unions provide both credit and savings services to their members. They originated in the middle of the nineteenth century in Europe and can now be found all over the world. At the end of , the World Council of Credit Unions counted , credit unions in countries with nearly million members.Goals, size and operational principles of credit unions vary. They can be formal, semi-formal or informal, depending on their specific characteristics. Moreover, various combinations of internal and external funds exist. Where cooperatives are informal and not regulated, they gain some flexibility, but are limited in their access to finance from the central bank or commercial banks. When they have access to formal loans, the scope for financial intermediation increases dramatically.Many credit unions and, in particular, agricultural credit cooperatives have been created in developing countries by Governments, non-governmental organizations, or donors. These actors have functioned as catalysts and as providers of funds and technical assistance, while Governments have also subjected cooperatives to policy directives.Sometimes a federation of credit unions is created within a country, which allows funds to be moved over larger geographical areas, thereby raising opportunities for intermediation. In Togo, for example, a federation of credit unions was established in . By , the federation consisted of unions with , members. The federation manages a central fund which transfers funds between those unions with surpluses and those with deficits. In addition, the federation has easier access than the member unions to financial institutions, through which members can increase funds for lending, place liquid funds in low-risk financial instruments and diversify risk. However, there have also been difficulties. The growth of the federation stretched the demand for management skills beyond capacity and the larger need for management resources led to an increasing dependence on external funds. Moreover, group cohesion declined with the increase in members, leading to more bad loans. The withdrawal of one donor in , however, prompted a shake-up and forced the federation to decentralize, implement measures to better control lending and costs, charge members for services and train managers.As exemplified in this case, the performance of credit unions has been mixed, largely because of monitoring and collusion problems. As the lenders are the owners, there is no incentive for usurious lending by a credit union. Yet, monitoring of borrowers in a cooperative is more difficult than in a ROSCA because the former is larger and less personal. Also, with the cooperatives being larger, members may feel less restrained in trying to take advantage of the institution for personal gain. For example, borrowers could try to effect a shrinkage of the spread between interest charged on loans and interest paid on deposits, which reduces financial sustainability and increases the dependence on external funds.The success of a cooperative can be increased by proper training of members and management, by relying on savings of members rather than on outside funds and by restricting activities to those that can be carried out with the institutional and management capabilities that exist. When a credit union can draw easily on loans from Governments and donors, an impression may be created that the union will be bailed out in case of default. In such situations, repayment rates are likely to be low, as a result of moral hazard. In contrast, when their own funds are at risk, members of the credit union are given a stake in the institution and incentives for repayment are larger.Innovations combining the formal and informalThe mixed results with development finance institutions, combined with the general movement away from direct government interventions in markets, have contributed to a rethinking about how best to deliver financial services to the poor. A number of innovations seek to combine the best characteristics of the informal and the formal financial sector.Linkages between formal and informal institutionsLinkages between informal and formal institutions which can increase the amount of funds within the informal financial sector, may take several forms (see figure VII.). Several linkages, as indicated above, arose autonomously, as traders, landowners, moneylenders or pawnbrokers took loans from formal financial institutions and lent proceeds to individual borrowers who did not have access themselves to formal loans. These lenders can also serve as intermediaries who screen credit applications from groups, such as ROSCAs. Moreover, there have been cases, for example, in the Republic of Korea, where banks sought deposits from informal lenders and used the deposits to lend to borrowers that had been selected by the informal lenders. In this way, the bank increases its market share, the informal lender transfers the risk of default to the bank, and the depositors are more secure and receive interest.Figure VII..Commercial bank DonorGovernmentSecond-tier intermediaryInformal financial institutionNongovermental organizationDevelopment bankMicrofinance institution: specialized bankPoorest Poor individuals individualsGroup Loan of poorSavingsCommercial bank microfinance unitThe second type of linkage encompasses lending by formal institutions directly to group-based informal financial institutions, such as ROSCAs and credit unions. In Senegal, for example, a reform of the agricultural credit programme entailed forming village groups which elected a president who, functioning as an intermediary, screened, allocated and enforced credit terms. Similar arrangements exist in the Philippines. Moreover, in several countries, banks allow group savings to be used as collateral or a screening device. In countries such as India and the Republic of Korea, banks have created ROSCAs themselves.Group savings can be deposited at a bank, making savings safer, and increasing the groups income through interest earnings. However, group savings that accumulate in a bank are not necessarily being lent to group members. This raises a more general concern that, if deposits by the poor are placed in formal institutions, they may leave the community. There is an argument that bank lending portfolios should be diversified and thus that not every dollar deposited should be lent locally. However, there is a case to be made for directing some bank deposits back into the local community. In the united_states of America, for example, the Community Reinvestment Act of encourages banks to lend to and service the same community that they take deposits from (the performance is evaluated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency).A final linkage of formal to informal institutions can be effected through local non-governmental organizations, which act as intermediaries and borrow on their own account for onlending to individuals or self-help groups. The non-governmental organizations then do the screening, monitoring and enforcement, based on their knowledge of the borrowers. This linkage has become a prominent part of the upscaling of microfinance institutions as discussed below.MicrocreditSince the s, a new approach has revolutionized thinking about how to provide small uncollateralized loans to the poor. This approach, often referred to by the term microcredit, adapted lending techniques from the informal financial sector. These techniques keep administrative costs down, reduce risk and provide incentives for repayment which could substitute for a lack of collateral (see table VII.). Costs are reduced by employing quick and simple procedures which keep documentation to a minimum. Loan approvals are decentralized to make best use of local information. Bad debt losses are curtailed through effective incentives for repayment, such as group pressure, denying access to future loans in case of delinquency and granting access to larger loans in case of on-time repayments. In addition, sometimes there are repayment stimuli, such as savings requirements. In order to cover (the bulk of) costs, interest rates are usually higher than those commercial or development banks are allowed or would dare to charge. Many of the poor are able and willing to pay interest at these rates because they are generally lower than the rates of other sources to which they have access. Moreover, the small size of loans and high interest rates will discourage potential large borrowers who have access to commercial bank loans with lower interest rates, and thus the difficulties in public credit programmes of earlier decades may be avoided.While originally pioneered by non-governmental organizations, albeit funded by Governments or donors, microcredit now also encompasses lending programmes by commercial or specialized banks, credit unions, parastatals and other semi-formal or formal financial institutions (see figure VII.).Microcredit loans may be extended to a group that allocates them among its members or to an individual member of a group. In both cases, the group is jointly responsible for repayment. Frequently, loan repayments are due at weekly or monthly group meetings to instil repayment discipline and allow peer pressure to operate. In addition, group-lending schemes apply sanctions. Some cut off access to loans to all group members after one defaults, but other schemes are less strict.Microcredit was introduced in Asia in the s and became popular in the development literature in the s. The prominence of group lending is largely a result of the success of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, which has received considerable attention. The Grameen Bank has been able to provide credit to million poor people as of and get repaid. It has been imitated in more than countries, including developed countries.Success in replicating the Grameen Bank has been mixed, although a few successful schemes have attracted attention. The scale and repayment rates of other group-based lending schemes are nearly all smaller than those of the Grameen Bank. The scale of the institutions range from a few hundred thousand members to a few hundred and repayment rates are more typically between and per cent, compared with the per cent reported by the Grameen Bank.Attempts to blindly copy the Grameen Bank have not been very successful. Socio-economic and cultural conditions different from those in South Asia require adaptation and innovation and the most successful replicators are those that have modified the model. Even within a single country, differences between borrowers (for example, with regard to loan size and risk) necessitate a variety of institutions. However, competition between different agencies has led to copying of well-publicized examples rather than innovation to meet local needs.One of the issues is whether borrowers need to be grouped. In some communities, groups readily form but in others, a catalyst is needed. This, in turn, raises several questions. Who should organize and bear the costs of group formation: the lender, the borrower or a third party such as the Government or a donor? What are the criteria to be used for membership in the group? To maximize repayment rates, should the group be more homogeneous (because its social cohesion would be larger) or more heterogeneous (because it is less likely that all borrowers would default at the same time). Should the group admit only women (because it would enhance the empowerment of women by creating womens networks, exchanging information and training)? How is the common interest created that is needed to keep the group together and make it function? How large should the group be (large groups reduce the transaction costs per loan but increase the costs of peer-monitoring within the group)? Should organizers of Grameen-type banks restrict their efforts to communities in which social capital is high and prospective groups already exist?Once established, there are considerable costs involved in operating a group. Group lending involves frequent meetings, often weekly, where peer pressure encourages repayment and information and advice are exchanged, for example, not only on running a small business but also on social matters such as family planning, health care, education and empowerment.In addition, project selection in groups is not straightforward. There is a danger that individual group members might select riskier projects because repayment is a joint responsibility. Group members therefore prefer to assess other members projects, and this entails a social dynamic within the group. If this does not happen, the probability of default rises.Furthermore, many group-lending schemes (including the Grameen Bank) remain dependent on subsidies, despite the high repayment rates. There is some evidence that the high repayment rates are related less to the fact that loans are made to a group than to the fact that default precludes future access to loans. Furthermore, men control a large share of the loans, while women account for the bulk of the borrowers and bear the liability of repayment. There is evidence that violence and aggressive behaviour have increased in households that borrow from the Bank.The alternative to the group-lending model is microcredit for individuals, as in Indonesia. Such institutions also locate geographically close to the borrower and screening of loans is based on personal knowledge (referred to as character-based lending). However, individual lending can be expensive and loans tend to be larger in order to reduce transaction costs per loan. Transaction costs can also be reduced over time as the lender learns more about a specific borrower through subsequent loans.One of the most successful organizations providing individual microloans is the Unit Desa programme of the Bank Rakyat of Indonesia (BRI-UD), a Stateowned bank that operates on a commercial basis. The Government of Indonesia prompted the establishment of the programme in when it forced BRIs loss-making public credit programme to become financially sustainable or face liquidation. The new system of village banks introduced by BRI became profitable within months by promoting deposits, charging interest rates for loans that covered costs, using information from peers and village leaders to screen loans and providing incentives for clients and employees to increase loan repayment. Collateral is desirable but not mandatory. At the end of , BRI-UD had , offices, . million outstanding loans with a total value of $. billion and an average loan size of $. BRI-UD is so successful that profits from the Unit Desa programme are used to cover losses in BRIs lending to large clients.Microlending schemes have served of poor people; however, this does not necessarily mean that poverty has been reduced. Although disentangling the multiple factors that influence poverty is difficult, many practitioners have argued that the effects of credit are positive as long as clients repay loans and reborrow. A large majority of borrowers are continuing members ( per cent in the case of the Grameen Bank as of ), although drop-out rates have been increasing in some programmes and many probably dropped out before they graduated out of poverty. The few studies that have investigated the impact on poverty found a generally positive impact of credit, particularly if the borrower is a woman. However, while there is evidence of gains in household consumption, nutrition, education and contraceptive use, the impact on asset accumulation, productivity and technologyand hence on achieving a sustainable output increaseis less positive, making the long-run impact on poverty less clear.Microfinance institutions: upscaling, borrowing and taking depositsInstitutions that provide microcredit and other financial services have been under increasing pressure from Governments and donors to become financially sustainable. Microfinance non-governmental organizations rely on a mix of government and donor grants, soft loans and commercial loans for their funding and the objective is to reduce the grant element. This involves becoming more like a bank, for example, accepting deposits, raising funds on capital markets, increasing interest rates to levels that cover costs and enlarging operations to benefit from economies of scale. The challenge is to maintain those aspects of microfinance that allow lending to the poor while keeping costs low.Upscaling often involves the transformation of a non-governmental organization into a specialized financial institution or a bank which becomes subject to prudential requirements (such as maintaining a minimum level of reserves) and also incurs higher central overhead on such items as salaries and offices. Two well-known examples are the Grameen Bank, which started as a project and became a chartered bank in by a government ordinance, and Banco Solidario (known as BancoSol) in Bolivia, which transformed itself from a non-governmental organization to a commercial bank, becoming the first private commercial bank to specialize in microfinance and the largest bank by number of clients in Bolivia. BancoSol became a bank to be able to take deposits and raise funds from the capital market, and it has been successful in these activities.A microfinance institution that can borrow on commercial terms can tap an important source of funds for lending to the poor. One well-known network of microcredit programmes (ACCION International) raised more than a quarter of its funds from commercial banks loans in . Such a borrower must be able to pass on the cost of the funds to its borrowers, however, if it is to service the loan without subsidy. Non-governmental organizations can and do charge higher interest rates than banks to cover (at least part of) the higher costs of administering loans. For example, the Small Industries Development Bank of India lent to non-governmental organizations at a per cent interest rate; the nongovernmental organizations lent to self-help groups at a rate up to per cent, and to individuals at per cent. This kind of linkages can become important although very fewif anynon-governmental organizations rely solely on commercial loans.Borrowing on commercial terms, however, is not always a solution. Many non-governmental organizations are not creditworthy, the most important constraint being their management capacity. These problems are reduced when non-governmental organizations transform themselves into more formal institutions. In other cases, these constraints have been alleviated by creating second-tier institutions or using microfinance networks as intermediaries between banks and non-governmental organizations. These institutions also provide technical assistance. Examples are the Peoples Credit and Finance Corporation (PCFC) in the Philippines, which is a public second-tier institution, and Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation in Bangladesh. Second-tier institutions work best when a strong retail capacity is already present, rather than with the expectation that the institutions will create this capacity, although they can play a role in strengthening capacity. Governmental and donor involvement can be an important support to the second-tier institutions through technical assistance in improving the capacity of the institutions, through guarantees or through additional funds. There is, however, a danger that second-tier organizations can be used for purposes of political influence by Governments or donors.One particular form of intermediary institution is an investment fund created either by the Government or by private individuals, to invest in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), either directly or through another organization such as a non-governmental organization. The fund borrows from banks and invests in SMEs and makes a profit on the interest rate spread.One of the most important aspects of the upscaling of microfinance institutions entails the taking of savings deposits. Savings had been deemed the forgotten half of rural finance in the s, and remained largely forgotten in the early s; but there has been an increasing emphasis on the importance of savings for the poor. While not all poor people want credit, mostif not all poor people use and benefit from savings institutions; this is one reason that postal savings institutions continue to exist. The poor have always saved, for example, by accumulating cattle (saving on the hoof) or jewellery. When savings institutions are available, poor people build deposits to accumulate for future investment, to create a stepping stone for access to credit, to protect their cash against theft orand not leastto insure against risk and unforeseen emergencies. Liquidity, safety, unlimited withdrawals, convenience and easy access are critical. There is usually a demand for different kinds of savings accounts by different clients, ranging from the poorest to small entrepreneurs, and research is required to establish the appropriate mix of products to be offered in any particular case.Savingseven small deposits spread over a large number of peopleare a potentially large and stable source of funds for lenders. Moreover, compulsory savings schemes to accompany borrowing enhance the financial discipline of the borrower and increase repayment rates. Compulsory savings require that the borrower save a fixed amount when the loan is received or regularly in addition to making the loan repayments. The amount saved is returned to the borrower if the loan is repaid on time. Savings schemescompulsory or voluntaryare also associated with higher repayment rates on loans because they increase the net worth of borrowers, are an insurance against default and give the borrower a stake in the institution, thereby increasing the pressure to repay.The transition from a credit-dispensing institution to an institution that takes voluntary deposits is a fundamental one. Accepting deposits is a different service than providing credit, and introducing deposit accounts makes an organization more complex: it requires staff training, changes in management, liquidity and risk management, and new information and security systems. Introducing savings accounts could also rapidly increase the size of the institution, as the demand for savings opportunities usually exceeds many times the demand for credit. The reason for this is partly that, as noted above, although even the poorest have the capacity and desire to save, they do not have much capacity to take on debt. For example, BRI-UD held . million savings accounts at the end of , increased from . million in , and amounting to $ billion, compared with less than $ million in . The number of savings accounts was six and a half times the number of loans. This ratio appeared to have increased further during the financial crisis (see box VII.). At BankPreliminary evidence suggests that microfinance institutions weathered the financial crisis in Asia relatively well, with repayment rates generally affected only slightly.a Institutions serving poor traders and vendors suffered less than those serving small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). In Indonesia in particular, the Unit Desa Programme of the Bank Rakyat of Indonesia (BRI-UD) hardly suffered a decline in repayment rates, while commercial and rural banks faced sharp increases in non-performing loans. Also, despite the severity of the crisis in and , BRI-UD enjoyed a significant increase in deposits, probably as a result of a flight to safety after the Government started to guarantee deposits in January and provide liquidity to commercial banks (including BRI-UD) but not to rural banks. Preliminary evidence also suggests that microfinance institutions with links to commercial banks were generally hit harder by the financial crisis and reduced lending drastically. BRI-UD also reduced lending but this was not a result of a lack of funds, as deposits soared. In Malaysia and the Philippines, lending by microfinance institutions with linkages declined, as it was more difficult to obtain funds from commercial banks. In some countries, such as the Philippines, an increase in demand for microloans was observed, perhaps as a result of a decline in formal lending or an increase in demand for informal sector products as a fallout of the crisis.Box VII..Dagang Bali, there are times more savings accounts than loans, although in other countries the ratios are lower and, in some, below .Only a few institutions have the capacity and financial footing to make the transition to a deposit-taking institution and manage a large and rapidly growing loan portfolio. Expansion can mean lower average costs as a result of economies of scale, but it can also mean higher monitoring costs (as borrowers are further away geographically) and more risks (as less information is available on new and more distant borrowers). There has been at least one financial crisis in a microfinance institution (Finansol in Colombia) that resulted partly from rapid growth of lending and inadequate management and accounting systems.Introducing savings into an institution also implies changes on the lending side. Group lending, in particular, becomes less attractive to the lender relative to loans to individuals, especially as the institution will have some information about the savings account-holder. Also, as individual savings balances grow, the institution becomes disposed towards making larger loans to its savers, at least its richer savers. Indeed, in the case of BRI-UD, for example, the average loan amounted to $ in and the average savings account to $.Finally, some have also argued that upscaling and increasing financial sustainability require that the institutions reduce or eliminate non-financial services, as these are often dependent on funds from government or donors.Commercial banks downscaleA number of commercial banks (perhaps a few dozen) have started to provide loans to the poor and small entrepreneurs. This has been the result of political pressures, encouragement and support from donors, social concerns or commercial motivation. Most of these initiatives have imitated aspects of informal institutions or microfinance to reduce risk and transaction costs. Banks often start a microlending programme after witnessing the success of microfinance institutions. While some banks that provide microcredit have experimented with group lending, nearly all focus on individual loans, largely because of the larger transaction costs involved in creating and maintaining the group.Two kinds of banks provide microcredit. First are banks that were once nongovernmental organizations providing microcredit and that have transformed themselves into regulated banks. Examples are the BancoSol and the Caja de Ahorro y Credito Los Andes in Bolivia. Second are multi-service banks that have established an independent microlending unit, or a special microlending window, or that provide small loans as a fully integrated service.Banks that venture into microcredit generally have more problems establishing themselves in the microfinance business than banks that were previously non-governmental organizations. This can often be traced to the fact that microcredit programmes in large banks depend on one individual. Such banks usually adopt fewer microlending features and bank management is less committed. However, the more independent the unit is, the more likely it is to introduce microlending features. The outreach of this kind of bank is still limited (each bank disburses typically a few thousands loans) and the share of microcredit in the total portfolio is usually low.In general, the microlending units are subsidized by other operations of the bank for a few years, but subsequently they are able to break even or become profitable. Technical assistance and subsidized external funds are crucial during the first few years and donor funds and rediscount lines from Governments also often help bridge the start-up costs.In South Africa, a case in point, the political situation after the end of apartheid compelled commercial banks to make an effort to provide financial services to the rural and urban poor and alleviate some of the socio-economic inequalities that had resulted from past discrimination. Nedcor, Standard Bank and Amalgamated Banks of South Africa (ABSA) have created divisions to serve poor employed blacks, while First National Bank developed a linkage scheme with stokvels (South African ROSCAs) although this was shelved after five years owing to low demand for loans. These initiatives are quite young, but there are some early results: Standard Bank introduced a pilot project for loans between , and , rand (R) in black townships, but the project failed because of the high costs and unwillingness to charge high interest rates owing to the negative perceptions that this would create. ABSAs Nubank also provides loans this size, but it charges full-cost interest rates and was breaking even after two years in operation. These four banks also operate small business units, but do not lend below R , and therefore exclude many potential clients.While the South African situation is unique, commercial bank initiatives elsewhere have also been prompted by financial sector liberalization reforms that led to more competition. Local banks, in particular, have looked to new market niches to cope with increased competition which often comes from new foreign entrants who pay less attention to small borrowers (see chap. V).A broad array of financial institutions have emerged to service the poor over the last few decades. But are they sufficient? Do the poor now have adequate access to financial services? What has been the effect of financial liberalization on the interaction between the informal and formal markets? Is there still a role for government?The continuing role of informal financeIt has often been argued that the informal sector is partly or entirely a result of financial repression, a term used by economists to depict the effects on the financial sector of government controls on interest rates and other interventions. The idea is that the policy interventions distort prices and incentives in the financial sector, reduce the level of financial activity relative to a free market situation and drive some activity into the informal sector. The obverse is that the informal sector should be smaller if financial repression is reduced. Financial liberalization should lead to lower interest rate spreads, greater access to formal finance and increased flows between the formal and informal sectors. Yet, the evidence from a number of cases does not support this argument. For example, the informal sector expanded significantly in four African countries, along with the real economy, while the ratios of formal deposits and credit to gross domestic product (GDP) changed little or fell after financial liberalization. Moreover, interest rate spreads remained high and banks continued to be biased towards large firms.This result is not hard to understand in the light of the preceding discussion of how informal finance copes with creditors information problems and the high cost of small transactions. Financial liberalization will not change these facts and therefore the informal financial sector will remain, although it might become smaller.It is useful to make a distinction between the autonomous part and the reactive part of the informal financial sector. The autonomous part develops as a result of specific characteristics of the local economy, as it serves segments of the population that are excluded from the formal sector. The reactive part is a result of the policy controls imposed on the formal financial sector. The reactive part might decline as the formal sector is liberalized, but the autonomous part might not.The interface between the formal and informal financial sectors comprises a group of borrowers who could tap either source and a group of informal lenders who could draw on resources from the formal sector. Otherwise, the credits in each sector travel in circuits that remain largely within each sector. In particular, banks will not service those segments of the population that are too risky and too costly. Moreover, if the interface between the sectors is very small, improving overall credit conditions in the formal sector may not improve conditions at all for the people who are still dependent on the informal sector. In other words, policy makers should not assume that reform of the formal financial sector by itself would meet the needs of people in the informal sector. Trickle down will reach only some of them.Lending to the poor and profitabilityThe increasing emphasis in recent years on improving the financial sustainability of microfinance institutions is partly a result of declining aid flows and the realization that even existing aid flows will not be sufficient to attain the goals of the Microcredit Summit of February to provide microloans to million poor people by the year . It has been argued that financial sustainability is compatible with outreach to the poor and contributes to poverty alleviation, although this is largely based on a few high-profile cases.Making microfinance institutions sustainable is crucial, as nobody is served well by institutions that fail. Institutions are more likely to fail once they are perceived as being temporary, as repayment rates will consequently decline. Dependence on outside contributions increases uncertainty, as the continuation of these contributions is outside the direct control of the institutions. Moreover, it has been argued (based on the experience with rural credit programmes of the s and s) that grants and subsidies to microfinance institutions in themselves tend to induce lower repayment rates, as they are regarded as charity.Whether or not aimed at making a profit, microfinance institutions can improve their financial performance. One of the most important challenges of lending to the poor is to reduce costs to levels that are as low as possible within the goals set by the institutions. Certain design features can help, including strengthening the incentive to repay by denying future loans in case of default and by increasing the size of successive loans, increasing the frequency of repayments, giving loan officers financial or other incentives to increase repayment rates and offering savings and insurance facilities.Most experts agree that microfinance institutions can become financially self-sustaining but may take as long as years to become so. However, the vast majority of the many thousands that exist will not become self-sustaining. Most significantly, in trying to become profitable, there is a risk that these institutions may lose their focus on the poor. For example, there would be strong incentives to raise interest rates or reduce average loan costs by increasing average loan size. Both courses of action are likely to discourage borrowing by the poor. Indeed, clients that are less poor are better at repaying loans.A recent study argues that financially sustainable microfinance institutions have a greater impact on the income of borrowers than subsidized institutions because of the selection bias against the poorest. Besides offering higher interest rates, the successful institutions require more frequent loan instalments and operate savings schemes, which reduce default rates and attract borrowers with financial discipline. According to the same study, in out of cases borrowers with incomes below the poverty line suffered a decline in income after they had received a loan. The poorer the borrower, the smaller the percentage increase in income from the loan.More generally, most microcredit programmes already have a bias against the poorest, even if they aim at reaching them. The poorest people generally do not seek credit because it is too risky to assume a debt burden that they cannot afford, and they do not have the skills (such as accounting, marketing and management skills) and assets (such as land and livestock) to make productive use of credit. Moreover, when people form themselves into groups for loans, the groups exclude the poorest, as they are considered the worst credit risks. For out of programmes, borrowers had higher income levels than a control group of non-borrowers and only the borrowers of two programmes in Bangladesh had average incomes below the poverty line. Even the Grameen Bank has mostly served the group just below the poverty line.While the poorest will make relatively little use of credit, they can use other financial services and ancillary services that microfinance institutions sometimes make available to their clients, in particular training to enhance the effect of loans. For example, the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) requires borrowers to go through three to six months of rigorous training. The Start-Up Fund in South Africa goes even further and uses training as the only selection mechanism and monitoring device. It requires prior participation in a small business training programme (a township Master of Business Administration (MBA)), for which a loan applicant has to pay, and does not screen applicants otherwise; nor does it monitor the business operation or enforce default. On the other hand, the Grameen Bank does not regard raising the skills of borrowers as essential and only trains borrowers on how to bank with Grameen (although it does provide information on social issues during its training).Non-financial services, such as literacy classes and training, can greatly enhance the impact of loans to the poor, but they also add costs to the operation of the organization and much of the costs cannot be recovered through revenues from lending. As only the richer clients can be charged for non-financial services, additional funding needs to be ensured so that these services can be made available to all clients. To increase transparency and improve accountability, these funds need to be separated from lending operations.In addition, as noted above, the financial services for the poorest are different from the financial services for the less poor. The poorest have a relatively high demand for saving facilities and for loans for special occasions and emergencies. Some microfinance institutions have group emergency funds and insurance schemes that extend loans in case of injuries and death or illness of a family member. However, non-governmental organizations are often not allowed to take deposits, and microfinance institutions that establish savings accounts for the public are often subject to regulation and upscaling, thereby becoming less attuned to the needs of the poorest. In this regard, there appears to be an institutional gap that is in danger of increasing.The role of government and the international communityGovernments, donors (including international non-governmental organizations) and multilateral institutions, including several united_nations organizations, have often been crucial in acting as a catalyst for private initiatives in microfinance. They cover set-up costs, finance training of borrowers and provide technical assistance during an initial period. Governments also provide incentives and support to encourage microlending by commercial banks. Even the most successful institutions, such as the Grameen Bank, BancoSol and BRI-UD, have received considerable external assistance from donors or the government, particularly in the early phases. Governments, non-governmental organizations and the international community will continue to play a crucial role, not least in ensuring that the poorest have access to financial services (and training).Some have argued that the most important constraint on expanding microfinance is local capacity to implement programmes. The task for Governments and the international community is to identify and select those institutions that have this capacity and to then make a long-term commitment to them, as it takes as many as years and the surviving of at least one shock (economic, weather-related or political) before an institution proves itself to be financially sustainable.Another area where Governments and the international community can play an important role encompasses the issue of governance and accountability. As funders, they have the leverage to require adequate data on costs, financial performance and impact. Knowing why a programme does not perform according to expectations or stated objectives is important and provides lessons about the factors that determine success. Currently, there is increasing emphasis put on financial sustainability but little on impact. This is partly related to the costs and difficulties in measuring impact, but the international community could focus more attention on assisting in developing methodologies for cost-effective impact assessment.Mostif not allexperts agree that microfinance institutions need to be regulated or supervised only when they take voluntary deposits from the general public and these deposits are explicitly or implicitly insured by the government. Regulation needs to be specifically designed for semi-formal institutions in order that they may retain their flexibility and simple procedures and documentation. Moreover, there are a range of microfinance institutions, with different risk profiles, degrees of deposit taking and linkages to formal institutions. This requires a multi-tier regulatory framework with thresholds on, for example, deposits and commercial borrowing.The types and role of the various financial institutions that serve the poor differ substantially from country to country, with different degrees of public and private involvement. Some countries rely more on non-governmental organizations, others rely more on specialized banks, still others on commercial banks and some have an important infrastructure of public agricultural banks which serve the poor in rural areas. In Indonesia and Thailand, for example, non-governmental organizations are relatively unimportant and public programmes dominate (although the financial crisis in Indonesia seems to have triggered an interest by the Government in non-governmental organizations). In the Philippines and many African countries, on the other hand, non-governmental organizations play a larger role. There is also a difference in emphasis, often related to cultural differences, between group lending and individual lending. For example, group lending dominates in Bangladesh and individual lending in Indonesia. Informal financial institutions such as ROSCAs are relatively important in several African countries, while credit unions dominate in Ecuador. Moreover, the relative importance of different institutions can change over time. In Bangladesh, for example, informal loans accounted for per cent of rural credit in but only for per cent in /, while microcredit (from non-governmental organizations, the Grameen Bank and cooperatives) increased its share of rural credit from to per cent over that period.Microfinance institutions are an important innovation which has already made a substantial contribution in extending credit to population groups that are not served by formal institutions. They are still evolving, howeversharpening their operational goals and procedures and learning how best to target financial services to the poor and women (see box VII.). Microfinance institutions are increasingly endeavouring to boost their own financial sustainability and to operate under market discipline, thereby becoming more formal.One of the most important challenges of microfinance is to reduce operating costs while maintaining the focus on the poor, inter alia, by keeping the loan size of a first-time borrower small. Pressures to raise the financial sustainability of microfinance institutions might challenge their commitment to serve the poorest. It is important that the poorest receive the financial services they needmost of all savings facilities and emergency loans. Providing these services, as well as training, is a public responsibility, but it is one that can be shared with the private sector. Microfinance institutions can reduce the degree of subsidy needed to achieve their conflicting objectives, but most will need to continue to receive a measure of subsidy if they are to retain their unique character and mission: only a small percentage of them will become financially self-sustaining. This should not be seen as a problem: while assuring efficient use of funds, support for the remainder can constitute an appropriate use of public moneys.Microfinance institutions are not, however, the magic bullet that will solve all the problems of poverty. Credit is an important but not the only constraint on raising the incomes of the poor. Other constraints that keep the productivity of labour, hence incomes, low include a lack of human capital, material assets and access to inputs. The poorest people, in particular, have a low demand for credit because they have relatively low capacity to make profitable use of it and their capacity to service debt is virtually nil. Nevertheless, the poorest still need financial services and an important aspect of development policy should be to ensure that they receive them, not only for their own benefit but also for the benefit that their savings, properly used, can bring to the economy in general.Many financial institutions that focus on providing small loans have a high proportion of loans that go to women, often accounting for more than per cent of a portfolio. Many of these institutions have undertaken the targeting of women as an instrument to both empower women and alleviate poverty; that is to say it has been argued that channelling credit to women is more likely than lending to men to improve nutrition, health and educational attainment (which argument was confirmed recently by a study of microcredit programmes in Bangladesha). Moreover, the push to financial sustainability of microfinance institutions has also led to a push for lending to women because their repayment rates have proved to be higher.However, targeting women does not lead in itself to the empowerment of women.b In three programmes in Bangladesh, for example, men at least partially control per cent of the loans given to women. This percentage declined significantly for women who were widowed, separated or divorced and for activities that were dominated by women such as those involving poultry, sericulture and fish.c These facts, combined with evidence that female-headed households are generally poorer and more vulnerable, suggest an argument for targeting female-headed households rather than women.d All in all, microcredit can play an important role in the empowerment of women but the success depends crucially on the incorporation of an empowerment strategy within microcredit programmes and also on wider economic, social and political policies.Box VII..In the knowledge-based global economy, a country that relied on a development model of importing known and well-tested technologies from foreign sources, including from foreign firms, would, in effect, be consigning itself to permanently following the leaders. It would not obtain the substantial benefits that come from introducing a new product and later, when it was on the point of replacing this with a higher-technology product, licensing its production to lower-wage producers. Its workforce might learn by doing, but it would always be a few steps behind the leaders in the industry: by the time that the imported technology had been learned, it would be out of date. This will be the experience of the developing and transition economies, even the fast-growing ones, unless they, too, develop the capacity to participate in and contribute to the knowledgebased global economy. The question is how and where they develop this capacity. The topics to be discussed in the present chapter are currently pertinent to only some countries and with respect to only certain activities, but a vibrant and expanding venture capital industry can be expected to play a growing role in economic development in the twenty-first century.Much of the growth in employment in the major industrialized countries has come not from the expansion of well-established companies but from the creation and growth of small and medium-sized enterprises. These small companies, many of which are set up with the aid of venture capital, often have a heavy export focus and can generate much greater revenues from each dollar spent on research and development than can larger companies. Had it not been for the possibility of starting up a small company to exploit a new idea, it is possible that many ideas of potential benefit to humanity would never have been generated. The concentration of many high-technology start-up companies in the medical technology field is a dramatic case in point.The surge of technological advance and innovative ideas gave rise to, and was itself encouraged by, the modern venture capital industry. Venture capital, the financing of entrepreneurs, has existed for a long time. Wealthy private individuals, family members and sometimes even sovereigns of States (as in the case of the Spanish monarchs backing the project of the Genovese sailor Christopher Columbus) have been prepared to put up their own money to back a riskybut potentially very profitableventure proposed by an entrepreneur.Often such ventures concerned the exploration and development of remote mineral deposits which, it was thought, scientific advances had made viable. For instance, through the work of the London-based Copper Ventures syndicate, the Zambian copper mining industry had been established in the s, even though one of the premises on which the venture was basedthat a new treatment process would render the known oxide copper deposits economic turned out to be erroneous.Traditional forms for obtaining financebank loans, issuing bonds or stock market flotationswere often unavailable for the high-risk activity of developing new products from the results of research on the frontiers of knowledge. The essentially conservative nature of the banking industry, in which a depositors money is entrusted to a financial institution which is obligated not to take undue risks with it, precluded its major involvement in such high-risk ventures. However, some banks have invested the funds of their wealthiest clients in ventures. Similarly, only a well-established company could expect to meet the requirements for listing on a stock exchange.While entrepreneurs still obtain funds in many ad hoc ways, the venture capital industry is a formal source of the financing needed to develop an idea into an enterprise that can be listed on a stock market or merged with or acquired by an existing company with a direct interest in the product. It is a rapidly expanding industry: the total stock of venture capital funds in the only two developing and transition regions for which data are availableAsia and Central and East Europerose from $ million in to over $ billion in . Thus, much of the analysis in this chapter, especially concerning the developing and transition economies, will of necessity be anecdotal and descriptive, relying on reports from the financial and business press, rather than the systematic analysis that could come only with the accumulation of experiences and a large and publicly accessible database covering many countries.It is the purpose of venture capitalists not to earn a steady income from holding stocks or bonds issued by a company that they invest in, but rather to realize a capital gain by selling their interest when the company is floated or when it is acquired by merger or acquisition. The ideal is that the capital gain should be several times the investment in the particular venture in order to compensate the venture capitalist for the many ventures that resulted in a complete loss and never reached the flotation stage. One early survey of the earnings of companies in the portfolio of venture capital companies showed that per cent had been either total or partial losses, per cent had been living dead (making an inadequate return to justify the effort devoted to them), per cent had made a return of to times the money invested in them, per cent had made a return of to times the investment and per cent had made a return greater than times the investment. However, it is difficult to say that the ideas behind the group of companies that were total losses, about per cent of the total, are complete failures, as they might have been used successfully by other companies.The modern venture capital industry emerged to finance high-technology companies in the most technologically advanced of the developed countries, the united_states of America. However, the industry is also of relevance to any country that wishes to establish a thriving small and medium-sized business sector. This is particularly relevant to the provision of employment opportuniVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? ties, as much of the growth of employment in many countries has come from this sector.The united_states of America modelThe modern venture capital industry arose in the united_states in the late s with the launching of American Research and Development, which made the initial investment into Digital Equipment Corporation. The company was formed by the President of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a Harvard Business School professor and local business leaders to develop products from technologies developed during the Second World War. From the s to the s, the industry was funded largely by insurance companies.In early , the united_states Department of Labor clarified the prudent man rule in the Employment Retirement Income Security Act. It ruled that portfolio diversification was a consideration in determining the prudence of an individual investment. Thenceforth, pension funds considered that investing a small amount of their assets in the venture capital industry did not breach the prudent man rule, thus opening a large source of funding.The united_states venture capital industry then started its rapid expansion: capital commitments to independent private funds rose from $. billion in to $. billion in . In , the amount of capital invested by venture capital funds was $ billion, a per cent increase from . Of this, $. billion went to computer software and service companies, $. billion to communications, $. billion to medical and health-related companies and $. billion to biotechnology companies. The State of California received $. billion and Massachusetts $. billion. Stanford University, the California Institute of Technology, the University of California at San Diego and the University of California at Berkeley were prominent among the academic institutions driving the venture capital industry in California.Understanding this growth of venture capital as a mode of financing requires seeing it embedded in a process by which new ideas are brought to commercial fruition. The united_states met all the requirements for a healthy venture capital industry and the industry has made a substantial contribution to united_states innovative activity. The first requirement was the generation of ideas that could be marketable. The universities and research institutes of the united_states, backed by considerable government funding for military research during the cold war, generated an abundance of ideas that could be turned to civilian uses. However, the ethos of military research, secrecy, is incompatible with the openness to new ideas and the vigorous exchange of ideas within the research community that a vibrant high-technology civilian economy requires. On the other hand, the decline in military research and development from the peak of the s released a large number of scientists who were able to turn their energies to civilian uses. The venture capital industry emerged to turn their ideas and creativity into products. In particular, two of the centres of military research, which were in California and Massachusetts, became the backbone of the civilian venture capital industry.At the same time, restrictions on the commercial exploitation of the results of academic research were removed, breaking the ivory tower mentality that had imposed a strict separation between commercial and academic life. The fact that university personnel or recipients of government research funds were no longer prevented from obtaining commercial benefit from the results of their research also boosted the development of the venture capital industry. In , the united_states Government adopted the Bayh-Dole Act, which explicitly allowed recipients of government grants to retain title to inventions made using government funds. The concentration of research in Massachusetts and California meant that there was already a network of scientists who knew each other and who could, if necessary, cooperate to turn their ideas into commercial products. California law, in particular, regarded post-employment covenants not to compete as unenforceable, and it is thought that this further contributed to the mobility of staff.Another factor assisting the generation of new ideas in the united_states was its openness to foreign talent. It was estimated that one in four people with a science degree living in the united_states in was born outside the country. The united_states, then, had the critical mass of research talent that gave a potential investor the confidence that any technical difficulties experienced in bringing the development of a research idea to the production stage could be resolved, if not by the originator of the idea, then at least by another member of the research community.The second advantage of the united_states was its pool of managerial talent, able to guide an enterprise from the idea stage to the flotation or acquisition or merger stage. Research scientists themselves would probably not have been able to negotiate all the pitfalls involved in turning an idea into a marketable proposition. In many cases, a business angel was essential for the commercial realization of a new discovery. These business angels were themselves often scientists, cognizant of the latest scientific advances, and thus able to grasp the significance of the new advances being made.A third advantage enjoyed by the united_states was the presence of investors who not only had the funds available for investment but were prepared to risk their own money, often as members of a partnership, in the hope of realizing substantial gains from such risk-taking. Their willingness to risk their funds also required an assurance that they would be able to enjoy the benefits of their capital gainsthat, for instance, tax laws would be sympathetic to sudden and large capital gains. The united_states lowered the capital gains tax for long-term investments. Moreover, as noted above, it had facilitated the growth of the venture capital industry by allowing pension funds to invest a small percentage of their assets in venture funds. In addition, a portion of the endowments of universities and foundations could be invested in the venture capital industry.A final set of financial backers of the venture capital industry were large corporations with an interest in the technology on which the venture capital companies were concentrating. Rather than seek to undertake the work inhouse, using their own scientists and facilities, it was frequently more advantageous for large companies to help fund the work of other researchers who were pursuing promising ideas. They would hope to purchase outright the companies that were spun off if they developed a technology that could be incorporated in their products or contribute to their corporate strategy. Again, such corporations would seek to invest in a known business environment where they could expect to be able to enjoy many of the benefits coming from the results of the research and development effort.VENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? The fourth advantage was the presence of large, highly liquid and wellregulated stock exchanges. These exchanges provided the venture capitalists with confidence that they would be able to float their companies once they were thought to be viable. Because of stringent listing and disclosure requirements, those buying shares in the initial public offering (IPO) were assured that they were purchasing stock in what might be considered a risky, but not a fraudulent enterprise.While the New York Stock Exchange is the most widely known stock market, the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations System (Nasdaq), which is an electronic exchange concentrating in smaller companies, was the choice of start-up companies. Over per cent of the companies quoted on Nasdaq were financed with venture capital. Nasdaq has also been the favoured exchange for many non-united_states firms wishing to raise capital. Over Israeli firms have been floated on Nasdaq. In August , the first IPO by a Singapore company on Nasdaq took place. In March , the first Indian company, a software company, was listed on Nasdaq. The Indian National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM) expected a further Indian companies to be listed on foreign exchanges in the next two years.Nasdaq is the largest electronic screen-based market in the world, with the ability to handle trading volume in excess of billion shares a day. Over , companies are listed on Nasdaq. At the end of , its capitalization was $. trillion.The National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) is the self-regulatory organization responsible for Nasdaq, in accordance with the Maloney Act of June whose stated aim was to effectuate a system of regulation...in which the members of the industry will themselves exercise as large a measure of authority as their natural genius will permit. This principle of self-regulation served the securities industry well. Market innovation helped promote the listing of small and medium-sized companies, especially in the high-technology industry, while protecting the interests of the individual investor. Technology itself helped Nasdaq expand, as it employed the industrys most sophisticated surveillance systems and regulatory specialists to protect investors and provide a fair and competitive trading environment.A Nasdaq listing helps a company attract talented people to whom it can offer stock options as part of their own compensation package. These are agreements to sell shares in the firm to the employee at a pre-set price within a pre-set period. If the company is successful, this can be a very attractive supplement to the salary. Stock options have the further benefit of not involving the firm in direct cash payments in its formative years. Furthermore, a large exchange such as Nasdaq where many experts trade has the ability to price a new issue more fairly than a young exchange which would tend to undervalue an issue.A fifth advantage unique to the united_states is the very large size of its domestic market. It is a matter not just of high incomes and large population, but also of the uniform laws and standards confronting the manufacturer of a particular product. In contrast, even in free trade areas and economic unions, such as the European Union (EU), differences between national safety and quality codes can delay the sale of a product among the different nations in the grouping.One question arises immediately from this review, namely, Why has the united_states been the main venue of the venture capital industry? Should other countries try to copy the united_states model (or some other, possibly innovative model) and if they should, what steps might national Governments and the international community take to assist them? To address these questions, examples will be given from the different experiences of a variety of countries that sought to promote venture capital.Innovation-generation: not necessarily high techAs described above, the venture capital industry arose in the united_states to fill an unmet need for capital to finance the transition from an idea to a functioning business enterprise. In this case, the ideas were primarily the products of research. There are other ideas that venture capital could be asked to exploit which are linked not so much to technological innovations, as to creating a new market for particular goods and services. The most recent examples would encompass the numerous enterprises that were established in the transition economies after the start of transition to supply the pent-up demand for goods and services that had been unavailable or illegal under the previous regime. Computer services, fast-food restaurants, discotheques, cellular phones, house repair and renovation, fashion magazines and speedy photographic processing are but a few of the numerous goods or services that could be supplied once central planning ended. Similarly, in developing and even developed countries, there are many needs that could conceivably be exploited profitably.These examples differ from the high-technology products that emanate from the venture capital industry in the united_states in that the risk involved in their exploitation is not so much a technical riskconcerning whether the product the entrepreneur wishes to produce will function so as to make consumers wish to purchase itas a market risk. Is there a market for the product at the particular price at which it can be supplied?The steps that have to be taken to obtain the finance to start up these new and risky ventures are similar to those that have to be taken in the case of a new high-technology product. The research into whether the product or service can be supplied at a profit by the entrepreneur still has to be undertaken, and the question whether the potential market is large enough has to be investigated. Management is also needed to bring the idea successfully to the stage where a company can be floated.Combating brain drainWhat has to be exploited in a new venture is usually not something geographically fixed, like an oil well or a mine. Being essentially an idea, it is eminently transportable. There is thus an alternative to exploiting the idea in the country of its generationit can be taken to the huge market of the united_states. Access to the united_states is especially easy, as so many in the global scientific community have been educated there and already have the contacts that can help them obtain the required finance and management assistance. Therefore, if a country with a large scientific community wants to discourageVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? brain drain, exploit to the full its domestic scientific skills and thereby expand its domestic exports and employment, it might well strive to develop its own venture capital industry.For instance, in Taiwan Province of China, the Hsinchu Science Park was set up in with the explicit aim of encouraging Taiwanese technologists to return from the united_states. The entrepreneurs were offered various tax breaks, and promised a considerable degree of independence. By , the park housed a network of small companies employing , people.Another reason for a country to seek to develop a vibrant venture capital industry is that there is a feedback loop: it can help to enhance and modernize the countrys research capability. The problems that universities have faced globally in obtaining government finance have made them more receptive to partnerships with private industry to exploit more fully the skills of their staff and their research facilities. The universities obtain funds directly to enable them to upgrade their facilities, thereby producing higher-quality research and attracting and retaining better staff. Moreover, the extra incomes that the staff obtain can persuade them not to move to higher-paying positions in other countries. Preventing this brain drain has been a major factor behind the commercial exploitation of the talents of the staff of even the most prestigious universities in the developed countries. For instance, the founder of Oxford Analytica was a North American graduate of the University of Oxford, who returned to Oxford as a lecturer and saw that providing an extra income to his colleagues for their analyses would help prevent their exodus. He saw himself as providing brains without the drain.Nurturing ideas that could be marketableAs described above, one of the essentials for a vibrant venture capital sector is the continuous generation of marketable ideas. A venture capital fund operates by choosing a few among a large number of propositions. In order to close five deals a year, a venture capital fund would need something in the order of at least serious new inquiries.The generation of new technology ideas was greatly assisted in the united_states by many decades of heavy government sponsorship of research and development for military purposesand by the downsizing of the military which released the pool of scientists concerned. Another country having a substantial research base which it was able to release for its own venture capital industry is Israel. With the beginning of the Middle East peace process, it, too, reduced the scale of its military research.Israel, moreover, also paid considerable attention to civilian research and development. In , these expenditures amounted to . per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), a slightly higher percentage than that of the united_states (.) and of the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland (.). Israel traditionally devoted considerable expenditures to education and thus had a highly educated population at the beginning of the s. In , it was spending . per cent of its gross national product (GNP) on education, a proportion higher than the average for the developed countries (. per cent)and for the developing countries (. per cent), and had highly sophisticated scientific and engineering institutions such as the Weizmann Institute and the Technion University. It also was well acquainted with the newest technology in , it had . Internet users for every , people, compared with per , in the united_states, and per , in the industrialized countries as a whole. In addition, in what was a fortuitous positive development, about , people primarily from the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) and educated in that country according to very high standards came to Israela country with a population of about . million in in the early s. A large percentage of these Russian-speaking immigrants were particularly suited to high-technology industries.Stimulated, in particular, by the influx of people with high technological expertise but little knowledge of modern commercial methods, the Israeli Government introduced a special programme of technological incubators. The programme, which was first implemented in , provides prospective entrepreneurs with physical premises, financial resources, tools, professional guidance and administrative assistance. The criteria for proposed projects were that they be based on an innovative technological idea that aimed to develop a product with export potential. A project would stay in the incubator for approximately two years, at the end of which period the entrepreneur should have carried his or her idea to the stage of explicit product definition and proved technological and marketing feasibility. The State aimed to be reimbursed up to the sum of its grant through royalties on sales. The grant was limited to $, each year, and could be a maximum of per cent of the approved budget.The project has been highly successful, with per cent of the companies that left the incubator stage having become self-sustaining, and the rest having been discontinued. However, even where projects failed, the people involved had little trouble finding new work in their fields. Even though half the members of the project teams at the incubator had to be recent immigrants, the programme was not seen as a job-creation enterpriseit stressed entrepreneurship only. The States involvement was not open-ended but limited in that the enterprise had to be able to stand on its own feet and attract domestic or foreign capital after the two-year period.A similar scheme was introduced in France, with the Ministry of National Education, Research and Technology creating biotechnology incubators which could offer accommodation for two years to start-up companies. The French Government also took steps to promote the commercialization of research ideas by proposing legislation to allow government scientists to participate financially in start-ups without giving up their jobs. The legislation would also encourage institutes to establish technology transfer units. Similarly, the Republic of Korea abolished a rule that university researchers could not set up their own companies while remaining on the faculty.One initiative by the German Government to promote the commercialization of research was the BioRegio competition of , in which the Science Ministry offered government funding to the regions that best promoted biotechnology. Three regionsMunich, Cologne-Dusseldorf and Rhine/Neckar won, but other regions were encouraged to enter into action.In addition, there is considerable scope for cooperation in research and development between companies of different countries. The advantages of suchVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? cooperation for both parties are the sharing of costs and reduction of risks. Partnerships can facilitate entry into new markets, access to know-how and technologies that would not be otherwise available to each of the participants, heightened awareness of the market opportunities in the partner countries and the possibility of joint commercialization in a third country where one of the partners has particular advantages.Cooperation in research and development also can take place at the governmental level. For example, the Binational Industrial Research And Development (BIRD) Foundation was established by the united_states and Israeli Governments in to promote private sector cooperation. It proved commercially successful: its initial endowment was $ million and as of it supported projects which generated over $ billion in direct and indirect sales. Recently, Israel, Jordan and the united_states formed the Trilateral Industrial Development (TRIDE) to promote trinational cooperation among their private firms. Each participant is to provide $ million. TRIDE will support per cent of the development and pre-marketing expenses for a new product and the balance will come from the participating companies. As of , two projects had been approved: one for the development of Arabic scanner software and document archiving products, and the other for Technological Education for Speakers of Arabic (TESA). In December , Israel and Singapore founded the Singapore-Israel Industrial Research and Development Fund. As described below, Singapore is actively supporting its venture capital industry.Building a pool of entrepreneurial talentThe managerial services that a successful venture capital industry requires are twofoldfirst, the talent to manage the venture capital fund itself and to invest the funds wisely, taking into account the high risks involved; and second, the managerial talents to bring the idea to fruition as a successful business proposition. The venture capitalists themselves help to choose the management of the venture in which they are investing.In the united_states, there is a pool of financial and entrepreneurial talent, not just prepared to take risks but also able to assess the relative riskiness of different business propositions. The venture capitalists themselves often need a scientific background so as to have some understanding of the ideas being developed by research scientists. This managerial talent is itself able to tap into and obtain the talent necessary to bring a business to the flotation stage.These talents are the products of a vibrant market economy but are also, to some extent, rooted in business ethos and practices. In some countries, the culture of taking risks is more accepted and failure to succeed in a business is not viewed with any moral disapprobation. Indeed, in the united_states, failures in several endeavours are considered part of a learning process for the successful venture capitalist. In a culture that frowns upon risk-taking and discourages mobility, and where failure results in social disgrace, it is difficult for a venture capital industry to flourish. Similarly, the fact that the venture capital industry also requires a firm to share its project ideas and business plans with outsiders and to cede some ownership and control can again result in a clash with local cultural norms.The tax and legal systems can help foster the venture capital industry and reduce if not overcome some of the traditional cultural impediments to entrepreneurship. The legal system can help by making it easier to start up again after a business failure (as in the united_states with the bankruptcy provisions under Title of the united_states Code). A legal system in which bankruptcy incurred criminal penalties, as in some European countries in the previous century, would be a severe hindrance to entrepreneurship. The taxation system can also help by granting favourable treatment to capital gains that are realized when a company is floated and to the substantial earnings, including those from exercising stock options, that managers of start-up companies may expect.Many developing and transition economies lack a pool of entrepreneurs and potential venture capitalists. The UNCTAD secretariat estimated that the supply of potential venture capital managers in developing countries is virtually non-existent and that a good venture capitalist will learn through experience, but this takes time and the poor performance of inexperienced managers will impact on the initial results of a venture capital institution.Developing and transition economies are taking steps to encourage entrepreneurship, especially in high-technology industry, for example, by changes in the tax code. For example, in the March budget in India, the Employee Stock Option Scheme was put on a par with international norms, as the Government realized that stock options could attract high-quality professionals. The Government proposed to charge a concessional tax rate of per cent on dividends received from stock options linked to Global Depositary Receipts (GDRs)a mechanism for issuing equity shares internationally (see chap. VI)of resident Indian companies, as long as the GDR was that of an information technology software and services company. This legislation was expected to further motivate companies to issue GDRs or American Depositary Receipts (ADRs)a similar vehicle for issuing shares on the united_states marketand provide dollar stock options to their employees. Moreover, dividends or long-term capital gains of a venture capital fund or a venture capital company arising from investments in equity shares in a venture capital undertaking would not be included in computing taxable income. Indian companies could also issue sweat equity sharesshares issued at a discount or for a consideration other than cash in exchange for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of intellectual property.In India, NASSCOM acts as a consultative body in assisting central and State Governments in making policies friendly to the information technology industry and, as illustrated above, it has achieved considerable successes in having its recommendations enacted. In Singapore, a private sector committee is advising the government on changes in regulations to help technological entrepreneurs. It pointed out that too many rules inhibited entrepreneurs. The Government recognized that the country would have to accept failure as part of the learning curve towards success and said that it would change the laws, including bankruptcy laws, and regulations, if necessary, to foster the entrepreneurial spirit.VENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? Government financial support for the venture capital industryBy its very nature, venture capital is concerned with high risks which should be incurred only by those who have the expertise to see a venture through to fruition. Thus the provision of funds cannot really be separated from an understanding of the risks involved and therefore an intimate knowledge of the industry involved. It is not an industry that lends itself, then, to government control and direction, but rather to indirect government backing and oversight.There are examples of government success in investing to bolster the venture capital industry, albeit when the foundations for success were already present. In the case of Israel, for example, there was a pool of talented people who, it was felt, would develop their ideas outside the country, particularly in the united_states, if they did not have access to funding domestically. Thus, the Government founded the Yozma Venture Capital Fund in June which began operations in January with $ million in capital. Its aim was to attract international investors to Israel and promote the growth of high-technology export-oriented industries. The Yozma Fund also invested directly in companies, concentrating on early stage start-ups.Ten Yozma-initiated venture capital funds were created with experienced venture capital partners outside Israel who themselves raised another $ million. Foreign investors were expected to bring not just capital but also the expertise needed to set up a viable domestic venture capital industry. The foreign participants included some major corporations with a global presence who could help Israel reach international markets. They would also help develop a cadre of Israeli venture capital professionals.The Yozma Fund was privatized at a considerable profit for the Government after it had achieved its objective of establishing a thriving domestic venture capital industry. In , private technology venture funds raised $ million, and Yozma funds $ million, while in private funds raised $ million and Yozma funds $ million.Other Governments are seeking to invest in local venture capital funds. The Indian Governments State-owned funds are to make $ million available for venture capital for the software industry. Like Israel, India has considerable scientific talentthe second largest pool of English-speaking scientific professionals in the world, and , educational institutions and polytechnics which train more than , computer software professionals on an annual basis, in addition to the graduates of the Indian Institutes of Technology.Even before a venture capital fund becomes involved in a project, there is need for capital to develop the idea up to the stage where it can attract the interest of a fund. In the example of Israel given above, the incubator scheme provided much of the finance and also technical guidance. In the Republic of Korea, a promising development is the emergence of angel clubs, the first of which was founded in . Angels are wealthy individuals who pool their own money to invest in a start-up venture in its infancy. The idea is to help the young company stand financially and to offer informal management guidance. In the Republic of Korea, angels are typically retired or seasoned business executives, with a wide network of contacts.Enter the venture capital fundThe venture capital fund will wish to see its investment achieve a high rate of return. This means that it will be able to add value to the original idea or prototype by the provision not only of finance but of all the other necessary components of a successful development package leading to a functioning companyresearch and technical expertise to turn the prototype into a marketable product, market research and marketing expertise.Once the stage at which the venture capital fund can be approached has been reached, all parties should realize that financing will be forthcoming only on certain conditions. In exchange for providing the finance and management skills, the venture capital fund will take a large interest in the company. This interest (even before the interest resulting from the financial investment) is likely to be about -per cent of the company. As the development of the product is the result of what is essentially a partnership between the original entrepreneur and the venture capital fund, the conditions for any successful partnership applytrust between the partners, close cooperation, openness and transparency. When the partners are from different countries, this trust is facilitated if they both speak the same language or at least understand each others customsnot necessarily linguistic, but legal, scientific and accounting. In this respect, the adoption of uniform accounting standards and similar and clear legal codes concerning bankruptcy, the protection of property rights, and the legal requirements for forming a company and listing it on the stock exchange can only facilitate understanding and therefore cooperation between partners from different countries.This partnership has to last for several yearsin the developed countries, to years in many industries, and over years in biotechnologyuntil the stage when the venture is ready for its IPO or for sale to or merger with another company. Periods of at least this length are probably required in developing and transition economies. Along the way, there are large, but inherently unavoidable risksnot least that the new product will simply fail, technically or in terms of demand, when taken from the prototype to the market. Also, there could be changes in the tax or regulatory regime affecting the product or service to be provided or the right of the venture capital fund to the patent over the new product could be infringed, either because of inadequate property rights legislation, or because of widespread disregard for existing laws. There are also human risks and uncertainties; for example, there could be a fundamental revision of the assumptions behind the original plan whereby the original owner would want to retain control of the enterprise rather than sell it. All such developments would reduce the capital gains to be derived from the sale of the venture capital funds interest, and the prospects for such developments would likely deter the investment of venture capital.Growth of stock markets for venture-based companiesAs described above, many non-united_states high-technology companies are listed on Nasdaq. The Nasdaq idea is spreading to other countries. For example, in December , the Nasdaq-Amex group (Amex is the abbreviation of American Stock Exchange) and the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong announced a partnership to provide investors with free information on a newVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? joint Internet Web site of companies traded on each exchange. In addition, the European Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation (EASDAQ) was modelled on Nasdaq and those companies that choose to list on both markets enjoy nearly identical admission and reporting requirements. It was set up by venture capitalists, investment bankers, securities dealers and investment institutions to provide a highly regulated, liquid market, with trading taking place through its European members. With one regulatory structure, one rule book and a single trading and settlement system, it is able to offer investors, its members and its companies a single, transparent, European stock market. Its founders and shareholders came not just from Europe but also from the united_states and Israel. The first share was traded in November and in March , companies were trading on EASDAQ, of which were also trading on Nasdaq. It is a sign of the international character of the venture capital industry that companies issued their securities in dollars, of the companies were incorporated in the united_states and was incorporated in Israel. The market capitalization at the end of March was $. billion.Individual European stock exchanges have also established their own programmes to promote small enterprises. The London Stock Exchange launched the Alternative Investment Market (AIM) in June . It had a simpler entry structure than the main exchangeit placed no restriction on the size of companies that joined, the length of their operating record or the percentage of shares in public hands. However, its shares are not so much in the high-technology industries as in smaller companies and its index has not performed as well as the later European arrivals that are dedicated to high-growth companies.In Paris, Nouveau Marche started trading in March , the Neuer Markt in Frankfurt in March and both the Nieuwe Markt (NMAX) in Amsterdam and the Euro.NM in Brussels in April . These four markets joined to form EURO.NM which is not so much a single market like EASDAQ as a network of individual exchanges depending on marketing cooperation, regulatory harmonization and technical cooperation between its members. Milan joined later and three other new market exchangesCopenhagen, Stockholm and Zurich are set to join by the end of June . By the end of , its membership could include exchanges in Finland, Ireland, Norway, Portugal and Spain. At present, the Neuer Markt dominates EURO.NMin September , it had per cent of the total market, the Nouveau Marche had per cent and NMAX and Euro.NM had per cent and per cent, respectively. EURO.NM is larger than EASDAQ or AIM and at the end of December it listed companies with a capitalization of $. billion.Developing and transition economies are also taking steps to make it easier to float the companies nurtured by venture capital funds. For instance, in , Taiwan Province of China eased the public listing rules for high-technology companies. Malaysia launched the Mesdaq, modelled on Nasdaq, in April l.As venture capitalists are able to make an adequate return by investing in a company that floats for a few million dollars, one good indicator of a vibrant corporate culture in which the venture capital industry can thrive is not so much the number of firms listed on a stock market, or even their average size (which could indicate simply that the corporate sector was composed of a few behemoths and that entry was restricted) but rather the number of listed enterprises per head of the population. In the case of the united_states, this figure is firms per million people. The average market capitalization of a listed company was $,. million in . The only developing economies that equalled or exceeded this first figure were, significantly in view of their promotion of venture capital: Israel, with firms per million people (average market capitalization, $. million), Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR), with (average market capitalization, $. million), Singapore, with (average market capitalization, $. million) and Malaysia, with (average market capitalization, $. million). Of the developed countries, only Australia, Denmark, Canada and the united_kingdom had a larger number of listed firms per head of the population than the united_states. There is, then, considerable room for a continued expansion in the number of listed firms in all countries, and with the further development of the venture capital industry such expansion can be expected.Creating market opportunitiesThe Indian Government set up a National Task Force on Information Technology and Software Development in May to foster the rapidly expanding information technology industry in India. It set targets of $ billion for Indian software exports and of $ billion for the size of the domestic market in , up from $. billion and less than $ billion, respectively, in /. The Indian industry itself has taken steps to expand its overseas markets by developing its client base. NASSCOM launched a special programme NIESA (NASSCOMs India Europe Software Alliance) to identify joint venture and strategic alliances in the computer software sector between India and Europe. It also formed a special interest group on the euro (SIG-EURO) to bring together overseas and Indian clients looking for euro solutions with Indian software houses. NASSCOM organized its first euro seminar in Edinburgh in September .The YK problemrewriting computer programmes to properly interpret the year in computer data and not read it as the year is providing Indian software companies with substantial market opportunities. The Government assisted with special tax breaks for YK exercises by domestic firms in Indiaall such expenditure was to be treated as current expenditure and would be accorded per cent depreciation benefit.The Indian Government is also taking steps to expand the domestic market of one of the most important avenues for venture capitalthe Internet. In early , there were only , Internet subscribers in India and , users. In January , the Government announced the end of the public sector monopoly in Internet service provision and in March the telecoms regulator ordered large cuts in fees for leased lines. The private sector development of the telecoms infrastructure could thus provide new business opportunities.The Indian market is large by the standards of developing countries. For developing and transition economies more generally, the international market may be essential. In this regard, multinational firms can enlarge the market by calling on local firms to supply their inputs. Multinational firms can work with other foreign firms, including venture capital firms, and local entrepreneurs, to set up the required local enterprises. Thus, easing direct investment byVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? multinational firms can be part of an open market policy to foster a local venture capital industry.In general, the expansion of the size of the market, through trade agreements, research and development linkages, cooperation between domestic and foreign firms, liberalization of domestic regulations, and standardization and simplification of health and safety standards, serves to encourage the development of the high-growth firms that are predominantly backed by venture capital.The venture capital industry is concerned with the provision of finance without standard collateral. By its nature it is a high-risk and high-return activity which can, however, be a very important part of a modern economy. There are many ways in which Governments can encourage the development of ideas and the taking of risks by creating an environment, and particularly a tax regime, favourable to venture capital. When all the ingredients are in place for a thriving high-technology sectorin particular, a large and vibrant scientific communitydirect government financial assistance to the venture capital industry can prove decisive, as in the case of Israel. As more countries put these ingredients in place, the further expansion of the venture capital industry beyond the few countries in which it is currently concentrated can be expected. As the examples in this chapter have shown, this is a very dynamic and rapidly expanding industryit can be considered one of the most successful exports of the united_states and considerable changes can be expected in the next few years.The venture capital industry and the related private equity financing industry (which comes in at a later stage than venture capital) involve local and international private investors in doing what the venture capitalist industry has proved very successful at doingpicking winners, that is to say, setting up companies that have thrived, adding new products and creating job opportunities. It might be added that, although the ability of Governments to pick winners had long been doubted, the Asian crisis served to show that some private banks, awash with cheap money, could also prove disastrously inept at choosing companies in which to invest.The Asian crisis also lowered the share prices of Asian firms and thus tended to make the purchase of a local enterprise more attractive than the investment of risk capital in the establishment of a new enterprise. However, the crisis highlighted the importance of pushing ahead with what the countries in the region had long seen to be necessarydevelopment of their own high-technology enterprises and upgrading of their industrial structures in order to take full advantage of the knowledge-based modern market economy. It thus provided an extra boost to the creation of local venture capital industries and a further incentive to involve foreign venture capital firms with their technical expertise and management and marketing skills.As a case in point, between and March , the Singapore Governments Economic Development Board Investments Company set up three venture capital funds, Seed Ventures, Seed Ventures II and Seed Ventures III, to cooperate with foreign venture capital funds in establishing technologybased and innovative start-up companies. The foreign firms were to co-sponsor and manage the funds. One of the companies that was established had a market capitalization in excess of $ billion in and was listed on Nasdaq. In April , the Singapore Government announced its intention to launch a $ billion Technopreneurship Investment Fund to boost entrepreneurship in high-technology industries. The fund was part of a four-step plan involving education, production facilities, regulation and financing. The moneys were to be released within the next three months in order to set up funds that would work with private funds. It was thought that the new fund would have done well if it had committed all its resources within to months.The same foreign venture capital fund that was involved with Singapores Seed Ventures, Walden International Investment Group, was appointed in late as a manager of the official Hong Kong Applied Research Fund, together with two local private funds, Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) Private Equity Management and AsiaTech Ventures. The three private venture capitalist firms were expected to help develop a culture of technology investment and entrepreneurship in Hong Kong SAR. They could draw on networks in other parts of the world to tap the latest technology market trends.These networks have had several linkages in China and Taiwan Province of China. For instance, in October , the W.I. Harper Group of San Francisco and Beijing Enterprises Holdings, Ltd., signed a memorandum of understanding to jointly set up the Beijing High Technology Development Fund. The fund would invest in information technologies, biotechnology and other industries. Its aim was to establish strategic links between Beijing and international hightechnology companies and to transfer venture capital management expertise to Beijing. The Beijing Enterprises Holdings, Ltd., is the sole overseas listed conglomerate controlled by the Beijing Municipal Government for channelling capital, technologies and management expertise into Beijing development priorities, and was listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in May . W.I. Harper had been founded in to provide international banking and advisory services to the Walden Group, and in began offering its services independently. It has offices in San Francisco, Taipei, Hong Kong SAR and Beijing. Similarly, the new fund would be headquartered in Hong Kong SAR, but would have branch offices in Beijing, Taipei and San Francisco. It would not just invest in Beijing but also emphasize a collaboration model which would include Taiwan Province of China, the united_states and Europe. In January , the Fund signed a Strategic Alliance with Tsinghua University Enterprises Group, a subsidiary of Tsinghua University, Beijing. Besides attracting foreign interest through its universities, Beijing has developed a high-technology industrial park which has welcomed many companies from Taiwan Province of China and foreign countries.International assistance to establish the venture capital industryThe rapid growth of the venture capital industry outside the united_states suggests that this industry is one that other countries very much wish to see established. International institutions are also seeing the advantages from a development perspective of supporting the formation of venture capital and priVENTURE CAPITAL IN DEVELOPING AND TRANSITION ECONOMIES? vate equity industries in developing and transition economies and are accordingly lending assistance.The International Finance Corporation (IFC), in a review of its experience with investment funds in developing and transition economies, found that the financial returns on its venture capital funds had been poor, with the unweighted nominal return on venture capital funds at June having been a negative . per cent and the weighted return . per cent. It found that management was the most important determinant of fund performance ... Good venture capital managers provide more than equity to firms: they supply advice on marketing, management and industrial contacts ... But venture capital management skills are scarce in developing countries.IFC, however, continues to support the venture capital industry for three purposes: (a) to meet the needs of the transition economies and China, as over half of the IFCs venture capital fund approvals have targeted transition economies and China since ; (b) to meet the equity needs of small and medium-sized firms, since it found that venture capital funds remained the most effective way for IFC to invest equity in small and medium-sized firms; and (c) to build management capacity. Preliminary indications suggest that there has been continuing improvement in the funds performance perhaps reflecting better structuring, more experienced managers and firms owners accepting the concept of third party equity. IFC considered that private equity funds in emerging markets were too new for evaluation of their financial performance, but that the lessons from their investment included the fact that continued government reforms and privatization are needed to supply a pipeline of investments ... and good managers are critical, to bring both financial and industry contacts and to adapt to changes in underlying markets.The Asian financial crisis has increased the need for venture and private equity capital to put their managerial and marketing skills and financial support behind the promotion of high-growth and high-technology industries in the region, and to support companies that, before the crisis, had been fundamentally sound, but currently were in difficulty. In May , IFC announced that it was investing $ million in the Asia Opportunities Fund, Limited, a new private Asian investment fund which would invest in healthy companies with high-quality management teams needing capital to expand or reduce debt as well as in businesses being spun off by conglomerates. The funds aim is to help fundamentally sound companies in East and South-east_asia thrive and thereby contribute to the economic development of the region. Its partner in the fund, Chase Capital Partners, the private equity investing arm of Chase Manhattan Corporation, is to contribute $ million.The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is supporting the venture capital industry in the transition economies. The funds that it supports make independent decisions about the projects in which they invest, but those decisions are consistent with the Banks overall investment policy. As an example of its work, in December , it supported the first venture capital fund devoted to investing in Croatia. The rationale for assistance was that if the arrival of venture capital, albeit on a tiny scale, begins to reap rewards, ... it could pave the way for a reassessment of Croatia among foreign investors.There is experience as well at the level of bilateral cooperation. For example, as of April , the united_states Overseas Private InvestmentCorporation (OPIC) was investing in direct investment funds with geographical restrictions, such as, for example, a fund investing in equity in information technology, telecommunications and consumer goods in India. The reasons given by the private companies undertaking such investments are instructive: the Draper International India fund considered that with growth coming from deregulation, the increased demand for services and goods has created significant opportunities for companies operating in India. However, there were few venture capitalists in India with proven and relevant investment experience who can play a supportive role in building a company, and the fund would help to add value through its access to information and resources in both India and Silicon Valley.Draper International, Warburg Pincus and Intel have recently backed Indias leading Internet portal company, Rediff, in its plan to launch a sophisticated new portal site for ethnic Indians in the united_states. Roughly per cent of this community of . million is connected to the World Wide Web, and includes many Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. The company aims to expand later to the million ethnic Indians living in Europe, Africa and Asia.OPIC supports the funds by guaranteeing per cent of the private financing raised through a zero coupon bondthe other per cent has to be in pure equity form. These two pieces are sold as a unit to private investors, thereby reducing the overall risk and therefore the cost of capital. (The rate of return demanded from pure equity investment in many emerging markets would be prohibitive.)By sponsoring the venture capital industry in developing and transition economies, donor agencies are helping establish a potentially important financial mechanism to help advance the domestic private sector. Local venture capital industries are already helping to create and develop small and mediumsized private enterprises that can be the locus of rapid employment and productivity growth. In addition, the venture capital fund is a very cost-effective and efficient mechanism for disbursing financial resources. Venture capitalists and local entrepreneurs have an interest in quick, although prudent, disbursement. Decisions are made by managers of funds who have the authorityand the financial incentiveto act quickly and decisively.Finally, but also importantly, the success of the venture capital industry in a developing or transition economy requires the country to promote what are in any case important elements of a development agenda: a well-educated labour force, an environment friendly to investment, a tax code that encourages and rewards risk-taking, high accountancy standards and transparent business practices. These are factors that are often summed up under the rubric of good economic governance. Moreover, once under way, the venture capital industry can produce a powerful domestic constituency in favour of furthering this agenda namely, the local entrepreneurs, a group to which Governments are increasingly listening. In this sense, as well as directly, venture capital can be part of an effective partnership for economic development in the twenty-first century.The participation of developing and transition economies in international financial markets expanded significantly over the past decade. As a result, their domestic financial structures have been increasingly exposed to the dynamics of global finance, which have themselves been rapidly evolving.The globalization of financial markets during the s has had profound consequences for countries at all points along the development spectrum. Some developing and transition economies experienced a large increase in access to external financial resources and as a result, net financial flows to these two groups of economies as a whole almost tripled from $ billion in to over $ billion in . Net private capital flows over the seven-year period -summed to $ trillion or about per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP) of these economies at that time, against $ billion (about per cent of GDP) in the nine years between and .Also, the structure of capital flows became more diverse. There was a shift from long-term bank loans mainly to Governments, the major vehicle of international financing in the s and s, to short-term bank loans, bonds and local currency obligations, with the share of private borrowers increasing from less than per cent of total external debt obligations to more than per cent. In addition, equity flows, especially direct investment, rose significantly.The explosive growth in international capital flows created valuable opportunities for the countries that could access them. Economic theory had argued that free capital movement would encourage a more efficient international allocation of savings, with capital flowing to countries whose abounding investment prospects exceeded domestic saving. Here was a chance to see if this was true. Also, unrestricted capital flows would facilitate cross-border trade in goods and services, both through more traderelated direct investment and greater financing of trade. At the same time, greater capital mobility meant a broadening international diversification of financial asset holdings which would enable investors anywhere in the world to achieve higher risk-adjusted rates of return.However, as financial crises demonstrated in Mexico in , in east_asia in , and in the russian_federation and Brazil in -, greater integration of emerging market economies into the rapidly moving world of global finance also carries large risks, as it exposes economies to sudden and dramatic reversals in capital flows, that is to say, to extreme financial volatility. The damage precipitated by these reversals has been substantialmuch larger, in fact, relative to the underlying causes than in the past. While the old-style balance-of-payments crises were driven by unsustainable current-account imbalances, the new crises were driven by swings in components of financial flows and these inflicted major shocks to the domestic financial systems of the affected countries. The present chapter thus looks at different parts of international finance that have been seen as sources of volatility in emerging markets and asks how exposure to such volatility may best be managed.One source of the greater volatility in the global financial system has been its rapid evolution in recent years. Dramatic advances in computer and telecommunications technologies have radically reduced costs of financial intermediation and facilitated the introduction of new financial instruments. Also, electronic trading has, compared with older, paper-based systems, increased manyfold the speed of financial transactions. Along with the technological innovations, many of the impediments to the free flow of capital across borders have been dismantled and domestic financial markets deregulated in developed and many developing and transition economies.Another important change in the pattern of financial intermediation has been the growing role of non-bank institutional investors, along with increasing securitization and growing marketability of assets. Commercial banks have also increased their involvement in the securities business, as part of competitive responses to the evolving financial sector, as noted in chapter IV. Most of these developments began in developed economies, especially the united_states of America, but they quickly entered the domain of international finance.The result of the developments has been the proliferation of turnover-oriented, transaction-driven finance which is displacing the traditional buy-andhold approach to financial investment. Incentives within financial institutions encourage maximization of short-term gains, possibly at the expense of the firms overall risk exposure and long-term strategy. Also, because of increasing securitization, longer-term bilateral financial relationships are being increasingly replaced by financing through the markets, making the individual debt relationships anonymous (see chap. V). As a result, investment horizons are shrinking. Together with the technology enabling investors to initiate massive transactions with very speedy execution, as well as rapidly and constantly flowing information, this is leading to huge and sudden shifts in the supply and demand for funds.Derivatives and emerging market economiesThe market for derivative financial instruments provides a case in point of how high-tech changes in international finance have affected developing and transition economies. Foreign currency forward and futures contracts have existed for a long time, but there has been an explosion in the volume of transactions in these and other instruments, such as currency and interest-rate swaps (where debtors or creditors exchange payment obligations to better fit their immediate needs). These instruments are used because they add liquidity and flexibility to financial markets.Derivative contracts are now written by many types of financial institutions and on many kinds of financial instruments, domestic and international. Mostly they involve separating out some of the risks embodied in a financial instrument and shifting the risk from one party who does not want to bear it to another who does. New derivatives are constantly being designed and some have become quite complex, mimicking, for example, the effect of purchases and sales of securities without actually undertaking the transactions.The notional value of international financial derivatives outstanding at the global level reached about $ trillion as of mid-. These products have become an integral part of the global financial system, as well as an important source of profits for several major financial services companies. They are considered a fundamental aspect of trading and risk management worldwide and in many cases the turnover in the derivatives markets is far larger than the actual needs of the markets to which they are related. Most trading activity and the largest users of these products are located in financial centres, such as London, New York and Tokyo. It may well be, however, that the highly leveraged futures instruments that are most often traded for speculation have added an extra measure of financial instability, not only to the international financial system, but also to the flows to the developing and transition economies.Derivative contracts have increasingly been written on underlying securities or loans of emerging markets, in some cases by financial institutions from those countries. For example, before the East Asian crisis struck, banks from the Republic of Korea participated in triangular credit swaps involving Indonesian companies and international investment banks through which the banks of the Republic of Korea channelled funds to Indonesian borrowers. The Indonesian firms received credit that they might not otherwise have accessed in the standard way and the banks of the Republic of Korea made a significantly higher return than they had been used to, albeit with the obligation to compensate the investment banks if the Indonesian firms defaulted (which they did). With hindsight, the highly speculative nature of such transactions was easier to see.Direct impact: pro-cyclical volume of derivativesOne lesson of the recent financial crises is that the liquidity added to financial markets by derivatives is pro-cyclical: it tends to be readily available during booms and much of it disappears during crises. This reduces the utility of derivatives in managing risk since writers of derivatives will cease to provide cover when it is most needed. However, some regulations might improve the situation.Several market participants have suggested that changes in the availability of derivatives may have aggravated the Asian financial crisis. At the beginning of the crisis, a number of dollar borrowers who attempted to cover their exposure to devaluation risk in South-east_asia found that the available forward foreign exchange cover had been fully used by speculators. There is, however, much in the structure of the international derivatives market that makes this result an expected one.This is because of the global structure of the industry. A small number of global financial institutions dominate the derivatives markets worldwide, owing to economies of scale and scope, as well as learning. They have brought their expertise and dominance in the advanced financial markets to smaller markets. They have not done this uniformly across the many markets that have mushroomed in Asia, latin_america and elsewhere over the last few years, but have selected particular markets in which to concentrate. As the smaller markets are similarly subject to economies of scale, information and learning, certain banks became specialists in these markets. In good times, these banks accumulate positions from derivatives transactions in the local market which they then sell to the international market. This removes their exposure and allows them to take on new positions. In times of crisis, however, the intermediaries will find it difficult to sell off their exposure; therefore, the local markets capacity becomes limited by the exposure limits of the local specialist banks and these limits could themselves be reduced in the light of an emerging crisis. Thus, the volume of activity in the local derivatives market expands and contracts according to how the local market is perceived internationally.Indeed, emerging market derivative volume expanded dramatically during the boom period. The consequences of this activity for local interest rates and currency values are difficult to evaluate; but as seen in the dramatic movement of the dollar exchange rate of the Japanese yen in October , the effect can be substantial.The main mechanism by which the derivatives market affects the cash market arises from hedging or arbitrage strategies of the local banks, whereby the bank selling a derivative simultaneously buys the underlying asset. For example, when a bank sells a forward dollar contract to an importer wanting to lock in the local currency cost of his coming payment obligations, the bank then buys dollars in the spot market, which it invests until the due date. Immediately, however, this puts downward pressure on the spot exchange rate. By the same token, derivative contracts on interest rates or stock-market indices can affect the prices of these underlying assets.Derivatives can have other effects, such as shortening the maturity of government foreign borrowing. This is because the longest maturity in forward foreign exchange contracts or foreign exchange futures in most emerging markets is one year. If forward cover is readily available to market participants, there will be an incentive for many international investors to buy the short-term domestic currency treasury bills, and to cover the exchange-rate risk with a forward contract. The short-term debt market will thus become more liquid and the pricing more favourable than for longer-term bonds. Governments will then have an incentive to issue more shorter-term securities, skewing their debt profile.A Government might even become overconfident and take on excessive short-term debt because it mistakenly believed that because the debt was denominated in domestic currency, it was relatively safe from a foreign currency run. It simply had to be rolled over every or or days. However, to the extent that the foreign purchases of domestic currency debt were matched by forward currency contracts, a substantial net demand for foreign currency could open up. Indeed, this kind of situation seems to have played a role in Mexico and Thailand, given their quick loss of reserves once the crisis began, as well as in the Russian default, given the large losses associated with the ruble cover provided by Russian banks.This discussion suggests that Governments in developing and transition economies would need to be aware of how derivatives are being used and their impact on underlying financial markets. Derivatives can offer definite benefits to these economies, including hedging the returns on commodity production or financial exposures to certain projects. However, if introduced too early in the development process, they may also expose these countries financial institutions to excessive risk. Also, they may not be the best way to promote local financial markets as places to raise capital for local businesses and economic development, since large amounts of funds might be drawn into speculative investments seeking high returns from stock or bond movements. Moreover, the cost of such financial crises as may arise from derivatives trading are easier to absorb in the developed economies than in the emerging markets.Admittedly, calling for a policy on the introduction of derivatives is easier than specifying what that policy should be. Is there a proper sequencing? Should one begin by first developing a foreign exchange market and the use of forwards via the banking system and then introduce futures for foreign exchange, bonds and finally stocks? Furthermore, should derivatives for bonds and stocks be postponed until the cash market has reached a certain size and liquidity? The data do not exist to answer these questions; but given recent market failures, such policy question seems to be an important area for research before returning to business as usual in terms of freely using derivatives for any kind of transaction in the emerging markets.Indirect impact: misperceiving the source of riskAfter the Russian default and currency collapse in August , a sequence of events followed that by October threatened the financial system of the united_states and perhaps the industrialized world. It prompted extraordinary measures to prevent the collapse of Long-term Capital Management, a prominent hedge fund, and caused an unprecedented per cent swing in the yen/dollar exchange rate on October. It underlined how far the interlocking leverage in the global financial system had moved and how dangerous it had become. This degree of systemic risk and contagion caught the attention of policy makers and market participants and set in motion both the easing of monetary conditions in the united_states and Europe and the commitment to speed reform of the international financial architecture. It also had a misplaced fallout for the emerging markets.Many market participants saw the source of the instability as being in the emerging economies, rather than in a global system of markets and regulations that permittedeven encouragedexcessive leverage and speculation. Therefore, not only did creditors unwind their positions (reduce their risk exposure) in the developed countries, but they also pulled back on loans and financing in emerging markets. This increased the potential for liquidity problems in already fragile economies and caused new swings in foreign exchange and asset values in these countries, which in turn made their financial instruments appear even riskier. Higher risk led to the demand for higher expected returns, reducing the perceived investment values and trade opportunities, and so on in a downward spiral.Reinforcing the tendency of developed-country financial institutions to focus their attention on difficulties in the emerging economies was the fall in stock prices of several major financial institutions that were considered to have had excessive exposure to emerging markets, such as Bank of Boston, Citicorp and Lehman Brothers. The Chairman of Lehman Brothers even had to make a public statement confirming the firms strength and solvency. Goldman Sachs had to postpone its long-awaited public offering of shares.Most executives in united_states corporations are compensated on the basis mainly of their companys stock performance and thus these bankers have had few incentives to return to previous levels of exposure to the emerging markets. Not only was there an immediate withdrawal of funds, but the supply of funds remained restricted for some time for all emerging markets, as bank stock valuations discouraged lenders from returning well after the worst of the crisis had passed. As one indication, the interest-rate spreads on some emerging market debt that had jumped from to , basis points (from to percentage points) at the height of the crisis, were still over , basis points in early March .The large players in global derivatives are also the large international commercial and investment banks that finance major projects in emerging markets. They also supply much of the trade finance. Thus, crises that lead to capital losses for these banks, for example, in the derivatives side of their business, reduce their ability and willingness to increase their exposure for other types of activity, in particular project finance and other longer-term lending that is central for development. In short, in a highly uncertain and fearful environment, the smallest borrowers with the weakest reputations, whether or not justified, are going to be the ones that suffer disproportionately.Part of the problem is that, until recently and despite little regulation, there have been relatively few major failures involving international derivatives trade, even though the number of market participants is large, the market size huge, and the transaction volume immense. Such failures as have occurred could have been, and were, considered one-time situations and not indicative of any systemic problems. However, while most policy makers have been generally sanguine about the rapid development and immense scope of leveraged transactions, those losses raise some important questions. They stem from the fact that there is substantial leverage implicit in all financial derivatives and more risk than is realized.This can be stated in terms of probabilities: derivatives are typically constructed and priced on the basis of a per cent confidence interval for a probability distribution on future outcomes drawn up from historical data (whose continued relevance is assumed). The question is which transactions will fall outside this range, and when, and how large they will be. The question becomes many times more complicated when attention shifts from the individual derivative to the net exposure of the financial firm that engages in very many of these transactions on a daily basis. Indeed, very elaborate computer models have been developed to keep track of the evolving exposure of a financial firm as it shifts in and out of a wide variety of derivatives during the trading day.The key question, in other words, is whether the possibility of rare but disastrous events is given adequate attention. The answer based on the recent experiences seems to be no. Events with per cent probability of occurrence have been considered anomalies and so their potential consequences were not calculated or included in the risk-management computer models. The task aheada major preoccupation in both private and official bodies concerned with the issueis to establish a stronger set of best practices for managing risk in financial firms and disclosing relevant information to regulators and the market (see below).Open securities markets in emerging market countriesWhile the global system has been seen as a highly efficient structure, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before. The vastly accelerated pace of financial activity, its complexity, and its volume, as well as much shorter investment horizons have contributed to cycles of huge capital flow to a national market, creating a bubble in financial asset prices, followed by the sharp declines in asset prices and reversal of flows.The phenomenon of herd behaviourThe massive withdrawal of foreign money from east_asia in -has been a painful reminder that financial systems are subject to periods when market judgements become heavily one-sided, that is to say, subject to herd behaviour. Simultaneous moves in several securityand hence currencymarkets could hardly be explained by a synchronous shift in economic fundamentals. Rather, it is a general phenomenon that cross-country correlations of price movements in financial markets increase significantly during crisis periods.Herd behaviour is not new by any means. However, it seems that over the past decade the motives behind the collective rush in or out of a country in response to a change in sentiment have become stronger and the results of this rush more widespread and damaging. There appears to have been an increasing convergence in the behaviour of different categories of market participants, including banks. Many seemingly diverse institutions have similar risk exposures and, consequently, may become vulnerable to the same adverse event.There is also a widespread practice of following the leader, which is the firm or trader that is perceived to be the most successful or experienced. Not to be left behind, investors make enormous efforts to predict the effect of new information on their peers, rather than work out what this information can tell about the underlying assets themselves.Emerging and transition markets are more susceptible to herd mentality of investors and volatility than developed countries, as they are still marginal for international investors. One aspect of this is that they are often treated as one asset class. Consequently, during periods of financial stress, funds are often pulled out of a group of similar markets simultaneously when investors spot signs of trouble in one of them. When the withdrawal begins, it becomes rational, even for those investors who have not changed their opinions about a particular market, to follow the herd. During such periods, momentum-based investors find themselves in a much more favourable position than their fundamentals-based peers. In such circumstances, financial investors who count on herd behaviour make better profits than others who do not. Even so, this is not to say that foreign investors necessarily cause the volatility in the securities markets of a country (see box IX.).Box IX.It is in the nature of equity shares traded in stock markets that their prices change continuously and over time by possibly large amounts. Are the fluctuations in some sense too large, especially in emerging markets? The answer seems to be that panics in stock markets, large or small, are irrational and that short-term circuit-breakers to temporarily halt trading are a helpful pause. With this exception, however, the prices of stocks should be allowed to find their own level in a competitive market. Governments should seek to prevent private manipulation of stock markets and not themselves try to manipulate stock prices.Dealing with panic sellingCircuit-breakerssuch as a decision-rule to suspend trading in a security for hours or the rest of a trading day or to temporarily close the stock exchange in the midst of a price collapseserve to prevent an inherent instability in stock markets from moving price downswings well beyond the values at which they would settle. Various factors might accelerate price declines into a panic. First, for example, if the price of a stock starts to fall and further decline is expected, holders of the share may rush to sell. The absence of hard information about the company and a surge of sell orders can start a herdlike stampede, dropping the price significantly. A second factor is the consequence of market participants being able to buy stock on margin through their stock broker, that is to say, partly with funds borrowed from the broker, with the shares of stock (and cash) on deposit with the broker being pledged as collateral for the loan. If the stock price drops sharply, the value of the collateral may fall enough to force the shareholder to put up additional collateral or sell the shares and repay the loan, making for further downward pressure on the market price. Third, in fast-moving stock markets, sell orders can be triggered by pre-set instructions to brokers or computer programs. Most significantly, in the midst of a panic, with the market moving very fast, participants cannot keep track of the range of buy-and-sell offers, as needed for appropriate pricing; in such a situation, it is said that prices become uninformative. A circuit-breaker to halt trading at this point and let information on the state of the market accumulate can be a market-enhancing measure.a While this is so in developed markets, it is even more the case in the thinner emerging markets. An enforced pause can also calm the psychological side of the panic.Not dealing with falling stock pricesIt is a different matter when share prices fall over a sequence of days, months or years and it is the clear intention of the market to reprice the securities. This happens regularly in all markets after securities prices have risen well out of proportion to profit expectations of the firms. The total capitalization of the Japanese market in was one third of what it had been in . The New York Stock Exchange is now thought by many to be in a bubble phase of its expansion, although as is always the case in such situations, many people expect that the unusually high ratio of stock prices to corporate earnings will last indefinitely.Stock markets in emerging economies have been subject to especially large and rapid swings upward and downward. In Mexico, for example, the stock-market index declined by about per cent from its peak at the beginning of to its low in early . More recently, the market index in Indonesia declined by per cent in the few months between May and September of .The problem in this volatility is that the downswings often cause major economic disruptions. Thus, in certain economies, including Japan, the government directed official resources into the market to try to bolster demand and prevent stock prices from falling further. The major weakness that the collapse in share prices exposes is usually in the banking system. In a stock-market crash, financial institutions find themselves holding claims or collateral whose value is fast evaporating. This only underlines the importance of strong financial sector regulation, as well as sound macroeconomic policies.Do foreigners raise volatility?In the recent emerging markets collapse, sellers of stock were also taking their funds out of the country, putting downward pressure on pegged exchange rates. Thus, bolstering confidence in the stock market was aimed in part to bolster confidence in the currency.b One question is thus, Did foreign purchases of shares in the recently liberalized markets first drive up share prices to unsustainable levels and then cause the crash by exiting? Some researchers have pointed to the larger amplitude of boom-bust cycles in the s in Asia which coincided with large capital flows. Large inflows relative to the level of liquidity in these markets would have a disproportionate impact on prices and result in "exuberant" valuations; a reversal in sentiment would, equally, cause large price declines.Given the perception of higher risk in emerging markets and serious problems of information, investors could be more skittish than in established markets;c that is to say, investors, in seeking to diversify their portfolios, should undertake considerable research into many companies in each market before they purchase and sell the shares of a selection of them. This would be costly. Instead, sets of equities in the various emerging markets tend to be treated as an asset class to be bought and sold together, with funds reallocated among markets in quick entries and exits.dIn addition, international portfolio managers have incentives to act similarly, moving into and out of individual markets in a wave, as each investor tends to follow the actions of others. They tend to copy their competitors in order to achieve results that are at least not too far below the average. The aim, in other words, is to maintain a favourable performance record relative to competitors, as this is how portfolio managers are compensated.This notwithstanding, several studies could find no statistical evidence that large inflows since the beginning of the s had increased short-term volatility as compared with the s.e Economic reform and financial liberalization had apparently led to "exuberance" on the part of domestic investors as well as foreigners.fOn the other hand, many of the local investors in emerging Asia were buying shares on their home market in part using funds borrowed from foreign banks. making the international link important. Indeed, the proposal made in several quarters to discourage excessive short-term capital movements across the borders of developing and transition economies seems quite germane in the context of stock-market volatility.Box IX. (continued)During periods of herdlike behaviour, investors begin viewing most pessimistically the situation in any country that bears the slightest resemblance to the situation of the first victim of the crisis. For instance, a historical high correlation between returns on money market instruments in national currencies in Thailand and the Czech Republic which had nothing to do with economic fundamentals encouraged investors to sell koruny on signs of strains in the baht.Finally, herd behaviour has been accentuated by the use of state-of-the-art risk management systems in the chief international financial institutions. A jump in market volatility in one country will automatically generate an upward revision of risk associated with correlated countries, triggering sell orders, margin calls and reluctance to extend credit lines.Portfolio adjustment effectsOne phenomenon that aggravates contagion is portfolio adjustment by international fund managers. In response to a market crisis in a particular country or region, international funds tend to liquidate positions in better-performing markets in order to realize capital gains to make up for their losses elsewhere and to raise liquidity. A sudden drop in liquidity owing to the falling prices in one market or for one kind of asset may thus induce a sale of other assets, even with no change in fundamentals in the other market.Given that the markets of most developing and transition economies are thin relative to the portfolios of international fund managers, the impact of such induced sales can be devastating. This can be seen in the fact that only per cent of total equity holdings by the institutional investors of the seven major industrialized countries is equivalent to per cent of the market capitalization in Asia and per cent in latin_america.Such global investors, moreover, come not only from industrialized countries, but also from emerging economies themselves. For instance, in December , investors from the Republic of Korea were forced to liquidate their holdings of Brazilian and Argentine dollar-denominated bonds in order to cover their dollar obligations and restore falling liquidity. The subsequent fall of prices on Latin American bonds then forced Brazilian banks, which had purchased these bonds on borrowed funds, to sell local currency-denominated assets for dollars, thereby increasing pressure on the exchange rate of the real. Banks in Brazil and the Republic of Korea were also forced to liquidate their holdings of Russian treasury bills. Those holdings were about $ billion out of approximately $ billion held by non-residents at the end of .Banks and currency marketsThe currency turmoil in one country after another has raised questions about how currency markets operate. Except where there is central bank exchange control, foreign exchange in developing and transition economies is largely traded in an interbank market that is highly opaque. This makes attempts by monetary authorities to monitor market activity and take the appropriate policy response quite difficult. The same opaqueness, however, helps monetary authorities mask their intentions when they engage in open-market interventions to alter market perceptions and prices.The foreign exchange markets of most emerging economies are relatively thin. Hence, when confidence is lost in a pegged exchange rate, one-way bets on devaluation can rapidly soak up the liquidity in the market. Relatively small transactions are then able to push markets into a tailspin.Also, potential participants in such currency markets have combined resources that are much larger than the foreign exchange reserves of the monetary authorities. Consequently, the currency market presents profit opportunities to market participants that have the ability to move markets in their favour, owing to the size of their purchases or sales.Currency speculation may be especially devastating for countries that have fixed or tightly managed exchange-rate regimes, as has been the case in many emerging and transition economies. In this case, a depreciation from a fixed exchange rate may go far past the level where a currency would have been if it had not been fixed initially.Perils of short-term foreign debtExceptionally high leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) in open financial markets is a sign of excessive risk-taking which leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. In this regard, it has been argued that the overall degree of leverage in the system that was viable even a decade ago may not be appropriate in todays more volatile financial environment.Moreover, it matters whether the bulk of the debt is long-term or short-term. Financial mishaps can result from almost any financial transaction. However, in virtually all recent cases, the major trigger that turned seemingly minor imbalances into a crisis was short-term debt, particularly cross-border debt.These concerns are particularly relevant to banks. As discussed in chapter IV, their assets (loans) are typically less liquid than their liabilities (deposits) and therefore they always need to carefully manage their liquidity so as not to be caught out by maturity mismatches. If banks have lax lending or borrowing practices, they can develop severe liquidity problems and become a source of systemic risk. Short-term interbank lending, especially across borders, may turn out to be the weakest link in the global financial system.In most cases, financial crises follow sustained periods of large increases in cross-border bank borrowing, with a high and growing proportion of these loans being short-term. By the time the Asian crisis began, short-term foreign bank debt in east_asia was measured as close to per cent of the total. The boom in short-term exposure continued in full swing until the very onset of each national crisis. For instance, growing financial strains did not deter foreign banks from raising their exposure to the russian_federation until the outbreak of crisis in the third quarter of .Conversely, commercial banks also account for the bulk of funds withdrawn during a crisis. For instance, more than per cent of the capital that left Thailand in represented the withdrawal of credit by international commercial banks.Short-term capital inflows can accumulate over time into a large stock of foreign liabilities. Ultimately, they may exceed the liquid international assets of the country. The ratio of short-term debt to official reserves reached over per cent in Mexico in . At the end of , it stood at per cent in the Republic of Korea, per cent in Indonesia, per cent in Thailand and almost per cent in the russian_federation. Conversely, the fact that the reserves of the Eastern European countries as a group were on average three times greater than short-term debt helped these countries withstand the global financial turmoil.It has been argued that if initial liquid foreign liabilities are large relative to short-term assets, then an exogenous shock or a sudden loss of confidence may prompt holders of the liabilities to attempt to liquidate them. Levels of shortterm debt in excess of liquid assets do not necessarily lead to crisis, but they make a country vulnerable to financial turmoil. The transformation of this vulnerability into crisis requires a sudden reversal of perceptions that induces short-term creditors to expect the flight of other short-term creditors. Once crisis starts, even countries that seem only slightly exposed may be overwhelmed by capital outflows. It has also been stressed that sudden changes in perceptions are very hard to predict and they tend to be much greater than the magnitude of the change in underlying fundamentals warrants.The problem of moral hazardThe recent experience in Asia and the russian_federation suggests that lenders and borrowers systematically underestimated the riskiness of their actions. In particular, the risk premiums for loans to the emerging market economies between mid-and mid-were at levels well below what could be justified by economic fundamentals. Lenders and borrowers either misjudged the reality or assumed adverse developments would not hurt them very much. The international banks might have assumed that their lending was at least partly protected by international rescue programmes, and domestic lender-of-last-resort facilities. This relaxed their concern about excessive debt accumulation and the quality of credit and risk analysis.The presumption of the official support would most likely have affected the short-term lenders. In this regard, it has been argued that the massive foreign official assistance, which allowed holders of short-term dollar-linked Mexican government paper to escape without any loss in -, may have weakened investors feeling of responsibility for their own actions thereafter. It may also have shifted the pattern of capital flows towards short-term foreign currency debt, as holders of other forms of Mexican paper suffered heavy losses.During the Asian crisis, most investors with funds in the affected countries have taken losses, but to a very different degree. Equity investors are estimated to have lost about per cent for the year ending June , while bank losses might have been between and per cent of claims. In this regard, international lenders assumptions about being bailed out were correct and for the future might reinforce debt rather than equity finance and shortrather than longer-term flows. Indeed, countering this phenomenon is one motivation for the most recent thrust of international policy to involve the private sector more intimately in crisis resolution (see below).Excessive risk-taking on the back of an implicit official safety net may turn into financial turmoil if market participants suddenly realize that their belief was misguided. This was probably the reason the Russian crisis created much more turbulence in both emerging and mature markets than the Asian crisis. Unlike the Asian crisis, the Russian turmoil challenged fundamental assumptions about emerging market finance, particularly the belief that official support would be provided. This led investors to radically re-evaluate the balance of risks throughout the world.The overshooting of markets, high volatility and the opacity that surrounds various aspects of global financial activity have always been attributes of the international financial system. Nevertheless, the benefits of unrestricted global flows were thought to more than offset these drawbacks. However, the recent waves of financial turbulence were unleashed with such speed and severity that the conventional wisdom which had justified the manner in which the system operated has been seriously questioned.Precautionary measures need to be strengthened. In addition, however, experience suggests that whatever precautions are taken, crises will continue to occur. Hence, the international financial community should be well prepared to deal with unfavourable events. Appropriate mechanisms for orderly and cooperative resolution of crises are extremely important, as poorly devised measures may not only exacerbate financial distress, but also risk inducing more frequent crises and volatility in the future.Devising the scope for new policy actions poses enormous challenges. Both national authorities and international bodies continue to experiment, analyse and assess various types of intervention for coping with the volatile capital flows of the age of globalization.Issues in strengthening national financial systemsThe crises in Mexico, Asia and the russian_federation highlighted the importance of sound financial sectors in emerging economies. In addition, the banking sector difficulties in Japan and the financial scare associated with Long-term Capital Management in the united_states also sounded warnings in the developed countries. There is now, therefore, a firm consensus that a major and sustained effort is needed to strengthen the structure, functioning and supervision of financial systems in all countries. Good management and strong supervision of financial institutions are a key to withstanding economic shocks. Activity is thus under way under the auspices of several international bodies to develop and foster the implementation of new standards of sound financial practices.Strengthening weak financial systems is, however, easier said than done. Even the most advanced countries have a lot of difficulties in the realm of prudential and regulatory controls. For instance, according to the Comptroller of the Currency of the united_states, only of the largest North American banks practice state-of-the-art portfolio risk management. Consequently, it may take most developing and transition economies many years to develop more adequate supervisory systems. There is little reason to believe, however, that the next major crisis will wait so long. It is thus in the best interests of the advanced countries in which capital flows originate not to hold responsible only emerging economies, and to take policy steps themselves to ensure that scale, direction and forms of capital flows meet the needs and capacities of the recipients.Moreover, much of the new international effort has focused on developing and promoting minimum global standards. These do not fully take into consideration that there might be special needs in developing and transition economies, and that the introduction of post-industrial financial techniques into less-developed financial systems may themselves create weaknesses (see discussion of derivatives above).The scope and nature of increasingly integrated financial markets have gone far beyond traditional fragmented regulatory structures in national jurisdictions. The establishment through the machinery of the Bank for International Settlements of the Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates in represented an initial response to this dichotomy. A further step was taken in February when the Finance Ministers of the Group of Seven (G-) endorsed a proposal to establish a Financial Stability Forum. It initially comprises the ministries of finance, central banks and senior supervisory authorities of the G-, as well as the international financial institutions and key international regulatory groupings. After its first meeting in April , the Forum set up three working groups, comprising officials of developed and developing countries, international financial institutions and supervisory groupings. One group will focus on highly leveraged institutions (for example, hedge funds), another on volatility arising from short-term credit and the third on offshore financial centres. They are to report policy recommendations to the Forum in September.There is also general agreement that higher standards of accounting and reporting in business, banking and government activitiesand better and more timely data for monitoring capital flowsare necessary for a well-functioning market environment. The problem is that greater transparency and disclosure cannot by themselves prevent future crises. More complete, accessible and timely information is supposed to enhance the ability of market participants to make efficient decisions. However, one lesson of the recent Mexican, Asian and Russian crises is that inadequate use was made of the great deal of information that was publicly available and that pointed to potential problems. Market participants tend to ignore information during good times and turn to if-only-wehad-known rhetoric after almost each collapse. More generally, financial markets do not use information efficiently. More information may reduce the size of the bubble and the crash, but will not eliminate the bubble and the crash themselves, as markets are imperfecteven when people realize ex post facto the error of their ways.The lack of transparency also complicates attempts to develop early warning indicators of financial crises. However, the major obstacle thus far seems to have been insufficient understanding of the dynamics of the new global financial system.Capital-adequacy standardsAs noted above, the major trigger of all recent crises has been short-term, especially interbank, debt. One proposal to discourage excessive short-term lending and shift funds to longer-term financing has been to increase the cost to banks of short-term finance by raising the capital required of the banks according to their short-term exposures. Capital requirements could be raised on borrowing banks by making the required level of bank capital dependent not only on the nature and size of the banks assets, but also on the nature of their funding.As for lending banks, under the current Basel capital-adequacy standards, banks have a clear incentive to lend short-term in emerging markets. This is because, in calculating the minimum level of capital that banks are required to hold, the capital-backing of short-term claims on banks from any country is lower than that of long-term bank loans. Raising the risk weight on shortterm lending to banks would reduce the incentive to build up interbank exposures and the corresponding systemic risk. Such a revision of risk weights is currently being considered as part of the review of the capital-adequacy standards. It has also been suggested that capital-adequacy requirements need to be higher in developing and transition economies, as their banks operate in a more volatile and risky environment.Taken alone, a system of reserve requirements that penalizes short-term flows is not likely to impose sufficient discipline on the market. The regulations can be evaded through derivative transactions that could convert longterm funding into an overnight foreign exchange loan. This would call for extending the scope of surveillance to include over-the-counter (OTC) derivative markets. However, certain practical difficulties, in particular the complexity of data collection, have been stressed. There have been proposals to induce a shift of derivative activities towards organized exchanges, where every trade is public information. The shift could be encouraged by increasing capital requirements for OTC derivative transactions.There is also a need to improve prudential standards for certain types of nonbank financial institutions, as the risks being borne by them are increasingly similar to those facing banks. In this regard, the imposition of some form of risk-based liquidity requirement on international institutional investors, including mutual funds, has been proposed. This is intended to lower their needs to liquidate investments in case of rising redemptions and, hence, to reduce the need for rapid changes in investment holdings and thus smooth international capital flows.The Asian crisis as well as the post-russian_federation turmoil has drawn attention to the activities of unsupervised financial service providers, notably so-called highly leveraged institutions (HLIs) and, first of all, hedge funds. Their impact on the market is considered to be significant. Specific forms of regulation of these entities have not yet been agreed. There is, however, a consensus that institutions whose investment activities and market impact are essentially similar to those of their regulated counterparts should not evade regulation only because of their different form and structure. Also, much attention has focused on HLIs relationships with banks, which are the major providers of funds for HLIs activities.The financial safety netPoorly designed or too generous government safety net arrangements may encourage private debtors and creditors to take excessive risk, thereby increasing the likelihood of the crisis. For instance, explicit or implicit government guarantees of loans to the domestic banking systems and, in some cases, to non-financial firms in east_asia might have contributed to excessive foreign borrowing and lending.Given the importance of financial intermediation, the burden of managing risk in the financial system should not lie with the private institutions alone. However, a complete insulation of the private sector is equally harmful. Hence, there should be some form of allocation of the burden of risk between the public and private sectors, with central banks responsible for managing only systemic disruptions. Especially in emerging markets, there is a need for clear distinction between government support of the banking system as a whole and support available to any individual bank when the system is deemed not to be at risk. This means, for instance, that individual banks should be allowed to fail. This also means that Governments need to untangle themselves from the too big to fail doctrine (see chap. V), for example, by promoting more competition in the domestic financial sector and reducing the range of activities allowed to banks that are accorded lender-of-last-resort protection. Also, implicit guarantees not only of non-financial firms, which are typical, but also of the more risk-oriented non-deposit financial institutions need to be reviewed.The provision of assistance to deposit-taking institutions during a systemic crisis may be accompanied by an increase in required capital which shifts more of the burden of a prospective bank failure onto the shareholders and gives a larger cushion to the guarantor. Also, it has been stressed that attention should be paid to appropriate pricing of the guarantee arrangements so as to reflect the risks being insured by the government and to deter outlandish borrowing. The price could be in the form of an explicit premium or extra reserve requirement on a banks interbank liabilities, with the reserves earning low or even zero interest rates.Managing international finance during currency crisesOne major challenge is to develop mechanisms that could provide during periods of financial market stress either additional resources sufficient to cover at least short-term foreign debt or greater payments flexibility.Resources for times of crisisThe primary form of government defence against the disruption of capital flow reversals is foreign currency reserves. In an era of open capital accounts it may be prudent to hold much larger reserves than before. In this regard, it has been argued that demand for reserves will likely increase with the subsequent rise of international capital flows.A related type of defence is to supplement reserves with an open credit line from foreign lenders for drawing from in certain unfavourable circumstances. For instance, Argentina, Mexico, Indonesia and several other countries have negotiated contingent credit facilities with large foreign banks. The participating country pays a commitment fee for the availability of the facility to a consortium of international banks and receives the right to draw down on the facility at a predetermined interest rate up to pre-established limits.Such facilities provide access to supplementary liquidity at a lower price than that of holding an equivalent quantity of additional reserves. Like reserves, contingent credit and liquidity facilities can help prevent crises by enhancing investors confidence that liquidity will be available in the event of unexpected volatility. Thus, the banks commitment and capacity to provide the credit must be unshakeable. The charge for drawing on such a facility, however, need not be low. The attractiveness of contingent credit lines as a vehicle for liability management led the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) to propose its own participation in such arrangements, together with the private sector.The International Monetary Fund (IMF) recently introduced an international public-sector version of such facilities, when the Executive Board established the Contingent Credit Lines on April . Member countries can make arrangements under this facility only before they enter into crisis, assuming the Fund approves of the Governments macroeconomic policies, as expressed through the Funds regular consultations with all its members. The intention is to prevent the spread of the contagion to soundly managed economies in the event of an international crisis. If the funds are actually needed, the Government requests an activation review, which the Executive Board is authorized to conduct expeditiously. If approval is grantedthis is in contrast with the private credit lines, which are automaticthe country can draw substantial sums for repayment in . years (the period can be extended one year), although it will be paying a penalty interest rate that begins at percentage points above that on regular IMF drawings and rises half a percentage point each months, up to percentage points total.There is also scope for financial innovations so as to provide more insurance against adverse market developments than is typical in the financial arrangements currently used. For instance, there have been suggestions to consider the addition of options to new sovereign bonds and interbank credit lines that would allow a debtor Government or debtor banks to extend the maturity of a bond or credit line for a specified period of time at a predetermined spread. Such options could be exercised to ease pressure in the event of a liquidity crisis. Another proposal is to design debt instruments that would automatically reduce payments in response to certain unfavourable economic developments.Involving the private sector in crisis resolutionThe international treatment of financial crises has changed profoundly in the s in comparison with the s and s, with the major difference being in the scope of private sector financial involvement. Private sector participation in the form of rescheduling of bank claims and provision of new loans accounted for to per cent of the support packages at the outset of the Latin American debt crisis in -. In the succession of financial crises that began with Mexico in -, however, the extent of private sector contribution has been much more limited. The private sector directly participated in only two of the six major international support packages in -, those for the Republic of Korea and Indonesia, with the involvement in the Republic of Korea being much smaller than the average in the s.There are several reasons for the changed participation of private creditors. Many procedures to resolve international financial crisis were developed and proved effective during the s. They were designed, however, for an environment in which a relatively small number of international banks provided most of the capital flows to developing-country Governments. Also, claims of individual banks were relatively large and mostly medium-term and to a large degree provided through organized syndicates. Since then, the larger scale and greater diversity of capital flows to emerging markets have significantly reduced the relevance of the procedures used in the past.The almost sole reliance on official support to respond to these recent crises stemmed, at least initially, from the aim of quickly resuming the private capital inflows. The common aim of recent packages has been to quickly restore private sector confidence. Debt rescheduling and other mechanisms that were applied in the s might have been considered counter-productive.However, the surprising severity of the financial crises and the realization that private funds would not be quick to return induced a shift in the international approach to crisis resolution. Following the ad hoc renegotiation process with bank creditors of the economy of the Republic of Korea at the start of , the IMF decided to review its policy on crisis intervention.One concern behind the review relates to the fact that bailouts in the s involved handing over relatively large amounts of public sector foreign exchange to both foreign lenders and domestic investors in emerging economies, with the resulting redistribution of wealth benefiting the rich at the expense of others. It has also been suggested that the bailouts might increase the fragility of the world financial system, as they would encourage behaviour that could lead to a repeat or worsening of the same problem in the future. According to this line of reasoning, the prospect of emergency financing encourages private lenders to assume excessive risk exposures in emerging markets until a crisis becomes imminent (the moral hazard problem). Then, they overreact.These concerns notwithstanding, there is a widespread belief that it would not be realistic to abandon public sector support arrangements in a crisis, even if the policy of bailing out debtor countries may create a moral hazard. The reason is that international capital flows can be extremely volatile and such volatility is contagious, exhibiting the classic signs of financial panics. Current thinking about an overall solution is thus to mix a measure of official financial support with a shifting of more of the financial burdenand thus riskto the private creditors. Such burden-sharing with the private creditors would be achieved by involving them in an agreed refinancing or provision of new credit in a future crisis. Raising their risk is expected to temper the moral hazard problem as well.Sharing the burden is an easy principle to accept, but a very difficult and controversial one to put into practice, not least because of inherent conflict between ensuring systemic stability and achieving market-driven outcomes. For example, bailing in the private sector should not be limited to foreign investors. Stopping a massive exodus of resident capital is equally important. Otherwise, resources provided by the international community would simply finance additional private capital outflow by residents, and such outflows can be large.A search is thus on for mechanisms to give private sector lenders incentives to act in tandem with the government authorities. The goal is to supplement official financial assistance by financial flows from other sources in the event of crisis, in a way that ensures that the private sectors exposure is maintained or increased. This could contribute importantly to orderly restructuring and speed up the restoration of normal credit flows.Private investors behaviour in a liquidity crisis is almost always myopic. Indeed, the prospect that private creditors might have been forced to contribute to a financial rescue package for Brazil appears to have accelerated capital flight in late . Economists describe such a situation as a collective action problem. If each creditor tries to collect on its loan, the debtor will go into crisis, but if the creditors agree to be patient and roll over their maturing claims, they may all recover all their loans. The international community has the power to organize the individual creditors so as to produce a more positive collectiveaction outcome.Consequently, under extreme circumstances and in the absence of private sector voluntary cooperation, it might be necessary to force investors into orderly crisis resolution through international support for a temporary halt to payments to all creditors. The IMF already has a mechanism to signal its support for a country in such circumstances, called lending into arrears. The IMF has recalled, officially, that this mechanism is available and that it could be deployed in extreme situations. However, the international community has yet to reach a consensus on what constitutes an extreme situation and how to handle it. It is important that it continue to try to do so because strong leadership from the international community when the next crisis begins can make that crisis a much shorter-lived one, with lower economic costs imposed on the population of the crisis country, than the events of -.The role of capital controlsThe Asian crisis has raised doubts about the validity of the concept of unfettered financial markets and drawn attention to various forms of government intervention. In particular, there has been renewed interest in capital control measures as a means to cope with volatile capital flows, especially in crisis situations. It has been argued that the restrictions on short-term, especially interbank, flows in order to limit excessive foreign exchange exposure of domestic institutions, or help to lengthen the maturity of foreign liabilities may be part of an appropriate strategy to prevent crises, as they partially insulate the country from the disruptive effects of sudden reversals in market sentiment.Supporters of preventive capital controls cite the experience of several Latin American countries and, first of all, Chile, which in imposed disincentives on a broad range of short-term capital inflows. The effect has been to lengthen the average maturity of financial inflows. The controls have also affected the overall volume of flows.The opponents of capital controls stress that world-class risk management systems and effective prudential regulation could work far better than capital restrictions, which the market would in any event eventually find a method of evading. However, as noted above, for most emerging economies the development and implementation of sufficiently strong prudential regulations and supervision will take quite a long time. In this case, even opponents of capital controls agree that they may perform a role. The banking systems of East Asian countries were not weaker than those in China or India, which were untouched by the crisis. Capital controls in the latter cases are thought to have discouraged the build-up of short-term liabilities and shielded these countries from the contagion.Hot money flows and attempts to control them are principally associated with pegged exchange rates. It has been suggested that, instead of imposing capital controls to preserve pegged rates, it would be better for developing countries to adopt a permanently fixed exchange rate supported by a currency board, or to allow the exchange rate to float. It is argued that as capital-market integration increases, countries will be forced increasingly towards more pure floating or more purely fixed regimes.Currency boards may be attractive to only a limited number of countries, as the rigidity of these arrangements makes the country more vulnerable to shocks, including changes in the exchange rate of the reserve currency vis-avis third-country trading partners. Consequently, for many countries that are not prepared to fix the nominal exchange rate of their currencies permanently, a measure of control of the most volatile kinds of capital movements may be an attractive policy choice.Exchange-rate flexibility can discourage short-term lending and borrowing. However, it has been argued that, except in large, diversified economies, the free movement of capital and floating exchange rates are basically incompatible because the exchange rate exerts too large an influence on the national price level.A number of developing countries have shown interest in the temporary resort to capital controls as a strategy to mitigate the extent of a crisis. The most prominent case here is the introduction of capital controls by Malaysia in September . The move was aimed at assisting the efforts to revive the economy by allowing interest rates to fall behind the new capital-account barrier.The opponents of capital controls have also been stressing that even if there are some short-run benefits associated with capital controls, these benefits are more than offset by long-term costs in terms of inferior macroeconomic performance. There is, however, no clear empirical evidence of this.The imposition of ad hoc restrictions in crisis situations appears to be even more controversial than preventive capital controls. It has been argued that ad hoc controls in one country may cause widespread contagion as investors will act pre-emptively in many countries. Yet, there exists an opposing view that despite certain drawbacks, the resort to temporary restrictive measures on capital transactions may be justified not only in emergency situations, but also when these measures are necessary for balance-of-payments or macroeconomic management reasons.While there is strong disagreement about costs and benefits of capital controls, especially the temporary crisis variant, there exists a policy direction that reflects a widespread consensusthe imposition or retention of selective controls that can be fitted within an overall framework of increasing liberalization of a financial system. The consensus view assigns great importance to caution, gradualism and proper management in the difficult and unpredictable process of financial liberalization. As there is a plurality of well-argued views on this score, it seems most appropriate that the decisions on the degree of openness of the capital account should be left to the discretion of national Governments, without pressures for hasty external opening being imposed from outside.DOMESTIC FINANCIAL SYSTEMS, CAPITAL-ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION AND VOLATILITY: CONCLUDING REMARKSThe preceding discussion has shown that financial liberalization and the integration of developing and transition economies into the international financial system carry significant risks. At the same time, it is unrealistic to expect this process to be reversed or even stopped. Hence, the question to be answered is under what conditions financial liberalization, especially capitalaccount liberalization, could be beneficial rather than harmful, that is to say, how the advantages of an open capital account could be maximized and the risks minimized.Unfortunately, thus far there has been no clear answer to this question. The benefits, costs and risks of any chosen path and pace of financial liberalization will vary from country to country, depending on initial conditions. Governments with different economic objectives can reasonably choose different policy strategies, for instance, with respect to the degree of openness to short-term capital movements over the medium term. However, it would be positively dangerous to expose underdeveloped domestic financial structures to the ebbs and flows of global finance under the assumption that external market forces could successfully substitute for carefully designed and consistently implemented reform policies. In other words, external financial liberalization should not be considered an isolated or primary goal, achievement of which automatically raises sophistication and resilience of the domestic financial system. Rather, it should be part of a concurrent, integrated and comprehensive policy approach to macroeconomic and structural reform with individual elements of this policy package reinforcing each other.It must be remembered, above all now that the world financial system is in a period of calm, that policy makers were taken by surpriseindeed, judging by the results of the past two years, overwhelmedby the dynamic new world of global finance. Policy advice that was confidently propounded at middecade, in particular, on the benefits accruing from completely unfettered international financial flows, may reappear and gain a new hearing. It might be argued, for example, that the sequencing was wrong the first time around and that domestic financial systems in developing and transition economies should be better prepared next time. While those systems must certainly be strengthened, one must not lose sight of the consequences of the first set of errors in terms of devastating economic contractions and untenable increases in poverty in the directly affected countries, not to mention an international economic environment of slow growth of world trade, very low commodity prices, and a very substantial net transfer of financial resources out of the developing countries, as described in part one of the present Survey. This needs to be a time for reflection, analysis and policy experimentation, so that the advantages of the new global financial industry can be captured for development and the dangers can be held at bay.