THE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSISIVTHE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE ANDHistory shows that development can happen. Over the last years, an increasing number of countries have achieved a substantial boost to their living standards. The latest testimony to the fact that development is possible has been given over the last half-century by a number of developing countries. east_asia in particular has developed faster than any other region in world history, doubling gross domestic product (GDP) per capita within a generation or less. Yet while some countries have seen enormous progress, a large number of countries have seen only small improvements in living standards and some have even regressed, particularly during the s and s. Many developing countries seem trapped at a low level of income.Developing countries at a low level of income have been a recurrent concern of the united_nations from its beginnings. It has recognized the existence of a group of developing countries that are the poorest and the weakest and face the largest obstacles to development in terms of their economic, institutional, technological and human resources. In , the General Assembly adopted a resolution affirming the need to alleviate the problems of the least developed among the developing countries with a view to enabling them to draw full benefits from the Second united_nations Development Decade. In , the Assembly approved a list of least developed countries; currently the list consists of countries.The external economic environment plays a critical role in the development success of the least developed countries and other low-income countries, particularly since they are generally more vulnerable to external shocks. Recognizing this, the international community has made special efforts to improve the external environment for such countries, for example, by providing trade preference, priority in the allocation of official development assistance (ODA) and, most recently, a special programme for debt relief. Such resources must continue, but it is apparent that they must be complemented by action to address key domestic constraints on development. Some generic policy issues have been addressed in previous editions of the Survey. Part two of wess, will review some of the domestic structural obstacles to development faced by the least developed countries, although it is not intended to be limited to those countries. It will examine a number of issues that such countries need to address in order to start a period of rapid and sustained growth from a low level of GDP per capita so that living standards will markedly increase over a relatively short period of time.Different obstacles to development have been highlighted over the years. For example, in the s and s they were export pessimism, poverty traps and market failures. The s focused on poor economic policies and a constraining external international environment (for example, unsustainable debt and low commodity prices). In the s, concepts from the s, such as the concept of poverty traps and that of externalities, reemerged and were put in a new light, partly as a result of theoretical developments. During the last five decades or so, development strategies have also changed, moving from government-led import-substituting industrialization in the s to the provision of basic needs in the s and to the market-led approach of the Washington consensus of the s. During the s, increasing emphasis was put on institutions, market failures and the functions of Governments in the development process. The following chapters will look at a number of these factors and highlight their role in the transformation of a low-income developing country to a middleor high-income country.The conditions favourable to development need to be created domestically. The incentives for the development of these conditions and the benefits derived from creating them can be substantially affected, either positively or negatively, by exposure to international markets, external assistance and access to foreign technology, as will be highlighted below. In chapter VI, for example, the effects of rising exports on the demand for an educated and skilled labour force are emphasized, while in chapter VII the role of international technology transfer is discussed. On the other hand, a period of rapid economic growth can easily be disrupted by external circumstances, such as a fall in the terms of trade or a balance-of-payments crisis. The extent to which a country is able to withstand an unfavourable external environment, particularly an externally induced crisis, or benefit from the opportunities of international markets, depends partly on domestic conditions, notably its human capital and institutions.GROWTH EXPERIENCE OVER THE PAST YEARSDuring the s and s, many developing countries attained relatively high rates of economic growth. This period has been described as the golden age, as both the developed and the developing countries reached rates of growth unparalleled in history. In nearly all regions of the world, GDP per capita grew three to five times faster between and than in the period -, which previously had been the period with fastest economic growth. Between and , all major regions of the world enjoyed annual growth rates of per capita GDP of per cent or more and Asia and Europe achieved an annual growth rate of more than . per cent. After , growth in the developed countries slowed down, but the growth in the developing countries started to slow down only at the end of the s, with the exception of many countries in east_asia where growth rates were maintained or even increased.The s, which were characterized in the developed countries by slow growth and in the developing countries by declining terms of trade and the debt crisis, were a lost decade for development in many countries. SeveralTHE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS indicators are testimony to this fact. Many countries suffered an end to a period of rapid growth at the end of the s or in the early s and have not been able to resume sustained rapid growth since. This was in particular the case for the overwhelming majority of countries in Africa, in latin_america and in West Asia. GDP per capita fell in these three regions by a total of per cent, per cent and per cent, respectively, in the s. (In contrast, GDP per capita in Eastern and Southern Asia grew by per cent.) The only economies that maintained a per capita growth rate of per cent or more on average without negative growth in per capita terms throughout the s were China, Cyprus, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand. There is no economy that was able to sustain economic growth of GDP per capita at per cent for each year throughout the s. In addition, only a few economies either commenced or resumed in the s a period of years with an annual average growth of per capita GDP of per cent or more without sustaining any decline in per capita GDP. They were Chile, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, India, Mauritius, the Republic of Korea and Viet Nam.The growth record of the developing countries improved during the s, as GDP per capita increased annually by . per cent, compared with . per cent in the s. This was largely a result of the rise in GDP per capita in latin_america. GDP per capita fell again in Africa and West Asia in the s, although in West Asia by a much smaller amount than in the s. Eastern and Southern Asia enjoyed about the same increase in per capita GDP in the s as in the s.The economic performance of several developing countries was interrupted by a number of financial crises that shook the global economy between the end of and . These crises originated in countries that had achieved substantial increases in their living standards. Subsequently, they had an impact on other developing countries as well, through the effects on international trade and finance. For example, the number of least developed countries that had reached growth rates of GDP per capita of over per cent fell in to from in (see table I.). Yet, it appears that the impact of the financial crises in the s was of shorter duration than the debt crisis in the s. The number of developing countries that are forecast to grow at over per cent is expected to increase from in to in (see table I.). For the least developed countries, the number is expected to rise from five in to eight in .The growth experience of the last half-century shows that few economies sustained growth rates at high levels without interruption. Indeed, there is no developing country that has achieved an annual growth rate of GDP per capita of at least per cent for each year for a period of years, which is the number of years needed to double GDP per capita at such a growth rate. Some economies (Botswana and Singapore) doubled GDP per capita in a period as short as seven years. However, this implies a double-digit growth rate, which can rarely be sustained for more than a few years. A more common growth path is one where a country doubles GDP per capita in years by growing at per cent in per capita terms on average. Doubling GDP per capita in -years was achieved by, for instance, Brazil (-), Indonesia (-), Mauritius (), the Republic of Korea (-, -and -) and Taiwan Province of China (-, -and -).For the majority of countries, growth is a very slow or even elusive process. In fact, out of the developing countries monitored by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the united_nations Secretariat, suffered a decline in GDP per capita between and and in an additional countries GDP per capita increased by less than per cent over this period (GDP per capita doubles in years if it grows at per cent annually) (see table IV.). Thus, a total of countries, which amounts to per cent, were not able to double GDP per capita over a -year period. Moreover, of these had a GDP per capita below $, (in dollars) in and of these had been in the same situation in . Thus, a large number of countries were poor and have remained poor. This suggests that they seem to be stuck in a poverty trap.The question then arises how some countries have managed to escape this trap while others are still in it. The present Survey will discuss some of the elements that have played a role. A certain set of conditions that were in place and thresholds that had been reached can be identified for most of the countries that commenced a period of rapid and sustained growth. However, there cannot be one single blueprint for what these conditions were. Table IV. illustrates the fact that the initial conditions varied markedly. For example, GDP per capita ranged from $ to $,, life expectancy from to years and years of schooling from . to .. The variation depended on specific circumstances. Economies poor in mineral resources had to rely on agriculture and manufacturing for rapid economic growth and this was largely impossible without reaching certain levels of educational attainment and technological capabilities. On the other hand, in countries rich in mineral resources, GDP often grew at high rates for some years even if the educational attainment and life expectancy were low and infrastructure was poor. Revenues from mineral exports created opportunities but only a few countries have been able to grasp them. Many mineral exporters ultimately suffered from low growth rates,Table IV..FREQUENCIES OF AVERAGE ANNUAL GROWTH OF GDP PER CAPITA AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, -Number of countries monitoredAverage annual growth of GDP per capita (number of countries)-.-.-.Developing countries of which:latin_americaAfricaEastern and Southern Asia West AsiaMemorandum items:Least developed countries Sub-Saharan Africaa THE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS Table IV..CountryInitial conditionsaPeriod of rapid growthbGDP per capitacLife expectancydYears of schoolingeTelephones per , personsInstitutional qualityfBotswanaChileChinaIndiaIndonesiaMalaysiaMauritiusRepublic of Korea SingaporeTaiwan Province of China ThailandViet Nam-----g ---. . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . ... . . . . .Taiwan Province of China is average of male and female life expectancy for .Average of government repudiation of contracts, risk of expropriation, rule of law and bureaucratic quality over the s. A high index number indicates higher instituappreciation of the real exchange rate (Dutch disease), worsening income distributions and corruption. The higher the educational attainment and the better the infrastructure and institutions, the more likely it is these problems are avoided. A mineral-exporting country can diversify into, for example, manufacturing, if a certain level of educational attainment is reached and infrastructure is built. Many developing countries received large foreign exchange earnings from exports during the commodity boom of the s, but did not translate them into a more diversified economy. This left them vulnerable to declines in commodity prices as the experience of the s has shown.To give one positive example, the initial conditions in Botswana were rather poor when it became independent in . There were no tarred roads in the country except for a few kilometres in towns. There were only nine secondary schools and only two offered the full five-year course, about people with a secondary school diploma and about people with a university degree. The proportion of people with higher education per capita was actually not small compared with that of other countries but the absolute number was very small. A small country needs a relatively large number of educated civil servants because of economies of scale in the running of a country. In the case of Botswana, the pickings were slim. Fortunately, the leadership and the institutions were of high quality (see, table IV.). Thus, Botswana was able to take advantage of two fortuitous events: the discovery of diamonds in and the entry of the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland (a major export market for beef) into the European Union (EU) in , which raised the price for the beef that Botswana exported. Export revenues were used to expand infrastructure and educational attainment, improve health care and diversify production beyond beef and diamonds. Thus, the quality of the leadership and the institutions, including the democratic ones, contributed to the fact that the export revenues were well spent.As the case of Botswana shows, institutions, including the political system, are crucial in influencing who appropriates an economic surplus and how it is spent. For example, a more equal distribution of land and income, as will be discussed in chapter V, results in a larger share of the income gains being received by peasants. This reduces capital flight and the imports of luxury goods and has positive effects on the private expenditures on education (see chap. VI) and on the demand for locally produced goods and services, thus stimulating development.The second half of the twentieth century witnessed vast transformations among the developing countries. Many of them became independent from their colonial rulers, mostly in the first two decades after the Second World War. Independence brought new hope and vigour to the development efforts of these countries. Yet, the task was daunting.In the s and s, the growth of GDP per capita was considered the main objective of development. It was thought that economic growth would, at least at some point, benefit everybody (by trickling down), the alleviation of poverty not being, in most cases, a direct objective. But growth would not come automatically. The early development economists regarded the standard economic theories as invalid for the situation that prevailed in the developing world. In their view, the developing economies did not function as smoothly as the developed countries but suffered from rigidities (for example, age-old institutions), shortages (for example, of entrepreneurs and finance), surpluses (for example, of rural labour), smallness (which made it hard to benefit from economies of scale) and absent or failing markets.To overcome the vicious circle of poverty and the structural constraints on development, a deliberate big investment push in the industrial sectorcoordinated, planned and instigated by an active Statewas generally regarded as imperative. For example, the development of the iron industry was hindered because the market for iron was too small in poor countries, and the average costs for iron production is much lower at higher volumes (in other words, economies of scale are large). Moreover, industries that used iron would not develop because iron was too expensive (in other words, forward linkages were non-existent). It was felt that if the Government created both an iron industry and an iron-using industry, such as railroads, the dilemma (which economists refer to as a coordination failure) would be solved. In addition, cheaper iron and railroad transportation would also benefit industries other than the targeted ones (in other words, the externalities would be large).THE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS The accumulation of physical capital, the construction of infrastructure and industrialization were seen as important instruments, partly because it was expected that the industrial sector would be able to employ the disguised unemployed from the agricultural sector (see chap. V). Government intervention, planning and public enterprises were expected to correct market failures, economize on scarce entrepreneurial talent, overcome large indivisibilities, realize economies of scale, induce positive externalities and linkages within and between sectors and increase the power of the State over the commanding heights of the economy. This development strategy was often combined with or a result of import-substitution, which was deemed necessary because of the pessimism that prevailed in the s with regard to the prospects for exports of primary commodities (export pessimism), the experience of the s being fresh in the memory of policy makers. Import-substituting industrialization was the dominant development strategy in the s and s; as Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, put it: No modern nation can exist without certain essential articles which can be produced only by big industry. Not to produce these is to rely on imports from abroad and thus to be subservient to the economy of foreign countries.The optimism regarding the abilities of the Government to bring about development resulted from the successful planning of the war economies in countries like the united_kingdom and the united_states of America; the Keynesian revolution which in the s was in full swing; and the apparent success of centrally planned development in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.). As Keynes argued that a capitalist economy could be in an equilibrium with unemployment, the development economists argued that a developing country could be in a low-income equilibrium or poverty trap. In both cases, Government could provide the escape route. Moreover, economists had created a tool chest, with, for example, input-output analysis and simple growth models, that Governments would be able to utilize to devise policy measures that could be used to actually start development.Starting at the end of the s, increasingly doubts were raised about the effectiveness of a Government-led industrialization strategy, but the definite death knell came only in the early s. This was triggered primarily by two events: slower economic growth, which affected almost the whole world after the first rise in oil prices of /, and the increasing acceptance of monetarism to combat high inflation. At the end of the s and the beginning of the s, Governments in a number of developed countries put the monetarists ideas into practice and tightened the money supply. This resulted in sharply higher interest rates and contributed to a recession in many developed countries, yet inflation did slow down and more sustainable growth was eventually achieved. However, the higher interest rates and the recession in the developed countries in the early s, coupled with falling non-oil commodity prices, laid the foundations for severe balance-of-payments problems, the debt crisis and a decline in economic performance in many developing countries in the s.The need for external finance (at a time when lending by commercial banks had decreased) resulted in increased lending by the Bretton Woods institutions. This was conditioned by policy prescriptions that generally focused on expanding the role of markets and reducing the role of Governments in economies.The convergence of policies that were recommended in the s became known as the Washington consensus. By this point, the ideological pendulum had swung to the other extreme: if in the s it was thought that Governments could do everything, by the s it was believed they could do hardly anything. This tendency towards a larger reliance on markets was further encouraged by the breakdown of central planning in Eastern Europe and the USSR, which started in .It became also increasingly clear in the s that the export pessimism of earlier times had been unfounded, at least for individual countries, as several developing countries were able to raise their standard of living by rapidly expanding exports of manufactures that, over time, were of increasing technological sophistication. Export-led development became a more widely accepted development strategy. It became increasingly apparent that sustained rapid growth has to rely almost always on exports, this being particularly the case for small countries.Without the convergences ever having become complete, some of the limitations of the Washington consensus came more clearly to the fore in the s. The simple (rhetorical) version of the Washington consensus asserted that economic growth would promptly follow stabilization, liberalization and privatization, but this was rarely the case in African countries and economies in transition. It became increasingly clear that macroeconomic stability was only a necessary condition for economic growth and not a sufficient condition. These disappointing results have contributed to a new phase in the views of development economists and policy makers.In the meantime, a parallel, and partly related, change occurred within the economic profession. Economic theory had become increasingly formal and mathematical over the previous few decades and the writings of the development economists of the s and s, which were more verbal, were often ignored. By , most ideas of the s and s, such as those concerning externalities and poverty traps, had been forgotten, essentially because the founders of development economics failed to make their points with sufficient analytical clarity to communicate their essence to other economists, and perhaps even to each other. One reason for this failure was that these concepts were difficult, mathematically speaking, to incorporate into the then dominant economic theory, which assumed an economy in which everything was perfect: for example, no firm had market power (perfect competition), every participant had the same complete information (perfect and symmetric information) and average costs were constant (no economies of scale) and independent of the level of output and of the activities of other firms (no externalities).While development practice was increasing its reliance on markets in the s, theoretical developments were pointing to the deficiencies of this approach. Economists, starting in the s, were increasingly incorporating into their models market power, asymmetric information and economies of scalephenomena that make markets work less than optimally. In the s, these two strandsdevelopment practice and theorycaught up with each other. In a way, the debate about development of years ago is being revisited with more powerful arguments. The concepts of externalities, economies of scale, poverty traps and strategic complementarities between industries, among others, which originated in the s, are again being used to explain development experience and to guide policy.THE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS One of the ideas that has resurfaced is that of the poverty trap. The concept of poverty traps, and related concepts such as those of vicious circles (of poverty) and cumulative and circular causation, took centre stage in many of the writings of the development economists of the s. Two clear-cut examples are from Ragnar Nurkse: (A) poor man may not have enough to eat; being under-fed, his health may be weak; being physically weak, his working capacity is low, which means that he is poor, which in turn means that he will not have enough to eat; and so on. ... Secondly, the inducement to invest may be low because of the small buying power of the people, which is due to their small income, which again is due to low productivity. The low productivity, however, is a result of the small amount of capital used in production, which in its turn may be caused at least partly by the small inducement to invest.Poverty traps have recently regained attention in the academic literature, partly because standard economic growth theory cannot easily explain the divergent growth experiences of the last half-century. This theory argues that, because more capital is used per worker in rich countries, the productivity of additional capital should be lower than in poor countries where less capital is used per worker (that is to say, where the marginal productivity of capital is decreasing). Investment in poor countries should be therefore more productive and should yield a higher growth rate than in rich countries. As a consequence, the difference in GDP per capita between rich and poor countries should become smaller over time. This has been the case among the developed countries themselves, where the gap in GDP per capita between the united_states and Europe, and between Western Europe and Southern Europe, has become smaller since the end of the Second World War. This has not been the case for the developing countries, with the exception of a few economies such as Hong Kong SAR, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China; to the contrary, the gap in GDP per capita between rich and poor countries has widened over the last half-century.The old and new writings of development economists have identified a number of causes for poverty traps. Among the most frequently mentioned are demand spillovers, externalities related to human capital and technology, and the persistence of suboptimal institutions.The first example of a poverty trap is a situation where demand spillovers are important as a result of economies of scale. A typical case concerns the iron industry and the railroads (discussed above). In both sectors, profitability is dependent on output levels (and therefore on the level of demand) because average costs decrease when output expands, in other words, they are subject to economies of scale. Each industry will never emerge by itself: the economy is stuck in a no-industry trap as a result of the complementarity between the iron and railroad industries. If the investments in the iron and railroad industries are coordinated and both expand at the same time, demand for each others output will make them profitable.Chapter V discusses the case where the demand spillover that stimulates output in other sectors comes from agriculture. If the agricultural sector produces with no economies of scalein other words, if the average costs per unit of output are independent of the level of outputbut manufacturing and services are subject to economies of scale, the economy can end up in a poverty trap in the case where the income of farmers is too low to generate enough demand for manufactured goods and services. However, if, for example, technological progress in agriculture or land reform raises the incomes of farmers, this can provide the necessary demand boost to manufacturing. Thus, manufacturing and services can expand output, resulting in a fall in average costs and an increase in profitability. Moreover, the availability of manufactured goods and services provides incentives to farmers to generate more income. This raises the possibility of an agriculture-led development strategy, which has often been ignored.Raising productivity in agriculture is also important because it can transform another vicious circle into a virtuous circle. One of the most important vicious circles that can exist in a poor country consists in the negative effect of chronically undernourished people on productivity. Raising food output and lowering food prices contributes to better nutrition throughout the economy and can provide an important stimulus to the escape from a poverty trap (see chap. V).A second major cause of a poverty trap is the existence of economies of scale and externalities related to human capital, research and development and technology. Education and research and development yield large benefits to people other than the ones educated or paying for the research. Because the benefits to society are larger than the private benefits, not enough people become educated, not enough technology is generated and not enough research is embarked upon. This in itself can generate a poverty trap, which can be reinforced if the returns to education or research for an individual are dependent on the educational attainment or research efforts of others. There are fewer incentives for an individual to go to school in a poor country because there are fewer opportunities that reward education, that is to say, the private returns to education are particularly low. Yet, growth will materialize only if educational attainment increases. Thus, enrolment rates are low because the country is poor and economic growth is slow because enrolment rates are low. The result is a poverty trap.Chapter VI emphasizes the fact that a certain level of educational attainment has to be reached before a significant improvement in living standards can be expected, which is consistent with the phenomenon of a poverty trap. Thus, economies as disparate as Scotland in the eighteenth century, and China, Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China in the twentieth century, reached levels of educational attainment surpassing what one would expect, given their GDP per capita. This prepared them for the subsequent rise in GDP per capita. When economic growth took off, it also created a demand for education, transforming a vicious circle into a virtuous circle.Similarly, a country needs to achieve certain levels of educational attainment and technological capabilities before technology can exert its full impact on growth. This is highlighted in chapters VI and VII. The rapidly expanding markets for products and services that use and produce information technology offer new opportunities. However, before they can be exploited, a number of conditionsregarding, for example, education and infrastructureneed to be in place. Moreover, there is evidence that a certain minimum threshold of investments in information technology need to be made before the benefits from these investments reveal themselves.THE POVERTY TRAP: EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS A number of chapters of the present Survey highlight the critical importance of education, whether in increasing the adoption of new technology in agriculture, enhancing technological capabilities and labour productivity or augmenting the linkages between agriculture and the rural non-agricultural sector.A third reason for the creation of a poverty trap can be the presence of suboptimal institutions. Institutions are the formal and informal norms and rules of society that shape the environment within which the economy operates, and increasing attention is being paid to their critical role in the development process. Chapter VIII examines the characteristics that can result in institutions that hinder development but are difficult to change. Institutions have a high degree of complementarity among themselves so that it is frequently difficult to change one without creating implications for others. This makes the dynamics of institutional change complex and hard to predict. Many institutions also have considerable set-up costs. This implies that they are subject to economies of scale, and this in itself can be a cause of a poverty trap. Because they are hard to transform, suboptimal institutions, such as those that create poverty traps, may very well persist.Chapter VIII argues that one requirement for changing institutions is greater participation. For example, an unequal distribution of land can be an obstacle to growth that is difficult to change; however, as discussed in chapter V, community involvement in land reforms has enhanced their success. If land reforms are complemented by policy reforms, they can provide a stimulus to growth because the combination may lead to higher productivity, political and social stability and a more equitable income distribution. This, in turn, can provide a boost to the demand for manufactured products and services. More equal income distributions also contribute to greater demand for and supply of education (see chap. VI).Poverty traps imply that certain critical values need to be reached before growth becomes a self-sustaining process: in certain areas of development, countries have to surpass a threshold before sustained growth will commence. Countries may need to spend considerable effort over an extended period of time to reach these thresholds before they can reap the benefits. For example, farmers incomes may need to reach a certain level before they generate enough demand for manufacturing goods and services to enable these other sectors to realize economies of scale and become profitable. Similarly, educational attainment has to reach a certain level before the externalities are large enough to have a significant impact on economic growth and the resulting expanded economic opportunities provide incentives to school enrolment. Equally, a country needs to acquire certain technological capabilities before it can benefit from the opportunities of a globalized economy. As a final example, more equal distributions of land and income are conducive to positive feedbacks between economic growth and the demand for manufactured goods and the demand for and supply of education. Several studies have indicated that high initial levels of inequality are detrimental to economic growth.This part of the Survey argues that it is possible even for countries that face seemingly insurmountable obstacles to escape the poverty trap and develop. Constraints do matter, but countries that face adverse conditions need to make a deliberate effort to surmount them and seize the opportunities that are offered. Several countries have done this, despite (or perhaps owing to the need to overcome) export pessimism, poverty traps, market failures, an adverse international environment, high transportation costs or a lack of natural resources. The Republic of Korea has succeeded, despite few natural resources and export pessimism; Chile is in the process of succeeding despite high transportation costs and dependence on primary commodities; Botswana is on its way to succeeding, despite little human capital; and Mauritius is also on its way, despite monoculturalism, cyclones, high unemployment, brain drain and high transportation costs. There are no absolute constraints on an escape from a poverty trap, but the process is neither automatic, nor quick nor easy. Overcoming the constraints and escaping a poverty trap usually take a long time. It took east_asia, for example, a number of decades to create some of the institutions, infrastructure and human capital that supported the rapid growth of the s, but others were developed in a much shorter period of time through a broad and intense effort. In all cases, creating the necessary conditions for development requires, above all, a long-term national commitment and strong political leadership.Development usually involves the transformation of an economy from one dominated by agriculture into one where other economic activities assume a greater role. Yet, whether agriculture plays a passive or an active role in the economys transformation from a low to a high living standard is less clear. Many development economists have paid relatively little attention to agriculturewith some notable exceptionsdespite the fact that some economists have argued that there has not been any industrial revolution that was not preceded (by to years) by an agricultural revolution, in other words, by a substantial increase in agricultural productivity. In many development strategies, ranging from import-substituting industrialization to export-led growth, agriculture has played only a supportive role or no role at all. In particular, the interactions between agriculture and other sectors have often been ignored and frequently little emphasis has been put on enhancing technological progress, on investing in agriculture and on exploring the possibility that agriculture can trigger development elsewhere. Policies have frequently displayed, either explicitly or implicitly, an urban bias, reflected in heavy taxation of agriculture, price controls on food, a lack of rural infrastructure, too little agricultural research and neglect in the provision of social services in rural areas. On the other hand, agriculture has played a large role during the development process in a number of countries, for example, China and Japan.Agriculture is especially fundamental during the early phases of development because of the size of the agricultural sector, the extent of rural poverty and the primacy of food. In most developing countries, agriculture engages between and per cent of the labour force and accounts for -per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) (see figure V.) and -per cent of merchandise exports. A focus on agriculture is also imperative because poverty in most developing countries is concentrated in rural areas.Agriculture can promote economic development through several channels: by increasing food production and lowering food prices; by improving nutrition and increasing labour productivity; by generating employment; by creating demand for manufactured goods and services; by providing labour and capital for the development of other sectors; and by earning foreign exchange. But the critical word is can. The question is thus how agriculture can stimulate development. The present chapter examines the factors determining the critical role that agriculture can play in the early phases of development. Specifically, this chapter will discuss the linkages between agriculture and the rural non-agricultural sector, the distribution of land, infrastructure and technological progress in agriculture.Figure V..SIZE OF THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND GDP PER CAPITA IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, aIn many development strategies, the agricultural sector is given a rather passive role. The central focus during the s and s was on industrialization; agriculture was to a large extent just a supporting activity that supplied the labour, resources and food needed in industry. It was possible for large numbers of workers to be taken away from agriculture and employed in industry without a resulting drop in food production. Agriculture could also be taxed to provide revenues that could be invested in industry.The bias towards industry was partly based on the belief that agriculture was subject to low productivity and slow growth. The classical economists of the nineteenth century, such as Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo, argued that agriculture suffered from diminishing returns. Many economists since then have considered the prospects for technical progress in this sector to be dim, partly because of the limitations to technological transfers across ecological zones. For example, the international development strategies for the s and the s deemed the potential growth rate for agricultural output at half (or less than half) the potential growth rate of manufacturing output.The prospect of slow agricultural growth has also been provoked by Engels law, which states that the share of income spent on food decreases when income increases. This ultimately limits the increase in the demand for food and thus the growth of output. Engels law has been one of the few widely accepted empirical regularities in economics. Limited growth of demand has been an issue not only for food, but for all primary commodities. Export pesAgriculture as percentage of GDPsimism regarding primary commodities, which prevailed in the s and s, was a key cause of the bias towards industry. Economists were pessimistic during that period about the possibility of the expansion of exports of primary products because of the Depression of the s when demand for and prices of primary commodities had been very low. In general, economists have argued that the income and price elasticities of primary commodities are low and that the demand for primary commodities is vulnerable to the invention of substitutes. To give two examples, synthetic rubber has replaced natural rubber to a large degree and fibre-optic cables are replacing copper wires.The emphasis on industry was also based on the view that manufacturing produced more dynamic production linkages and could therefore better serve as an engine of growth for the whole economy. It was argued that agriculture did not generally use many inputs from other sectors, or provide a lot of inputs to other sectors, except in food processing and textiles, and that these two sectors would decline relative to other sectors when a country developed. Thus, Albert Hirschman, an influential development economist, wrote in the s: Agriculture certainly stands convicted on the count of its lack of direct stimulus to the setting up of new activities through linkage effects; the superiority of manufacturing in this respect is crushing.The potential for linkages in manufacturing is closely related to the argument that economies of scale are more prevalent in manufacturing. This is particularly the case in sectors that require large investments, such as the chemical and steel industries. Economies of scale are smaller in subsectors such as textiles and leather. Many economists have also argued that technical change originates from manufacturing industries and a large share of total research and development (R&D) expenditures is spent in the manufacturing sector. R&D spillovers thus originate to a large extent from the manufacturing sector, and capital goods sectors are particularly important in transmitting technical progress. Finally, the possibility for specialization and division of labour is greater within manufacturing than within other sectors of the economy.In contrast, agriculture has few economies of scale inherently internal to the farm because land can be tilled with a hoe and with a tractor and plough and inputs such as land, labour, livestock, fertilizers, seeds and pesticides can be applied in small quantities (or rented). Economies of scale on larger farms can result from easier access to credit and from economies of scale that exist in processing, storage, distribution, irrigation or agricultural support services. Plantations, for example, usually arise (or survive) because of a combination of economies of scale in processing and transportation and the need to coordinate harvesting, processing and transportation owing to the perishable nature of the crop.During the last three decades, the assumptions underlying the bias against agriculture have increasingly been challenged. The gloomy expectations about agricultural productivity have been challenged in a major way by the green revolution. Although the term green revolution is associated with the increased use of chemical inputs and high-yielding seeds in developing countries since the s, the essence of this process was applied earlier in countries such as Japan and the united_states of America. Japan started to use improved rice varieties in the late nineteenth century and the united_states first developed maize hybrids in the s. This, in combination with more fertilizers, led quickly to a large jump in output per acre of land in both countries.The success of the green revolution in the s and s, particularly in South Asia, pointed to another misconception regarding agriculture. It was recognized in the s and s that the green revolution required an increased use of industrial inputs, such as chemical fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation tube wells and agricultural equipment. What was ignored was the generally much larger effect of the green revolution on the demand from farmers for consumption goods produced by other sectors. The size of these consumption linkages broached the possibility of an agricultural demand-led development strategy. In other words, agriculture can be a leader rather than a follower. This possibility has been emphasized increasingly since the s.An often-neglected externality of agriculture is the benefit to other sectors if food prices are low or decline. An increase in agricultural productivity that leads to higher food production and lower food prices has beneficial effects throughout the economy because it improves the nutritional status of people, allowing an increase in labour productivity, and leads to higher real wages. One economic historian estimated that per cent of British economic growth beween and appears to have been accounted for by the better nutrition and increased human efficiency in transforming dietary energy into work output. This has been recognized by some economists, but it received little emphasis when countries were designing and implementing their development strategies. The importance of the externality of food production and prices became very apparent in India in the early s when there were a number of years of poor harvests, pushing up food prices and wages. This process was reversed only with the green revolution. The subsequent growth of the nonagricultural sectors was made possible partly by lower food prices.The price of food is also central when policies focus on incentives for the production of tradables but ignore the fact that the cost of tradables is partly determined by the prices of food. The competitiveness of tradables can thus be improved by lowering food prices; but in many developing countries, particularly in Africa, food is non-tradable, largely because of high transportation costs. As a result, policies that attempt to enhance the incentives for tradable goods should not ignore non-tradables.There are a number of advantages of a development strategy that emphasizes agriculture. Firstly, agriculture itself, and the construction of the infrastructure that agriculture needs to enhance its productivity (roads and irrigation), are very labour-intensive. They are even more labour-intensive than such manufacturing industries as textiles. Productivity increases in agriculture will thus lead to higher demand for labour, which will particularly benefit the poorest people in rural areas, namely, the landless. Secondly, higher agricultural productivity leads to higher living standards among poor farmers and more demand for goods and services that are also relatively labour-intensive. These two factors imply that an agriculture-led development strategy is an effective way to reduce poverty through employment creation. Finally, agriculture is less import-intensive than manufacturing and alleviates the foreign exchange constraint that many developing countries face.LinkagesIf agriculture functions as an engine for development, linkages to other activities are the driving belts and perform the actual work. The larger these linkages, the bigger the effect. Evidence shows that an additional dollar of agricultural income in Asia leads on average to an additional $. in total income, that is to say, the multiplier is .. Until recently, multiplier estimates for Africa were usually lowerabout .. As indicated above, the total effect (in Africa and Asia) is largely a result of consumption linkages, rather than production linkages. The production linkages are, in relative terms, stronger in Asia than in Africa because Asian agriculture is technologically more advanced and uses more inputs from other sectors, and processing of agricultural products is more prevalent. Potentially these linkages in Africa could be higher.The size of the linkages depends on a number of factors. One of the most important determinants is income distribution and closely related to that is the distribution of land. Rich farmers spend a larger share of their income on imported goods or on goods that are imported from urban areas, thereby reducing the linkages to the rural non-agricultural sector (see below). Lowincome farmers spend a much larger share of their income on locally produced goods and services, which are cheaper and of lower quality and thus more compatible with the income level and needs of the lower-income segments of the population. Moreover, large farms are generally more mechanized and less labour-intensive than small farms. This also reduces the linkages to other sectors because the inputs and machinery used by large farms are mostly imported. An agricultural demand-led development strategy will thus be unlikely if the income distribution is very unequal because the additional income generated within agriculture, for example, by an export boom or technological progress, will not translate into much demand for domestically produced manufactures and services. It has been argued, for instance, that the tobacco export boom in Colombia during the s and s failed to generate wider economic development because tobacco was cultivated on a few very large plantations; but the surge in coffee exports in Colombia between and stimulated industrialization because coffee was grown by a large number of peasants.The size of the linkages is also related to the extent and quality of infrastructure. Transportation and communication infrastructure has a positive effect on agricultural incomes because it reduces transaction costs and increases the availability of inputs to agriculture. In addition, higher incomes within agriculture translate into effective demand for goods and services produced by other sectors. Who benefits from this increased demand depends on the tradability of the goods and services produced, which is partly determined by infrastructure as well. However, the better the infrastructure, the higher the tradability of goods and the more likely an increase in agricultural incomes will translate into demand for goods produced elsewhere, for example, in urban areas. This could also mean that there is a triggering by demand of imports from abroad, which reduces the linkage effect. Demand is more likely to be satisfied by supply from elsewhere when there are local supply constraints or when demand doesnt match the supply of goods and services. Supply constraints are probably more pervasive in Africa than in Asia. There can thus be a contradictory (short-term) effect associated with the improvement of infrastructure.Better infrastructure, especially in rural areas, generally has a positive effect on agriculture and other activities because it enhances technology adoption and the degree of specialization among regions. This will raise incomes. The effect of higher incomes on the rural non-agricultural sector is higher if the demand for goods and services matches what is locally produced, if there are no supply constraints and if the non-tradability of goods and services is high. The more these conditions are met, the higher the linkages to the local community. In Africa (West Africa in particular), the proportion of goods and services that are considered non-tradable is high, partly owing to poor infrastructure. As a result, an exogenous increase in agricultural incomes, as caused, for example, by the adoption of new technology or an improvement in the international price of an exported commodity, can have an important demand-led growth effect on the economy if there are no supply constraints. According to recent estimates that take account of the large non-tradable sector in Africa, a $ increase in income from the production of tradables will generate approximately an additional $ to $ in income at the national level (that is to say, the multiplier is between and ). This enhances the prospects for agricultural demand-led growth.To realize the full potential of the role agriculture can play in the transformation of an economy, agricultural productivity has to increase. Poor performance of agriculture has often been blamed on the bias against agriculture with regard to prices, taxes and interventions in production, consumption and marketing of outputs and inputs. As a result, reforms of the agricultural sector initially mainly focused on the liberalization of markets.However, the aggregate supply response to changes in prices is very low in the short run in agriculture because the factors of production (land, labour, capital and technology) are largely fixed. Over the long run (as many as to years), agricultural output is more responsive to prices if and only if the factors of production are expanded or new technology is adopted and this is complemented by investments in education and infrastructure and access to credit, extension services and inputs.Land reform is an important means to increase agricultural productivity. The redistribution of land from landlords to farmers who own and operate the land has played a key function in transforming a traditional agricultural society into a developed economy, by increasing output through more intensive use of land and labour, by enhancing the demand linkages with other sectors and by stimulating rural non-agricultural activities. Programmes to redistribute land became unpopular during the s, partly as a result of poor results and government interventions in markets that had proved unsustainable. Recently, interest in land reforms has re-emerged.The case for land redistributionThere are three main arguments in favour of the redistribution of land from large farms to owner-operated small farms. The first argument is based on the evidence that small owner-operated farms are usually more productive. However, this argument is not straightforward. Average costs per unit of output are generally not very different on small and large farms. In other words, economies of scale are generally immaterial at the farm level. That is because very few inputs are indivisible and have large fixed costs (which would cause average costs to decline when output is larger). Farm machinery might be an exception but it can be made divisible by renting rather than owning.On the other hand, the costs of supervising workers increase with the size of the farm. These costs are particularly large in agriculture because tasks on farms are spatial and sequential in nature. This is one of the major reasons why family farms, where the operator is also the owner, are often the most productive, as family members have high incentives to work hard on the farms they operate. Family members are not paid by the hour (so that the costs of production do not increase when more labour is used) and often have low opportunity costs, for example, because of a lack of off-farm wage employment. Therefore, they are likely to work long hours. The combination of the lack of economies of scale, low supervision costs and high labour input on family farms establishes a negative relation between farm size and productivity. This pattern has been found in many parts of the world.The empirical regularity of land productivitys being higher on smaller farms can be disturbed by imperfect markets, institutions and policies that favour large farms, or by economies of scale that exist in processing or agricultural support services, such as distribution, extension and storage (see box V.). For example, it is often easier for large farms to obtain credit because they can use land as collateral. Moreover, countries all over the world have favoured large farms through subsidies, taxes and interventions in land markets, output and input markets, and labour markets, or in the public provision of services, such as transportation, extension and research. Such policies and institutions greatly increased the profitability of large farms in many countries, particularly in Eastern and Southern Africa. Large farms often occupy land of higher quality, have better access to credit and extension services and use more non-labour inputs, such as fertilizer, pesticides, high-yield seed varieties and irrigation. This is mainly a result of subsidies and institutions favouring large farms. In South Africa, for example, the profitability of large farms was aided by restrictions on tenancy, the elimination of African tenancy in the Land Act of , the pass laws and subsidies for mechanization. Some have argued that discrimination against smallholders in several African countries has been the most severe in the world. As a corollary, output should increase when the policy bias against smallholders declines. This has been the case, for example, in Kenya and South Africa; the latter has reformed a number of markets since the s, for instance, by reducing the subsidies on capital that favour large farmers.The second argument in favour of land redistribution is based on equity considerations. Economists often argue that there is a trade-off between efficiency and equity; but, as the evidence on the productivity of small farms shows, this trade-off usually does not exist in the case of land redistribution. There is little dispute about the fairness of land redistribution, as the existing distribution of land is usually the result of violence, coercive actions and/or discriminatory policies. As the unequal distribution of land in many countries was often secured by violent means, it also has frequently led to long and violent strife. As a corollary, land redistribution can contribute to social and political stability, as has been the case in some Asian countries. Yet, land reforms that wereBox V..The productivity advantage of small farms over large farms implies that it is more profitable for landlords to sell or to rent out land than to hire labour to work the land. The question arises whether farmers who rent the land are as productive as farmers who own the land. Theory suggests that, under certainty and if the work efforts of the tenant can be observed and enforced by the landlord without costs, the outputs of a fixed-rent tenant farmer, owner cultivator, or sharecropper should be the same. Yet, these circumstances are obviously unrealistic. If the work efforts cannot be enforced freely (and there is no uncertainty), a fixed-rent contract will yield higher incomes for landlord and tiller than sharecropping. This is the case because it is harder to motivate sharecroppers, as they receive only part of the additional output they produce if they work harder. If, on the other hand, enforcement costs are zero, there is uncertainty and the tiller is risk-averse (which is typical for a household that needs to ensure minimum subsistence), a share contract is the preferred choice of contract, even though incomes are lower than in the unrealistic perfect world. The reasons for this are that sharecropping will allow the tiller to share the risk (for example, of adverse weather) with the landlord and that it insures the landlord against rent default by tenants who are illiquid.In the real world with its uncertainty, enforcement costs and imperfect credit markets (where landownership means easier access to credit), tenants and sharecroppers in particular have lower incentives to work hard, to purchase yield-enhancing inputs and to invest in land improvements, and will thus have lower outputs. Yet, these incentives are enhanced in a number of ways. Firstly, in close-knit communities where social relations are important and where the landlord is also a resident, enforcement costs are lower and yields are closer to first-best outcomes. (Moreover, where enforcement costs are lower but uncertainty exists, share tenancy is more desirable.) Secondly, imperfect credit markets, which landless farmers face, are partly alleviated by borrowing from landlords and cost-sharing of farmers inputs with the landlord. Furthermore, the development of financial markets that enhance access to finance and insurance will lead to higher output (and a shift from share to fixed-rent tenancies because the finance and insurance can partly cover against risk).Thus, tenant farmers, and sharecroppers in particular, in theory face lower yields. In practice, however, sharecropping is a very common and efficient solution to the complexities and imperfections of the real world. In effect, empirical studies show that the yields of sharecroppers are not significantly lower than those of owner cultivators or tenants (unless there are constraints for example, legal ones on tenancy arrangements).The fact that the efficiency losses associated with tenancy and sharecropping are small or negligible establishes a case for land rental markets. It has been argued recently that the encouragement of a land rental market should be a higher priority than the creation of sales markets. Rental markets tend to be less affected than sales markets by credit market imperfections, have lower transaction costs and often also facilitate the transfer of knowledge. Imperfect credit and insurance markets are particularly a problem because they can lead to distress sales of land by smallholders in case of adverse weather or accidents and to a reversal in land concentration.initiated only to calm or avoid social unrest or divert attention were often poorly designed, with insufficient attention to the needs and capabilities of, and structural constraints on, peasants. Moreover, the implementation of these reforms was often piecemeal and they were often abandoned after the immediate threat subsided.Successful land reforms have occurred in Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China. Ownership of large amounts of land was transferred in the late s and the early s from landlords (and the State) to smallholders. This contributed not only to socio-political stability but also to higher productivity and higher living standards in the agricultural sector, and higher demand for locally produced manufactured goods and services, thus stimulating development. Thus, land reforms made the income distribution more equal and augmented the size of the linkages between the different sectors. The fact that they also transformed social relations and power structures within the societies has had positive effects on the participation of communities and on development. Even in latin_america, where land reforms have been more limited, the results have been positive with regard to productivity and income distribution. These positive effects of land redistribution partially explain the positive relation between initial land and income distributions and subsequent economic growth across countries, which contradicts the traditional view that inequality was necessary for growth and that growth would eventually produce a more equal distribution of income.The redistribution of land from rich landlords to poor farmers reduces wealth and income inequality and alleviates poverty as it enhances the income-earning potential of poor people. For example, it has been shown that poor people who have access to land are more food-secure, as land provides an insurance against malnutrition. In addition, the credit access that is associated with landownership allows families to spend more on schooling and health care.Thirdly, land redistribution is also undertaken for environmental reasons in countries where land overuse needs to be reduced, as in the communal areas of Zimbabwe. Environmental degradation is particularly a problem in areas where poverty is combined with high population growth and land scarcity. In highrisk situations, where short-term subsistence is at stake and the ecological balance is fragile, cultivation or grazing practices that are environmentally damaging are often inevitable for individual producers, regardless of tenure arrangements and population pressure. High population growth exacerbates this process as it leads to larger livestock herds and higher demands for land and fuel wood. If, on top of that, land is scarce, farms will become smaller, fallow periods will become shorter and use of marginal land will increase. Countries such as Cameroon, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria and Senegal have seen an increasingly bimodal distribution of land with the farm size in the smallholder sector declining as a result of higher population density. Land redistribution and increasing the productivity on small farms can break the vicious circle of the poverty trap. However, if land reforms include the privatization of common-property resourceswhich are often under environmental stress they could lead to a rise in inequalities, as poor people often rely on commonproperty resources for a significant part of their income and use them particularly as insurance against an economic shock.Land redistribution alone is not enoughInstitutions and policies biased against smallholders have been widespread, particularly in Africa. Research, extension services, seed and fertilizer delivery systems, marketing and transportation are often focused disproportionally on large farms. This bias against smallholders could also have economic reasons. Financial institutions, for example, are less likely to provide credit to smallholders because of the inadequate collateral and high administrative and transaction costs compared with loan size. Moreover, poor farmers are preoccupied with short-term subsistence and cannot afford the uncertainties associated with the adoption of new technologies, such as hybrid seeds. The preoccupation with survival is exacerbated if farmers have difficulty obtaining credit that could help bridge a period with a poor harvest. The adoption of new technologies will be more widespread if they are clearly recognizable as superior to the traditional ones, that is to say, are cheaper, have a lower yield-variance and a lower risk of failure. National and international research systems have focused too much on export crops and too little on the development of drought-resistant and low-cost seeds for rain-fed food agriculture.Taxes, subsidies and other biases in favour of large farms need to be dismantled before land redistribution commences because land prices are otherwise likely to be higher than the discounted value of profits smallholders can expect, despite the higher productivity on smaller farms. Resettled farmers are thus likely to go bankrupt with these distortions in place and this can result in a reconcentration of land.The success of land redistribution depends critically on the availability of credit, marketing, roads, water, extension services and technology such as hybrid seeds. Governments are likely to be involved in creating the institutions that deliver these services to smallholders, yet the farmers themselves can also be involved, for example, in the construction of infrastructure. Without credit, farmers might not be able to buy inputs such as seeds and fertilizer and might be forced to sell the land in times of poor weather. Extension services are crucial to teaching farmers about farming techniques and new technology. These played an important role, for example, in the success of the land reforms that Kenya started in the s. Moreover, there have been a number of cases where public marketing functions have been dismantled but where a private sector marketing capacity has been lagging or where private traders used their power to extract rents from smallholders, particularly in remote areas.Other implementation issuesLand reforms in South and east_asia often involved the transfer of ownership to tenants who were already farming on their land and had the necessary skills and knowledge. Land redistribution is much more difficult when it involves resettlement. In Africa and latin_america, resettlement is more common and the selection of farmers becomes a crucial issue. One study shows that farmers who are married and under years of age, who have larger families, who are better educated and who have farming experience and skills are more likely to be successful as settlers, while the amount of capital that farmers have does not appear to be an important factor in predicting success.The success of land redistribution also depends on political factors. Unequal distributions of land have often been the result of violence, and delayed and protracted land reform has frequently led to violent strife. Moreover, land reforms were often implemented during or after a war or a revolution (for example, in Japan, Mexico and the Republic of Korea). Redistributing land without political upheavals requires careful planning and wide political support. One method for doing this is through the involvement of communities, non-governmental organizations and local governments. Community-based land reforms that use grants, markets and voluntary land salesrather than the top-down forced-purchase land reforms of the pasthave become the preferred mode of implementing land redistributions. In this case, the role of the Government is limited to establishing a framework and providing technical and financial assistance.Preliminary results of community-based land reforms, such as those in Colombia (see box V.), show that the effects are dependent on accountability, technical assistance, access to finance and output markets and monitoring of the quality of the programme (for example, agricultural productivity) rather than the quantity (hectares transferred).The willingness of farmers to pay for the land gives an indication of the commitment to farming and is also an indicator of success. Market prices for land are often inflated as a result of credit subsidies for large farms, tax advantages and the use of land as a hedge against inflation. Even without these distortions, the price of land often exceeds the discounted value of the income from the land because land can be used as collateral. Thus, even if a poor farmer can secure credit to buy land, the income stream will not be sufficient to pay back the loan and distress sales will follow. Moreover, if the land is mortgaged to buy it, it cannot then be used as collateral for borrowing toIn Colombia, municipalities devised a land reform plan that identified potential demand for and supply of land and off-farm investments required. The municipalities conducted a systematic effort to disseminate information about the land reform law and to establish a registry of potential beneficiaries, who were selected on the basis of social and economic criteria. The fact that the criteria and the selected candidates were made public increased the transparency, accountability, awareness and acceptance of the programme. The supply of land was enhanced by providing information, increasing awareness among landowners and improving the collection of land taxes. Local non-governmental organizations provided technical assistance and commercial banks administered the grants and provided additional loans for land acquisition and working capital. The banks worked closely with the non-governmental organizations. The non-governmental organizations, for example, supervised the use of the loans and collected loan repayments.A central part of the programme in Colombia was the model farm project. These projects were designed by the potential beneficiaries, with technical assistance provided by non-governmental organizations, which enabled the beneficiaries to identify the requirements, for example, with regard to investments, marketing channels, working capital and finance. These plans also facilitated the negotiations with the land sellers. The implementation of the projects on the actual farms was also assisted by non-governmental organizations through additional training.Box V..acquire farming inputs. Grants are therefore needed to cover at least the collateral premium of land so as to allow farmers to purchase their land. However, the larger the grant, the fewer the farmers can be assisted.In sum, land redistribution can give an important boost to development because of the higher productivity on smaller farms, the positive effects on income distribution, which increases the linkages with other sectors, and the possibility of breaking out of a vicious interaction between poverty and the environment. Nevertheless, the positive effects of land reforms are not automatic: reforms need to be combined with additional institutions and policies that ensure the availability of credit, marketing, extension services and technology.Although often neglected, the rural non-agricultural sector can perform a critical function in the transformation of the agricultural sector and the economy as a whole. There are a number of reasons for this. Rural non-agricultural activities are generally more labour-intensive than urban activities and usually generate higher incomes than farming. Their contribution to job creation and poverty reduction is therefore relatively large. Moreover, the capital used in rural non-agricultural activities is to a large extent locally or domestically produced, rather than imported, as is often the case for large-scale urban industry. Rural industry thus requires less foreign exchange. Rural industry is also more geographically dispersed than urban industry and spreads the benefits wider, not least because it provides employment opportunities to disadvantaged people, such as women and the landless. Through the creation of non-agricultural jobs in rural areas, it is also possible to thwart a trend observed in many countries whereby plots of farmland are cut in size from generation to generation through inheritance. In fact, plots of land can become so small that they are no longer able to sustain a family. Rural non-agricultural jobs can supplement family income and provide an alternative source of livelihood.Furthermore, if farming households also generate non-agricultural income, they diversify their income and reduce their vulnerability to exogenous shocks, such as a drought, and this allows for the smoothing of incomes, thus improving food security. The diversification of income sources is thus a form of insurance, which is, in formal forms, often absent or incomplete in developing countries. Non-agricultural income also provides farmers with (additional) cash, which allows them to invest and purchase inputs, such as seeds and fertilizer. These inputs are needed to increase agricultural productivity but are difficult to acquire without cash or credit. Farmers, particularly smallholders, often face credit constraints, frequently because of a lack of rural financial institutions. If these are present, proof of a steady income from nonagricultural employment can be used to acquire loans for agricultural investments, as has been the case in Benin and Kenya. Furthermore, the demand for agricultural inputs and for transportation services and facilities that process agricultural raw materials provides a stimulus to their production and provision. At the same time, the availability of inputs, transportation and processing stimulates productivity-enhancing changes in agriculture. In Senegal, for example, the absence of transportation and marketing services led to the discontinuance of cowpea cultivation after it had been introduced. Agriculture and rural non-agricultural activities can thus mutually reinforce each other, creating a virtuous circle.If the linkages between agriculture and other sectors are important, the incentives to satisfy larger demand from agriculture will first be felt by the local producers of goods and services. In a country like India, with a large agricultural sector, rural consumption of manufactured goods is more than twice urban consumption of those goods. Producing the goods and services where the demand is reduces transportation costs and prices, particularly when this involves the processing of agricultural raw materials which usually involves large weight and volume reductions.Although rural non-agricultural incomes almost always reduce poverty, they do not always reduce income inequality. Rural non-agricultural activities contribute to lower income inequality if poorer households earn a larger share of their income off the farm and if off-farm incomes are higher. The evidence is diverse on the relation between the share of non-farm income in total income on the one hand and total income, total non-farm income or the size of landholdings on the other hand. The conventional negative relationship between the share of non-farm income and total income or landholdings is quite common particularly in Asia, for example, in Taiwan Province of China (see below) and latin_america but a positive relationship is also found, more often in Africa. Moreover, in most cases, the richer strata earn higher incomes as a result of more skills and investments or of better access to credit and licences. The cross-country evidence on the comparison of Gini coefficients (a measure of income inequality) for farm and non-farm income is also mixed.There is one additional beneficial effect from a focus on the rural non-agricultural sector. Many developing countries go through a phase of rapid urbanization as a result of urban-based industrialization (pull factor) and increasing pressures on land (push factor). Urbanization often occurs at a rate that is higher than that of the creation of jobs in the modern sector, leading to urban unemployment and underemployment. Rapid urbanization also creates severe pressures on urban infrastructure, such as roads, sanitation, schools and health facilities. Yet, development and industrialization do not necessarily have to proceed in tandem with urbanization. The rural non-agricultural sector can generate more jobs at lower costs than urban areas because this sector is more labour-intensive and uses fewer imports.There is evidence that the development of the rural non-agricultural sector has made a substantial contribution to poverty reduction and development in several economies, including China, India, Japan and Taiwan Province of China. In India, for example, when non-agricultural output per capita increased faster than the trend, it reduced rural poverty by a large, significant amount, while urban output growth had no effect on rural poverty. Growth in agriculture and services reduced urban and rural poverty but output growth in industry had no effect on either urban or rural poverty. This might have been a result partly of the capital-intensive and urban-based industrialization that was typical in India. Finally, the effect of non-farm output on poverty rates was largest in those Indian States where the initial conditions were most favourable, in particular those States where literacy was highest.Rural transformation in ChinaIn China, the agricultural reforms that commenced in contributed to the rapid expansion of the rural non-agricultural sector. One of the major reforms was the expansion of the household responsibility system (HRS). The HRS was introduced as an experiment in Anhwei province in , officially accepted in and by had been adopted by per cent of the production teams, which lost as a result most of their administrative functions at the bottom of the hierarchical community structure. Under the HRS, households obtained use rights to collectively owned land under long-term leases, which initially lasted years and have subsequently been extended to and years. Farmers were still obliged to provide a share of the output to the collectives production quotas but the remaining output could be sold on the free market or to the Government at negotiated prices. Over the years, the share subject to quotas has been reduced and mandatory production plans were abolished in . These reforms were supplemented by a number of other measures, such as increases in procurement prices and the size of private plots, the introduction of hybrid seeds, the encouragement of diversification and the relaxation of rural markets and non-agricultural activities of farmers.The reforms in agriculture provided a direct boost to rural non-agricultural activities in several ways. Firstly, agriculture released a large amount of labour as a result of the higher labour productivity in agriculture and the decollectivization of agriculture, which transformed a hidden labour surplus into an open one. In , million Chinese, amounting to per cent of the total population, were living in rural areas. Rural non-agricultural activities were partly encouraged to create off-farm employment for farmers in rural areas as migration was restricted. Secondly, the rapid expansion of rural firms outside agriculture was to a considerable extent financed by funds from agriculture. Thirdly, the diversification of agricultural production increased the opportunities for the processing of agricultural raw materials, for example, in the food, beverage and textile industries. Fourthly, the market liberalization of inputs stimulated the rural production of such inputs as fertilizers, pesticides, machinery and equipment. Finally, one of the most important effects of the agricultural reforms was the increase in agricultural incomes, which was a result of higher prices (quota, above-quota and free market prices) and higher yields. As incomes increased, farmers demanded a more varied consumption basket that included, in particular, more manufactured goods, houses and services but also more expensive foods (such as fruit and meat). This created substantial consumption linkages with rural industry, construction and service providers.The agricultural reforms, export incentives and reforms of, for example, prices, markets, finance and foreign investment, fuelled the rise of the rural non-agricultural sector, which became one of the most dynamic sectors in China. Productivity has grown fast, partly through the upgrading of technology. This sector has also attracted substantial amounts of foreign direct investment (FDI) and exported a large share of its output. Well known are the township and village enterprises (TVEs), which are collectives owned and operated by local communities. Less known are the individually owned enterprises. Both operate under market principles and hard budget constraints and are not subject to State planning or price controls. TVEs had existed before the reforms that commenced in (although under a different name before ) and increased from . million in to . million in , but they almost doubled in size, measured by the number of people engaged per firm. Individually owned enterprises, allowed since , grew much faster, to million in , but remained approximately the same size at about three employees per enterprise. Although total rural non-agricultural employment had increased only from million in to million in , the figure reached million in , amounting to per cent of total employment. TVEs and individually owned enterprises accounted for per cent of total nonagricultural GDP in , but for per cent in . In certain manufacturing sectors, such as garments, building materials and metal products, the share exceeds one half.The potential role in AfricaThe rural non-agricultural sector can potentially perform a pivotal role in the development of Africa. Rural households in sub-Saharan Africa earn already on average per cent of their income from non-farm activities, with the share ranging from to per cent. A number of these activities, such as beer brewing, bread baking, weaving and basket making, have traditionally been and often still are performed on the farm and often by women. Higher demand would open the possibility of production on a larger scale and specialization. The transformation from crafts to larger-scale production is crucial and can, to put it simply, result either in small off-farm firms in rural towns or in large urban capital-intensive companies. Which development path evolves depends on a number of factors (see figure V.).Figure V..TechnologyLand reformIncome distributionInfrastructureEducationDemand for final output (food)Intermediate inputs (backward linkage)Intermediate inputs (forward linkage)Demand for final output (consumption linkage)Agricultural productivityRural industry and servicesLabour, finance, taxes and foreign exchangeThe first factor is an increase of agricultural productivity. As some researchers note, buoyant agriculture is the single most important cause of a flourishing non-farm sector. An increase in agricultural productivity gives a boost to the demand for goods and services produced by the rural non-agricultural sector. The non-agricultural sector can in turn provide productivity-enhancing inputs to agriculture, leading to a virtuous circle. Moreover, agriculture can provide the labour, finance and food needed to transform the rural non-agricultural sector and the economy as a whole. This positive interaction between agriculture and the rural non-agricultural sector has been a central feature of the development experience of China, Japan and Taiwan Province of China.In Africa, agricultural productivity is low, and agricultural output per capita has been almost stagnant for three decades. One of the main reasons for the poor performance of African agriculture is the absence of a green revolution. The green revolution in Asia was made possible by an international publicly financed research programme that developed high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice, which responded very well to fertilizers and controlled water management. These varieties were not, however, very suitable for Africas climate (in terms, for example, of the variability of rain), and soil or in the context of its diseases.There is a need to focus research on the development of drought-resistant, low-risk and low-cost innovations for rain-fed food agriculture that do not need many external inputs. However, commercial interest of developed countries or corporations in research on typical African food crops is limited because these crops are neither consumed nor grown in developed countries, only a small fraction are exported and the domestic market is small compared with that of Asia. Yet, research in this area could be encouraged by Governments of developed countries, for example, by offering tax incentives to firms that undertake research on typical African crops. Agricultural technology is highly locationspecific and needs local research and development capacity, as the case of hybrid maize in Kenya and Zimbabwe has demonstrated. However, the research capacity in Africa has been weak, lacking a critical mass and being biased towards export crops.In order to improve adoption rates of new seeds among smallholders and to achieve a green revolution in Africa, investments in infrastructure and the development of institutions that provide credit, inputs and extension services, are also necessary. The development of these institutions, in combination with land reforms in certain countries, is a critical step with respect to raising agricultural productivity and sharing the benefits as widely as possible. This, in turn, will enhance the prospects of the rural non-agricultural sector.Another means to advance the rural non-agricultural sector is through the development of horticulture. Horticultural products usually have higher market values per acre of land than other crops, and fruit and vegetables are important components of a nutritious diet. Moreover, horticulture also typically requires substantial processing and packaging and thus creates jobs in rural areas. Furthermore, if the processing and packaging are of sufficient quality and infrastructure is available to guarantee timely deliveries, horticulture also creates opportunities for export.The second factor determining the extent of non-farm rural activity is the improvement and extension of rural infrastructure, such as roads and electricity. In Africa and elsewhere, the presence of infrastructure, mostly through its effect on transportation and information costs, is an important condition for the adoption of new technology (such as new seeds and fertilizer), the marketing of an agricultural surplus, access to credit and the development of rural nonagricultural activities. This is also illustrated by the case of Taiwan Province of China (see below). Through these effects, infrastructure makes a principal contribution to the reduction of poverty. Rural infrastructure is particularly poor in Africa with very low road density, telephone availability and electrification rates. Redressing these obstacles would have a positive effect on the development of the rural non-agricultural sector.The third condition for a favourable development of the rural non-agricultural sector is an adequate level of education in rural areas. Evidence shows that higher levels of education have generally a positive effect on the adoption of new technologies (such as high-yielding seeds) and agricultural productivity and incomes. Moreover, higher levels of education and skill acquisition in rural areas increase the likelihood that farm households will employ entrepreneurial initiatives outside agriculture or obtain non-agricultural jobs. In addition, the effect of education on productivity becomes much more pronounced after a certain thresholdin most cases, four to six years of schooling. Moreover, there is evidence that returns to education are higher in non-agricultural activities and that education stimulates a shift from farm to non-farm activities. Access to schools and the quality of education are wanting in many parts of rural Africa. There is particularly a need for vocational and technical schools that provide formal training and generate the skills required for the adoption of new technology in agriculture, for participation in the non-agricultural sector and especially for the development of subcontracting links with urban or foreign firms, which require higher-quality products and better timeliness of delivery.The fourth condition, which played a critical role in several East Asian countries, is land reforms. As discussed above, land reforms, if well implemented, not only contribute to political stability but also lead to a more equal income distribution, which increases the demand for goods and services produced in rural areas.Taiwan Province of China, which has experienced one of the most astonishing take-offs in economic history, has often been cited as an example where the agricultural sector has played a crucial role in fostering rapid development. The present section therefore contains a more detailed examination of the role of agriculture in that economy.Development of agricultureThe favourable conditions for the rapid development of Taiwan Province of China after the Second World War were partly created during its occupation by Japan between and . Japan wanted to develop an agricultural surplus in Taiwan Province of China, of rice and sugar in particular, as it had started to face food shortages around the turn of the century. To that end, experimental farms and extension services were set up (as early as ), which were instrumental in the development and distribution of rice varieties that were suited to the ecology of Taiwan Province of China. However, without improved water management and additional fertilizers, the benefits of the new varieties are limited. Investments in irrigation infrastructure, therefore, were heavy. The share of irrigated area in cultivated area increased from about per cent in to per cent in . Chemical fertilizers were initially subsidized (even briefly distributed free) and imported from Japan, but, later, factories were built in Taiwan Province of China. The use of chemical fertilizers increased from kilograms (kg) per hectare in to kg per hectare in . Although the adoption of the new rice varieties was initially enforced, their profitability when used jointly with irrigation and chemical fertilizers quickly became apparent and served to encourage their use. Because of these investments and institutional and technical innovations, rice and agricultural production and productivity increased rapidly, especially after . Between and , agricultural production increased by . per cent per year.During the colonial period, a number of institutional reforms, which were instrumental in generating technical change in agriculture, were implemented. The Japanese createdbesides the just-mentioned experimental farmscredit cooperatives, a land bank (Hypothec Bank) and compulsory farmers associations, which were used to disperse new technologies. Although these institutions were administered separately, they were very much coordinated by the Government. Changes were also made in the land tenure system, which provided landlords with incentives to invest and adopt new technology, and the formation of landlords-tenants associations was encouraged to prevent tenancy disputes and foster production. The land distribution, however, remained skewed during the colonial period. This only changed as a result of the land reforms introduced after the Second World War.As the intention of Japan was to export the colonys agricultural surplus to Japan, it invested heavily in transportation infrastructure. Between and per cent of development funds went into transport and communication and , kilometres (km) of roads and km of railroads had been built by , having started from basically nothing in . Large investments were also made in the capacity to generate electric power, which grew from , kilowatts (kW) in the early s to more than , kW in the mid-s. One observer noted that the development of the electric power industry along with the construction of the basic transportation system ... (was) probably the most important contribution Japan made towards future industrialization.Perhaps equally significant were the efforts to enhance human capital. As was often the case with colonial powers, Japans emphasis on education was partly incited by the desire to teach the colonized the language of the colonizers and make the citizens loyal subjects. Thus, elementary education was greatly expanded during the colonial period, particularly after . By , fifty per cent of Taiwanese children between and years of age were in school. Although there was equality in theory and almost all teachers were Japanese, expenditures per student were twice as high in the schools dominated by Japanese children. The development of education paid off: the literacy rate increased from per cent in to per cent in , creating one of the most literate populations in Asia. After , the access of Taiwanese to post-elementary, especially technical and vocational, education was increased. The health status also improved through sewerage construction, sanitation services and vaccination programmes. Life expectancy of males increased by . years to . years and of females by . years to . years between and -.In short, the investments in physical infrastructure (for example, irrigation and roads), technical change, human capital and institutional reforms brought about an early development of the agricultural sector in Taiwan Province of China.Land reformDespite the changes made in the land tenure system and landlord-tenant relations during colonial times, there was still a need for land reform after the Second World War, and the political turmoil made this possible. The farmers associations formed during the colonial period were able to reduce the number of disputes between landlords and tenants somewhat and the Decree for the Control of Farm Rents had been able to prevent further rent increases. Nevertheless, the land distribution was very skewed, landlord abuse was pervasive and the demand for land was large.Land reform was sponsored by the Government and the Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction (JCRR). The programme started in with a compulsory reduction of rent to a maximum of . per cent of the farmers main crop yield, the abolition of advance payment, provisions in case of crop failures and the enforcement of written contracts, which should have a lease period of at least six years. These measures provided new incentives to farmers to invest and increase production, which materialized swiftly.In , the Government accelerated the sale of publicly owned land, which had been started in . Some of this land had previously been owned by Japanese companies and farmed by tenants. The price was set at . times the annual main crop yield, which could be paid over a -year period. Finally, the Land-to-the-Tiller Act was adopted in . The Act stipulated that land owned by landlords in excess of chia (. hectares) ( chia = . hectare) was to be compulsorily purchased by the Government and resold to the incumbent tenant, with the price fixed at . times the annual main crop yield. The owner was paid up front in commodity bonds and stocks in four public enterprises previously owned by the Japanese and the buyer could pay over a -year period. Between May and December , the number of hectares sold to tenants equalled ,.The land reforms were very comprehensive, in terms of area and households affected (see table V.), and led to a significant increase in the share of farm families that owned the land, from per cent in -to per cent in -. Moreover, the share of land farmed by its owner rose from per cent in -to per cent in -. The distribution also greatly improved as fewer households owned very small or very large plots. The proportion of farm families owning between . and chia increased from per cent in to per cent in . As a result, the average plot size rose as well for all size classes of less than chia.The land reforms were accompanied by improvements in rural infrastructure, such as extensions and repairs of irrigation systems, and by other institutional reforms. The farmers associations were reorganized, changing from topTable V..Rent controlSale of public land -Land-to-the Tiller Act, Area affected (thousands of hectares)As percentage of cultivated area in -Farm households affected (thousands)As percentage of average number for -. . . .. . . .. . . .down to bottom-up (farmer-controlled) organizations that supplied inputs, purchased and processed outputs, provided credit and savings facilities and promoted rural industry. The farmers associations were used to introduce new technology and new crops, such as cotton, fruits, vegetables and, during the s, asparagus and mushrooms. The new technologies, new crops, fertilizers and finance were largely supplied to these associations by the JCRR. Moreover, agricultural research was expanded so that in there were agricultural research workers for every , persons active in agriculture (compared with . per , in India and per , in Japan).The land reforms and the complementary institutional reforms and investments in infrastructure created the conditions for a rapid change in the agricultural sector. After agricultural production had regained its pre-war peak in , it grew by about . per cent annually during the s and s. As a result, output was nearly per cent higher in , and nearly . times higher in , than in .Most of this increase in output can be attributed to higher productivity and the adoption of new technology that was made available through Governmentsupported channels. During the two decades up to , a gradual shift away from the traditional crops, rice and sugar, was established. This was partly the result of the fact that the new owners of the land did not need to grow rice any more for rental payments to the previous landlords. Moreover, the new technology and new crops increased the labour-intensity of production and saved on the scarce factor, land, and this was, of course, the desired pattern of technical change during the s, given the excess labour and shortage of land. As a result, agricultural employment, working days, working days per worker and working days per hectare all increased, at least until the mid-s when labour shortages started to emerge.In sum, the success of the agricultural transformation was made possible by a combination of private incentives and public action. The publicly instigated land reforms enhanced the private incentives to invest and purchase inputs and the Government created the institutions and infrastructure that made these private investments possible and profitable.Support industry with agriculture and develop agriculture with industryThe seeds for the development of industry were sown by agriculture. Before , the emphasis of government policies had largely been on agriculture, but during the s the attention given to industry increased so that resources in Japan could be shifted towards heavier and war-related industries. Large firms were owned mostly by the Government or the Japanese; and large-scale industrial activity by the Taiwanese was discouraged in the colonial period, but smallscale manufacturing was allowed. In , half of all those engaged in manufacturing worked within the home of the craftsman or in an establishment adjacent to the home with fewer than five workers. Much of this very small scale manufacturing, producing mostly processed food, apparel, textiles and wood and bamboo products, was owned by Taiwanese and took place in rural areas. During the s, new energy supplies (for example, electricity) and new machines (imported from Japan) made manufacturing on a larger scale more efficient. By , the number of people working in factories with more than five workers had doubled, accounting for per cent of those engaged in manufacturing. Despite the increase in scale and modernization of industry, smalland medium-sized firms continued to play an important role until the s.Small-scale and large-scale industry were both tied to agriculture during the colonial era and these linkages were partly intensified by the policies emphasizing import-substitution and food processing. The bulk of industrial output either used agricultural products as inputs (particularly food processing and sugar refining), provided inputs for agriculture (for example, fertilizers), or used by-products of sugar refining (molasses, which was used in the production of alcohol). Moreover, farmers worked in rural factories to enhance their incomes. Thus, most of the colonial industry was linked to agriculture, partly as a result of the large investments in rural infrastructure, such as roads and electricity. These linkages, combined with the fact that peasants cultivated the major export crops (sugar and rice), prevented a dual-enclave economy from developing; but this was not the case for many other developing economies where little interaction between the modern industrial sector and traditional agriculture has been typical.The colonial period had prepared the economy for a take-off. Modernization of agriculture and industry advanced substantially. Infrastructure was built. Institutions were created. Moreover, significant progress was made with regard to the education and health of the labour force. The favourable conditions for a take-off of industry were enhanced after the Second World War by the land reforms, ongoing emphasis on education and training and the continued investments in rural infrastructure. School enrolments and rural infrastructure were already substantial during the colonial period, but increased rapidly after the Second World War as well (see table V.). Rural areas were not ignored and an urban bias was avoidedand this was not the case for many other developing economies. For example, electricity rates were the same in rural and urban areas. By , already per cent of farm households (and by virtually the whole island) had access to electricity. By , per cent of the population aged six years or over were literate.Moreover, the conditions were particularly favourable for a fruitful interaction between agriculture and industry as a result of the equitable distribution ofTable V..PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND HUMAN-CAPITAL INDICATORS IN TAIWAN PROVINCE OF CHINA, -Installed electricity capacity (megawatts)Paved roads (kilometres)Primary education indicators (percentage)Enrolmenta Primary school graduates continuing to secondary schoolb. .. .. .. .. .. .land, the availability of rural infrastructure, the presence of an educated rural labour force, the existing linkages between the two sectors and the size of the rural-based industrial sector. Thus, when agricultural output started to rise rapidly in the s, industry was able to benefit in several ways.By , inflation had been reduced to the single-digit level and the economy had recovered from the neglect and vast damage inflicted during the Second World War. The economy was still essentially based on agriculture. Agriculture accounted in for per cent of GDP, per cent of employment and per cent of merchandise exports, if processed agricultural exports are included. However, after the Government increasingly turned its attention to the development of industry. It advocated initially an import-substitution strategy that focused on the domestic production of goods that would replace imports; but, in contrast to many other developing economies, agriculture was not neglected. For example, agriculture obtained a large share of the foreign aid (mostly through the JCRR) and per cent of total investment under the second development plan, covering -. Moreover, the terms of trade of agriculture (vis-a-vis non-agriculture) never fell below ( = ) in the s. The development plans of the s and s aimed to achieve balanced growth between agriculture and industry and to support industry with agriculture and develop agriculture with industry. In effect, the linkages between agriculture and industry increased as the import-substitution programme emphasized the processing of food and the supply of industrial inputs to agriculture. During the period -, agricultural raw materials accounted on average for per cent of the value of manufacturing gross output, but this share dropped subsequently.Linkages with the rural non-industrial sector also existed as farmers asked for repair and trade services. The providers of services were usually located close to customers. Because the tradability of services was low and personal contact was often necessary, demand from agriculture stimulated the production of rural-based services.Besides the input linkages between agriculture and the rest of the economy, there was also an interaction with regard to final demand and employment.Consumption linkages were particularly pronounced in Taiwan Province of China. Some have argued that higher incomes in agriculture provided the most important initial boost to manufacturing. As discussed, institutional and technical innovations introduced in agriculture led to higher productivity and higher incomes, which were widely shared because of the land reforms. Moreover, the higher the income, the larger the share spent on non-agricultural goods and services; and because the size of the agricultural sector was still substantial, higher agricultural incomes translated into a significant demand in rural areas for non-agricultural goods and services. The small firms in rural areas were close by and particularly suited to satisfy this demand, as both the demand and the supply were concentrated on such items as textiles, garments and wood and bamboo products. As a result, rural and semi-urban prefectures recorded faster growth in the number of establishments between and than cities, semi-urban cities and mixed prefectures.The growth of the often labour-intensive rural secondary and tertiary sectors required an increasing supply of workers. Agriculture was able to meet the demand because of the higher agricultural productivity and the existence of substantial disguised unemployed in agriculture in the s and early s. Because of the availability of labour, new firms (particularly those with labourintensive production methods) often established themselves in rural areas. The rapid increase in industrial employment, particularly in rural areas, reduced unemployment and underemployment to such an extent that labour shortages emerged after .The labour flow further enhanced the symbiotic relation between agriculture and industry. Agricultural incomes led to the demand for industrial goods, and farmers working in manufacturing enhanced incomes for farmers. The transformation of farm-based manufacturing into off-farm manufacturing, and the growth of rural manufacturing started in the s, accelerated in the s and continued in the s. Part-time and seasonal off-farm employment accounted for an increasing share of farmers income. This trend made the income distribution more equal as non-agricultural income was more equally distributed than agricultural income. Moreover, the fact that the share of nonfarm income in total income was generally higher and increased faster for farmers with less land further equalized the income distribution. A more equal income distribution meant a higher demand for the kind of goods and services that the rural firms were producing.The entrepreneurs that started new manufacturing or service-oriented firms were sometimes former farmers. This phenomenon was possible partly because of the export orientation of agriculture, the educational attainment in rural areas and the skills those entrepreneurs had acquired as craftsmen factors all dating back to the colonial period. The investments by farmers in non-agricultural activities were limited, however, by the taxation of agriculture. The productivity in agriculture was high enough to allow for some taxation that would not distort economic incentives too much. The tax revenues were spent by the Government, for example, on productive items such as education, health care and infrastructure, but also on defence. The total tax burden of agriculture declined gradually after and rapidly after . In the s, the Government started to provide tax exemptions, price supports and subsidies to agriculture. By , the tax burden was lighter on farm families than on nonfarm families.The agricultural surplus was not only invested directly and taxed, but also saved and intermediated by financial institutions. The savings rate increased during the s, partly as a result of the land reforms and the increase in incomes. Yet, the net savings that left agriculture as a proportion of the surplus remained about the same (at per cent) as investments in agriculture and the liabilities of agriculture also increased. Nonetheless, the outflow of savings provided an important source of finance for investments in the non-agricultural sectors.The increase in agricultural productivity made it possible for food prices to stay relatively low without squeezing the income of farmers. This kept real wages in check. Real wages increased moderately during the s and most of the s and started to rise faster only after labour shortages emerged at the end of the s.Another contribution that agriculture made to the broader development of the economy was through the generation of foreign exchange revenues, which financed the imports of capital goods and intermediate goods. During the s, agricultural goods and processed agricultural products still accounted for the majority of export revenues, although their share declined rapidly from per cent in to per cent in and to per cent in , as their revenues increased less rapidly than the revenues from industrial products. On the import side, the share of capital goods and intermediate inputs increased from per cent in to per cent in . In absolute numbers, agricultural exports (including processed goods) amounted to $ million and imports of capital goods and intermediate inputs to $ million in ; in , these numbers were $ million and $, million, respectively.Concluding remarks on the case of Taiwan Province of ChinaInstitutional reforms stimulated technical change in agriculture in Taiwan Province of China and increased agricultural production. Agriculture stimulated the development of the rural non-agricultural sector through the demand for intermediate inputs and consumer goods and services, through the supply of labour and entrepreneurs, through the provision of finance, tax revenues and foreign exchange and through low food prices. However, the contribution of agriculture to broader economic development was possible only as a result of extensive land reforms and the large and long-lasting efforts to increase agricultural productivity, raise educational attainment in rural areas and improve the quantity and quality of rural infrastructure. In effect, rather than be pulled by industry, agriculture pushed industry.A development strategy that focuses on agriculture and the rural non-agricultural sector has the advantage of being more labour-intensive and less import-intensive. Although often neglected, agriculture can play an active role in triggering a sustained increase in living standards that is widely shared. Yet, this is not automatic. A number of conditions have to be fulfilled in order for agriculture to be able to play this role. Firstly, productivity in agriculture has to increase so that agriculture can provide the labour and entrepreneurs, finance and food needed in other sectors and the demand that will stimulate the production of goods and services, particularly in rural areas. Secondly, the rural infrastructure and institutions that will facilitate the transformation of the economy need to be in place. One of the institutional changes that can perform a critical role is land reform, as it can boost agricultural productivity and enhance the linkages with other sectors. Thirdly, the level of educational attainment in rural areas needs to be raised. This will have positive effects on agricultural productivity and on the development of the rural non-agricultural sector.To realize the full potential of the agricultural sector and exploit the ability of this sector to trigger development of other sectors, considerable effort and resources need to be devoted to this sector and rural areas. Yet, agriculture does not seem to be a priority area for international financial institutions and bilateral donors. For example, up to June , the world_bank (that is to say the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA)) had devoted per cent of its resources to agriculture. This proportion was unchanged by , but by it had declined to per cent and in fiscal year it was less than per cent. A similar lack of attention can be observed in the data from the Development Assistance Committee (DAC). For example, in DAC members devoted only . per cent of official development assistance (ODA) to agriculture. The international community has in particular an important role to play with regard to the funding of agricultural research. Publicly funded research was crucial in the green revolution for Asia and is just as critical if Africa is ever to have a green revolution.Education has long been seen not only as a means to achieve productivity growth, but also as an end in itselfit expands human capabilities: from the ability to undertake the most elementary functions of a human being to the ability to enjoy the greatest fruits of the human mind. The present chapter will concentrate on the relationship between education and the take-off into sustained economic growth. In chapter VII, on technology, the discussion will concentrate on the role of the higher levels of education in enabling a country to take full advantage of the possibilities opened up by new technological advances.One of the most basic products of education is literacy. This allows people to read great works of literature, including the texts upon which their own religion is based, to follow road signs so as to undertake a journey, to compare the price of products, to understand written instructions necessary to operate machinery, to choose the right seeds or fertilizers, to take the required medicines in the prescribed manner, to find out at what time a television or radio programme is being shown, to understand what the political leaders are promising to do and to acquire the freedom to enter into contracts (like that governing the purchase of a product on credit terms) that would otherwise need the intervention of a lettered person. An illiterate person cannot function in the way a literate person can and a society made up largely of uneducated people is very different from one comprising educated people. In a society with a small educated elite and a large mass of illiterate people, economic activity, even for the elite, becomes difficulthow can you advertise for labour or for the sale of your products in the press or through handouts, and how can you sell products to people who are not able to maintain a bank account or to understand how to determine their balance? How can the Government expect its enactments concerning health provisions to be understood and obeyed? How can it expect its policies to be understood? Clearly it is in everyones interests to have an educated population.At the World Summit for Social Development held in Copenhagen, Governments committed themselves to attaining universal and equitable access to quality education and primary health care. In April , the World Education Forum at Dakar stressed that it was unacceptable in the year that more than million children have no access to primary education, million adults are illiterate, gender discrimination continues to permeate education systems, and the quality of learning and the acquisition of human values and skills fall far short of the aspiration and needs of individuals and societies. The Forum reaffirmed the goals of Education for All of ensuring that by all children, with special emphasis on girls and children in difficult circumstances and from ethnic minorities, have access to and complete free and compulsory primary education of good quality. Other goals are to eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education by , and to achieve gender equality in education by and a per cent improvement in levels of adult literacy, also by . These goals do not just come from the economic desirability of forming an adequately educated labour force, but are also supported by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Governments have an obligation to ensure these rights, and it was fitting that this should again be stressed at the beginning of the twenty-first century. In the Group of Eight (G-) Summit in Okinawa in July , the leaders reaffirmed their commitment that no Government seriously committed to achieving Education for All would be thwarted in this achievement by lack of resources. It was tragic, however, that there was a need to set as goals what should have been accomplished during the twentieth century.Although the term human capital entered the vocabulary of economics only in the s, the idea that knowledge and skills of workers are important determinants of productivity and of a countrys overall wealth is not new. Adam Smith wrote about the cost of the improvement of a workers skills and dexterity through practice and education, as being like a capital fixed and realized as it were in his person that could also be considered part of the capital stock of his country. Smith could see the value of education at first-hand from the example of his own country, Scotland, which had achieved nearly universal literacy by around (see box VI.).This achievement of near-universal literacy years ago by what was a small and poor country, where, however, the costs of primary schooling had been set so low that even a common labourer could afford them, can be contrasted with the fact that many countries have still not been able to achieve near-universal literacy (see table VI.). Of developing countries, only had achieved adult literacy rates of per cent or over in the late s, and had rates of per cent or below, with the average of the latter group being a literacy rate of per cent. The poorer the group of countries, the lower was the literacy rate. Each group of developing countries has made progress since the early s, but the group with the lowest literacy rate is still not able to provide universal primary enrolment, with the improvement having been an increase of only percentage points, from . to . per cent. Another group, the one with a literacy rate of between and per cent in , had achieved near-universal primary education by the late s, having increased its enrolment from to per cent. It also made larger gains in extending secondary education than the poorer group. Finally, whereas the developing countries made progress in achieving universal primary education, they lagged far behind the developed countries in secondary education, which is virtually universal in the latter group of countries.The educational system established in Scotland relied very heavily on the ideas of John Knox, set down in the First Book of Discipline in , that there should be universal education, for rich and poor alike, under penalty of Church censure, and that in a unified system of national schools, a pupil with the requisite ability should be able to attain to the highest positions.a This scheme had no equal for breadth and comprehensiveness among the educational proposals of the period.b A pupil could advance from the parish school to one of the three Scottish universities: St. Andrews (founded in ), Glasgow () and Aberdeen (), which were soon to be joined, in , by Edinburgh.The purpose of this educational system was related only indirectly, if at all, to developmentits goal was to provide an educated ministry and for the virtuous education and the godly upbringing of the youth of this realm, enabling them, in particular, to read the Bible. Based on Knoxs scheme, in an Education Act was passed that set up a school and appointed a schoolmaster for each parish, under the authority of the presbytery. These schools were to be financed by those who could inherit property in the parish, and who could defray half the expense from their tenants.c In , at a time of economic difficulty, the Act was strengthened to ensure that the schoolmaster was paid his stipend or fees.dThe success of these parish schools was such that Adam Smith could write in that they had taught almost the whole common people to read, and a very great proportion of them to write and account.e This was done at a small cost: For a very small expense, the public can facilitate, can encourage and can even impose upon almost the whole body of the people, the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of education. Almost universal literacy was achieved with a fairly small amount of formal schoolingoften three or four years in schoolbut sufficient to impart skills that could flourish with subsequent self-improvement.Economic change in Scotland, during the course of the eighteenth century, gave rise to changes in the educational system. The growing commercial class demanded, and was prepared to pay for, instruction in new subjectssuch as mathematics, modern languages and mechanicsrather than Greek, Hebrew and Latin which were needed for the education of the clergy. The satisfaction of this demand led to major changes in institutions and in the syllabus taught.fBox VI..A disturbing figure is that the lower the literacy rate, and therefore the greater the effort needed to be devoted to education, the lower was the percentage of gross national product (GNP) devoted to the sector. Moreover, the changes over time in this effort were, on average, small, as measured by shares of GNP allocated to education. In no group did this share come up to the average of the developed countries of over per cent (although in this group of countries, tertiary education tends to be more widespread and so a higher figure could have been expected).The inability of many developing countries to achieve what some poor European countries achieved over two centuries earlier is especially disturbing in that the history of education has been one characterized by a growing appreciation of the value of education. This has led to the growing role of the State in its provision.Table VI..PROGRESS IN LITERACY AND EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, s TO THE PRESENTAdult literacy rate (percentage)Number of countriesAverage adult literacy rate (percentage)AverageGDP per capita (US dollars)Average expenditure on education as percentage of GNPAverage gross primary enrolment ratio (percentage)Average gross secondary enrolment ratio (percentage)LatestLatestLatest--and above. . .. . .. . .. . .. .. . .. . .Historical efforts to achieve high education standardsGovernments have been involved in raising the educational attainment of their citizens for centuries. Running a State has always required the formation of an educated elite which might or might not coincide with the aristocracy. China, one of the first unitary States in the world with a joint Government, language and culture, was recruiting bureaucrats on the basis of meritocracy rather than hereditary aristocracyas early as the Han dynasty ( BC-AD). Recruitment examinations were instituted in the seventh century and improved under the Tang (-AD) and Sung (-AD) dynasties. These examinations provided a stimulus to the pursuit of education, a phenomenon often referred to as reflecting the emphasis on education in a Confucian culture.Particularly during the last quarter of the nineteenth and the early parts of the twentieth century, many Governments expanded and formalized their role in the provision of education. Governments were concerned about the moral habits of the uneducated and feared public disorders during a time of rapid urbanization and industrialization and paltry living conditions in many cities. An educated population, it was hoped, would be God-fearing, industrious and respectful of the law. Education was the first of the social services to which Governments devoted attention and finance on a large scale. Among the earliest to have done so was the Government of Prussia, which under King Frederick the Great placed great emphasis on education: in , it made attendance at school compulsory for all children from to years of age, under penalty of a fine. The defeat of Prussia by Napoleon in led to an intense effort at national revival, including a major push for education: per cent of children were attending school in . In the united_states of America, education was seen as essential to guarantee the success of the new democracy. The Government had committed itself to the principle of free education as early as when it disposed of lands in the Western Territory and reserved a section of each congressional township for the support of schools. The third article of the Northwest Ordinance of recognized that religion, morality, and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind,schools and the means of education shall always be encouraged. As a result of these acts, each township was expected to have a school. Free education was available for almost everybody in the united_states at the end of the nineteenth century, the major exception being the black population.In England and Wales, the Government first subsidized private schools (often church schools) and after put them under public supervision. Elementary education became compulsory in and free in . Nearly universal literacy was achieved in England by , a feat that, as previously mentioned, Scotland had achieved in around . A similar process took place in France where elementary education became free in and compulsory until age in .Frequently, concerns about morality and public order also impelled colonial powers to provide education in their colonies. Colonizers often felt the need to teach the colonized the language and religion of the colonizers and make them loyal subjects. In addition, primary education was often provided by missionaries, mostly on a small scale. In sum, these efforts were often haphazard and limited to primary education. However, the need to have an educated civil service was always present, and led to the formation of institutes of higher education in many colonies or to arrangements for a few educated people from the colonies to attend universities in the metropolitan country. At independence, one of the first priorities of the Government was often to expand educational opportunities and eliminate the educational deficit left by colonialism. In India, primary schools especially experienced rapid growth after independence to fulfil the constitutional directive of providing universal, free and compulsory education for all children up to age .Whereas early government involvement in the provision of education was largely based on concerns about social values and attitudes, the crucial role of education in economic development gained wider acceptance among Governments in the second half of the nineteenth century. Germany was the first country to recognize explicitly the key role of technical education and research as instruments for economic progress, and in particular as a means to bridge the gap made evident by comparison with great_britain. For example, the first publicly financed agricultural research institute was established in Germany in . The leading role given to education by Germany was emulated by the united_states, especially in agriculture, and by Japan.During the Meiji period in Japan (-), emphasis was put on the introduction of Western technology and education systems. Although the Meiji reforms built on the progress made during the Tokugawa period, the expansion of the education system was impressive. A department of education was established in , school laws were adopted in and four years of education were made compulsory in . Between and , enrolment of to year-olds increased from to per cent and the literacy rate jumped from to per cent. Vocational education was further developed and agricultural schools, research institutes and universities were established. The increase in the years of education per person aged to was even more remarkable. Between and , the figure had stagnated at a meagre . years. It increased to . years in and reached . years in , which was about the same number of years as in several European countries and about years less than in the united_states. Yet, by comparison, gross domestic product(GDP) per capita in Japan was only about one third of the Western European average. As in the case of Scotland, the fast and substantial increase of educational attainment in Japan preceded the rapid increase in GDP per capita.Recent economic analysis of the link between education and growthThe close connection between economic performance and educational attainments has led to the formalization and popularization of the concept of human capital in expositions on economic growth and development. Human capital formation was given a prominent place in studies of the economic miracles that had taken place in the East Asian newly industrializing economies. One of the factors identified as having enabled the rapid growth of these economies was the emphasis in their cultures on education which had resulted in a well-educated labour force.The findings of microeconomic studies support the notion of there being a positive relationship between investment in education and productivity, although the rate of return to education varies from country to country. The empirical literature on the financial rate of return to education at the individual level is very rich, including studies of industrialized as well as developing countries. However, if the labour market is less competitive or workers engage in non-wage-paying activities such as self-employment, as is often the case in developing countries, it is preferable to use physical measures of output rather than earnings to measure the effects of better education on labour productivity. Studies analysing the relationship between education and physical measures of productivity in low-income countries have concluded, for example, that farmers having some years of education are more productive than those with no education, with the increase in agricultural productivity being greater when improved farm techniques and complementary inputs are available to all farmers.The reason for the positive relationship between education and economic growth is twofold. Education directly contributes to economic growth owing to improvement in a countrys human capital stock (a component of the production function) and the enhancement of labour productivity. There is also a positive feedback from economic growth to education. Economic growth allows more investment in education (thus increasing the supply of education) and it also increases the demand for educated labour, which serves as a stimulus to public and private investment in education. In Botswana, the fruits of economic growth, coming through the development of a mineral industry, were used to foster education and subsequent economic advance (see box VI.).As expenditure on education can be seen as an investment, the question is, Where should developing countries, especially the least developed, which are characterized by poor human capital endowment, low levels of income and limited public resources, concentrate their resources in order to build up the necessary human capital for economic growth to take place?The earlier review showed that the first level that can assure universal literacy is fundamental. Without primary education, children will not be able to go on to higher levels. Thus, for countries facing binding constraints on theThe case of Botswana demonstrates how a very poor country capitalized on its political stability and determination to create a favourable investment climate so as to turn a poor and largely uneducated population into a comparatively wealthy and well-educated population.At independence in , Botswana had been one of the worlds poorest countries and was among the first group of countries identified as least developed by the Committee for Development Planning in . However, its traditional ruler, the Khama, had unquestioned political legitimacy and always worked through the process of consultation achieved in the kgotla meetings.a At independence, Botswana still preserved its traditional consultative institutions. Sir Seretse Khama, the traditional leader of the Bamangwato, renounced his chieftainship and moved into the political arena: he was elected President, and set the tone for full commitment to democratic processes from which the country has never veered. Moreover, Botswana set out to be a safe haven for investors and to provide an enabling environment to the private sector, including foreign business interests.bThe basis for Botswanas success was laid well before independence. In , De Beers, part of the Anglo-American Corporation of South Africa group, began to prospect for diamonds. In , after three years of negotiation, conducted in an atmosphere of frankness and simplicity by representatives who were far-seeing and statesmanlikec the Bamangwato concluded an agreement with Roan Selection Trust of Zambia to prospect for minerals. Copper and nickel were found at SelebiPhikwe in , with a public announcement of the discovery being made in . The goodwill and mutual trust generated throughout the long negotiations enabled the shareholders in the project to put together a capital sum equal to the gross domestic product (GDP) of Botswana at that time.d Botswana let the major corporate investorsprincipally the Anglo American Corporation and American Metal Climax (AMAX) (which absorbed Roan Selection Trust after its properties had been nationalized by the Zambian Government in ) bear all the risks, and, as it happened, the project was not a success compared with the diamond industry.Diamonds had been discovered in Orapa in and production began in . More diamonds were discovered at Jwaneng in . By , diamonds made up per cent of Botswanas total exports. The growth of the mineral industry and prudent economic policy ensured that the country experienced a period of fast growth from to : it recorded the highest gross national product (GNP) per capita growth in the world, and fulfilled the hopes of the Government and of its foreign business partners. The mining sectors share in GDP rose from . per cent in / to . per cent in / and in government revenues from to . per cent in the same period.eEducation played an important role in the countrys subsequent economic progress and diversification. Financing education was made possible by the success of the mineral industry. Even though the gross primary enrolment ratio was above per cent in Botswana at independence, compared with the per cent average in the rest of the low-income sub-Saharan African countries, the quality of primary education was poor. Class size was very large, the repetition rate was high, at about per cent, and about half of the teachers were untrained. Moreover, there were very limited opportunities for secondary or tertiary training in the country.BOTSWANA: THE VIRTUOUS CIRCLE OF GROWTH AND EDUCATIONBox VI..Box II. (continued)Botswana had university graduates and about persons with a secondary school certificate in .Botswanas traditional consultative mechanisms ensured that development would not concentrate on the urban elite, but would take into account the need to help the rural areas.f This was reflected in the priorities given to primary education, basic health care and improved transport and communications in rural areas. The Government set universal access to primary education as a goal and committed large amounts of public resource to education. In , . per cent of GNP (or . per cent of total government expenditure) was invested in education, of which almost per cent was devoted to primary education. During the s, the share of GNP invested in education increased to about per cent. By , the gross primary enrolment ratio had reached per cent. The Government continued to spend about per cent of GNP or per cent of total government expenditure on education through the s. However, the emphasis shifted to secondary and higher education as the goal of universal primary education had been achieved. The combined share of secondary and tertiary education in total educational expenditure had increased from about to per cent by , the last year for which information was available. In , total public expenditure on education as a share of GNP increased further, to . per cent.Investment in the education of its people paid off in a high rate of economic growth. Compared with other sub-Saharan African countries, Botswana has been more successful at taking advantage of its mineral resources while also diversifying its economy into non-mining activities, a process that has been aided by the improvement in the countrys stock of human capital. Combined with the countrys stable political democracy, an educated labour force has attracted foreign investment. For example, the Republic of Korea automobile manufacturer Hyundai set up a factory in Botswana, its third in Southern Africa (the other two are in South Africa). The educational system has provided the civil service with qualified personnel who are responsible for the crafting and implementation of national economic policies and strategies. Botswana is so far the only country that has graduated from the list of least developed countries.resources that they plan to invest in education in order to escape the poverty trap, focusing public investment on primary education would likely generate higher returns and lay the foundation for secondary and tertiary education. Moreover, primary-level education typically costs less per person than education at higher levels.A labour force equipped with a basic education from a high-quality primary level helps meet the challenges of industrial development and economic diversification, the first step in structural change that often symbolizes economic take-off. Developing countries that have succeeded in achieving high rates of economic growth, such as the Asian economies and those that came afterwards, launched their economic take-off on a platform of labour-intensive, export-oriented industries. This was well illustrated in the case of the Republic of Korea (see box VI.). Technological upgrading came at a later date in their success story. This pattern results from the cumulative nature of technological change which makes it difficult for latecomers to compete with established leaders atEducation played an essential role in the Republic of Koreas post-independence long-term growth strategy.a Progress in providing primary education was very rapid between and , the year the economy started to take off. Although some progress had been made in education during the colonial period, in , when independence was achieved, illiteracy was still high, at per cent, and only per cent of adults had received any formal schooling. After , enrolment rates increased sharply, especially in primary schools. In , sixty per cent of children from to years of age were enrolled in school. The rate increased to per cent by and nearly universal elementary education was achieved in . As a result, the illiteracy rate dropped to per cent in . Thus, the Republic of Korea reduced the illiteracy rate by percentage points and increased primary school enrolment rates by nearly percentage points in about two decades. These levels of educational attainment exceeded the levels in countries at similar levels of gross domestic product (GDP) per capita.The increase in primary enrolment between and , which amounted to . million pupils, was made possible by large investments in schools. A large share of these investments was financed by the united_states Army and by foreign aid, which allowed government expenditures on education to remain at relatively modest levels. Public expenditures on education amounted to only . per cent of gross national product (GNP) in and . per cent of GNP in . A high share of these expenditures was devoted to primary education. Moreover, parents have always born a substantial share of the costs of education.After , the rise in educational attainment continued. By some measures, the rate was among the fastest the world had ever seen. Between and , years of schooling on average were applied to a person of working age. Adult literacy increased from per cent in to per cent in . The quality of education rose as well, as measured by such indicators as cognitive skills. This performance is similar to what occurred in other economies in east_asia but is in contrast to the performance of many other developing countries where the quantity and quality of education have diverged. The high quality of education is highlighted by comparisons of international test scores: in recent years, students of the Republic of Korea have ranked at the top in mathematics and science (often ahead of students in many developed countries). In general, the quality of education can help explain the high returns to educational investment.bAs indicators of the increase in resources devoted to education, in primary education, the pupil-to-teacher ratio fell from in to in and the real spending per child increased more than five times over the same period. However, both these input indicators are not exceptional compared with those of other developing countries. The areas where the Republic of Korea stood out were in higher teacher salaries, low repetition rates and low drop-out rates. Salaries for teachers, for example, have always been high relative to those of other developing countries and to those of other professions in the Republic of Korea.Having achieved its targets in primary education, beginning in the mid-s the Government shifted the focus of public educational expenditure from primary toBox VI..Box VI. (continued)secondary and tertiary education. The share of secondary education in total public educational expenditure rose from about to over per cent between and . The share of tertiary education oscillated in the range of to per cent. A larger portion of the costs of tertiary education, compared with other levels of education, is borne by the individual yet the enrolment ratio at the tertiary level had increased from per cent in to what is, by international standards, the extremely high level of per cent in . This change in priority suited the technological upgrading of the economy of the Republic of Korea by providing workers with the higher levels of education demanded by expanding industries.After laying the foundations for growth through primary education, the Republic of Korea saw the virtuous circle develop between education and growth. Growth in the s and s created demand for labour with a basic education. The availability of jobs with good salaries provided the incentives to enhance education levels. In the s, high school graduates, for example, earned about per cent more than workers with only primary school education. Graduates of a junior college earned about two times as much and graduates of colleges and universities about four times as much, as workers with primary school education. These earning gaps narrowed in the s but real wages continued to grow. When the Republic of Korea shifted to more skills-intensive exports in the s, the demand for skills increased accordingly. By the Vocational Training Law, enacted in , the Government established training institutes. These institutes had trained , workers by . The Government also encouraged training within firms through a system of subsidies and penalties. However, in the s, doubts were increasingly raised about the systems effectiveness.c The school system was also changed as more support was given to colleges and universities in the s; this entailed a shift from the emphasis of the s and s on vocational training and secondary schools. In sum, the export-orientation of the economy of the Republic of Korea, which required an ability to adjust to rapidly changing conditions and competitive pressures, demanded and rewarded education.There is consensus that education made an important contribution to the development success of the Republic of Korea: one study concluded that about per cent of the growth of GDP between and could be explained solely by the advances in education.d A diversity of opinions exist, however, on the precise mechanism through which education contributed to development.v Some have argued that the role of education was largely restricted to screening, socialization, the enhancement of discipline and moral behaviour and assisting the Government in its modernization policies. Others have emphasized the positive effect of education on encouraging and increasing the returns to investment in physical capital through the identification of new business opportunities and the adoption and invention of new technologies. Whatever the precise mechanism, there is little doubt that the substantial investments made by the Republic of Korea in its educational sector more than paid off and that, without them, the country could not have attained its present high living standards.the frontier of technology. In other words, technological leapfrogging is hard to accomplish without some strong foundation, provided by the success of primary education, from which to jump.Poverty traps and thresholds in educationMoreover, the positive feedback between economic growth and educational advance points to the possibility of poverty traps and a threshold level (or critical mass) of educational attainment that, once reached, allows growth to take off. Until this threshold is reached, however, investment in education is not seen to pay off. A study for Brazil found, for example, that a threshold existed when the amount of formal education per person of the labour force had reached three to four yearsadmittedly, not a large figure. Thresholds imply that the effects of education on output are small before a critical mass of education is achieved yet, when the critical mass is reached, education gives a significant boost to economic growth. Given the existence of thresholds, substantial efforts to improve educational systems are required before the positive effects of education on growth can be seen. Governments need to make a considerable effort over an extended period of time to enhance education before a take-off in development can be expected.Table VI. gives some evidence for these thresholds. It shows a clear correlation between income per head and the gross primary school enrolment ratio. The average income of the countries with an enrolment ratio of between and per cent was eight times that of the countries with a ratio below per cent, but only three quarters of that of the countries with an enrolment ratio of over per cent. Once a fairly high level of secondary education covTable VI..Number of developing countriesGross primary enrolment ratio (average)Average GDP per capita (united_states dollars)Gross enrolment ratioBelow per centBetween per cent and per cent Above per cent. .Number of developing countriesSecondary enrolment (average ratio)Average GDP per capitaGross enrolment ratioBelow per centBetween per cent and per cent Above per cent. . .erage had been reached per centthis further improvement was associated with a much greater increase in income per head.The necessity of emphasizing education, especially primary education, as a foremost priority for a developing country wishing to achieve sustained growth is also confirmed by the evidence that there has not been one single developing country that reached a sustainable growth path over the long term by first emphasizing economic growth while ignoring the accumulation of human capital. In fact, all countries that emphasized growth over human development reverted to a vicious circle of slow growth and low accumulation of human capital.Virtuous and vicious circles in educationThe success of East Asian economies illustrates the existence of a virtuous circle between education and growth. Economic growth raised income levels and the demand for educated workers, which in turn boosted both the supply of and demand for education. As industrialization deepened and the economy gradually climbed up the technological ladder, demand for workers with secondary and tertiary education increased. At this later stage, demand played a more important role in generating and allocating investment in education among different levels, completing a virtuous circle of: well-educated labour force high rate of economic growth improvement in human capital.The last-mentioned point is vital, and shows that concentration should not be focused solely on primary education and that policies aimed at secondary and tertiary education should also be designed, for the expansion of each level of education requires the expansion in size and quality of the level above it, with the aim being for each student to be educated up to his or her full potential. This point had been apparent over years ago to educational pioneers who realized that someone had to teach the teachers, but was frequently missed even a few decades ago by the providers of advice on educational policy who argued that tertiary education was elitist.Another reason for a virtuous circle between economic growth and education is that in a growing economy, tax revenues are increasing, providing the resources required in order for the Government to invest in education and to improve its quality. Personal and household income also tends to rise in a growing economy, enabling families to increase their investment in the education of their children. Economic growth thus provides the incentives and the finance for educational enhancements.Similar virtuous circles exist with regard to educational attainments. The higher the level of education of others, the more the individual can benefit from his or her own education, and the more he or she is inclined to strive for more education. An educated society demands goods and, particularly, services that educated people can supply. Thus, the private returns to education depend on the levels of education of others.The opposite of the virtuous circle is the low-level equilibrium trap where low overall levels of educational attainment provide too few incentives to acquire more education. For example, why should an individual acquire the knowledge to produce a new good or service, when no one will be able to read the instructions needed to use it or the advertisements put out to promote it.Similarly, in a poor and slowly growing economy that is generating few jobs, the private returns to education might not be large enough to encourage parents to send their children to school and acquire skills. Thus, a vicious circle can be created whereby children do not obtain sufficient education because the economy is stagnant and the economy is stagnant because educational levels are too low.Education and income distributionThis possibility of a vicious circle is increased if income inequality is high and has a negative effect on education and on economic growth. Greater initial income equality enhances economic growth because it contributes to political and macroeconomic stability: there is less dispute over claims to a share in national output and Governments can focus on devising and implementing policies, public expenditures (including those for promoting education) and taxation that enlarge output.Through its effect on the demand for education, income distribution affects economic growth. Poor people do not have enough cash and lack the assets to acquire loans to pay for education. Greater income equality will therefore enhance the income of poor people and alleviate the liquidity constraints that they face. If poor people have the financial means, and if they see the potential returns as being large, they will make substantial investments for themselves and their children in such areas as education. If there are appropriately highpaying jobs available for those with higher levels of education, poor households will reduce consumption and increase work effort in order to pay for more education. Thus, greater equality in income and asset distributions reduces the liquidity and credit constraints on poor households and encourages greater investment in education. However, in conditions of extreme poverty, there is almost no incentive great enough to encourage a family to take out a loan to finance education. The family is too concerned about obtaining the maximum income from the work of all its members in order to survive. It is doubly important that education for these poorest and most disadvantaged members of society be absolutely free at the point of delivery.Income distribution can also have an important effect on the supply of education. In more equitable societies, it is more likely that the Government will devote an appropriately large share of its resources to primary and secondary education and not, at least initially, concentrate resources on university education, which benefits only a small group. This has been an important consideration, for example, in Botswana, Costa Rica (see box VI.), the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China. The high levels of income equality in the two Asian economies, which were partly a result of the extensive land reforms in the s, resulted in the wide sharing of the fruits of economic growth. This meant that even the poorest households could afford to pay for the education of their children. (Households paid at least per cent of educational expenditures in the Republic of Korea between and .) Moreover, the destruction of the old class system after the Second World War and the Korean War made education the most important vehicle for social mobility. This also geared the Government initially towards ensuring the provision of primary and secondary education rather than of university education for a small group: theBox VI..COSTA RICA: THE COUNTRYS COMMITMENT TO EDUCATIONIn Costa Rica, over a long period, Government made a deliberate effort to raise the level of education in the country, which in turn helped to sustain long-term economic growth.As early as (three decades after the country had achieved independence (in ()), a revision to the Constitution made primary education for both sexes obligatory, free, and at the cost of the Nation. An educated population, combined with freedom of the press, helped defeat militarism in Costa Rica: the educated masses ensured that the elite did not try to exclude them from the political process, while the elite found that orderly democratic change was in their own business interests. However, the Depression of the s revealed the weaknesses in old-fashioned paternalism and Costa Rica endured a Civil War in as a result of a disputed election. The Constitution introduced suffrage for women and full citizenship for all, outlawed a standing army, imposed presidential-term limits and created an independent electoral tribunal.Access to education by the rural population had been limited before the Civil War, but Government investment in education and educational attainments rose rapidly after the revolution. The Government of the Partido de Liberacion Nacional (PLN) accorded first priority to expanding the coverage of primary education. By , the gross primary enrolment ratio had reached almost per cent. Complete coverage at the primary level was achieved in the early s. Economic growth also accelerated: gross domestic product (GDP) expanded at about per cent per annum during the first half of the s.With universal primary school enrolment having been achieved, secondary education received more emphasis during the s: the enrolment ratio increased by more than two thirds during the decade to reach . per cent by . Higher education also expanded in this period, the number of students enrolled equalling . per cent of the population aged -. To achieve this progress, the Government had invested . per cent of total GDP in for education at various levels (. per cent for primary education, . per cent for secondary education, . for higher education and . per cent for vocational training).aInvestment in education paid off in the high rate of economic growth in the years prior to the onset of the debt crisis of the s. The fiscal consolidation brought about by the debt crisis and subsequent economic recession forced Governments in the region to cut back public spending. Costa Rica reduced public expenditure in education and health, but maintained its effort to increase the coverage of primary education. The average educational attainment of new graduates declined during the crisis years, as total public spending on education fell below its level. In the mid-s, the share of public educational outlays in total gross national product (GNP) dropped to . per cent, recovering so as to reach its pre-crisis level only by the late s. In , the Constitution was amended so that, by article , public expenditure on education was set at a minimum of per cent of GDP.These renewed efforts to improve education in the country in the s placed greater emphasis on secondary and higher education. By , the gross primary enrolment rate had risen to per cent, secondary enrolment had increased to from per cent in and tertiary enrolment had gone up from to per cent over the same period. This investment, and the political and investment stability provided by the countrys strong democratic traditions, also played an important role in attracting foreign investment in the s. A number of foreign high-technology companies invested in the countrys information technology sector.The latest government effort is to steer the educational system towards meeting the demand of high-technology industries. This strategy fits an emerging pattern among the more successful developing countries: focus on primary education first so as to build up the threshold level of human capital for economic take-off, then allow industrys demands to play a greater role.Republic of Korea devoted a very high share of the education budget to primary education, for example, per cent in . Yet later on, it certainly did not neglect the higher sectors: tertiary enrolment rose from per cent in to per cent in , a higher rate than in many developed economies. Higher-education levels, however, do not necessarily lead to greater income inequality in the long term, for the wage premium for educated workers declines over time as more workers become educated.Public investment in educationAs the nation as a whole gains from investment in education, the provision of education has long been one of the main activities of Governments. It is a function that has acquired ever-greater importance over time, as the functioning of a modern society requires a continual increase in educational standards. Moreover, parents have continually demanded that their children be provided with high-quality education and that the Government set aside the resources to achieve this. As shown in table VI., the higher the income per head, the higher the percentage of GNP is devoted to education: a virtuous circle is created whereby those who are educated to a high level insist that adequate resources be devoted to this sector so as to provide an even higher level for their children. Governments have both required parents to send their children to school to achieve a minimum level of education and used tax revenues to make this education absolutely free at the point of delivery.One of the reasons for the nation as a whole to gain is that education has significant positive externalities: the education of one person benefits others as well, whether it is the family, neighbours, colleagues or employers. Through interpersonal interactions that facilitate individual learning, one persons education can positively influence others around him or her. The external effects of education for women are particularly large as higher female educational levels reduce fertility and child mortality rates, increase the likelihood that their children will attend school and improve the nutritional status of the family. Education also promotes a more equal distribution of income by facilitating the social and professional mobility of the educated, and there is evidence that greater income equality promotes economic growth. In sum, the total long-term social benefits from education are greater than the sum of the benefits to individuals. Thus, if left to the free market, investment in education would be suboptimal, resulting in a lower-than-justified supply. Public investment or a subsidy from public funds is needed to expand total investment to the socially optimal level. There is also the traditional argument for State intervention: that better education expands human capabilities, including the capability to serve the State and advance its interests. In respect of primary education, there is now no question that this should be universal and absolutely free at the point of delivery.Public investment required for an educational system often takes the form of the physical infrastructures that constitute the hardware of educational systems, such as school buildings. The training of personnel also requires public investment in the form of public contributions to training institutions.Although public resources typically finance a large portion of total educational costs, the amount of resources that it absorbs is not always an accurate measure of the quality of an educational system. Countries have reached different levels of the enrolment ratio and literacy rates with similar monetary investments in education, and have achieved better results in terms of output indicators such as test scores with the same or even smaller financial outlays. The Republic of Korea is one example of a country obtaining substantial results from its educational investment (see box VI.). External aid is another source of funding for education. However, external aid to education amounts to less than per cent of the total education budget in developing countries, although it is an important source of capital investment in poor countries. Moreover, much external aid for education comes in the form of loans for capital investment. It does not cover the recurrent costs on such items as facility maintenance, administrative costs and teacher salaries which are needed to keep in operation the new educational facilities. The volume of such recurrent expenditures greatly affects the quality of education.Encouraging private investment in educationGovernment support for the educational system at all levels is crucial. However, a supportive role can be played by private resources. Investment in education is a sound investment for the individual, as the result is higher lifetime earnings and other non-monetary benefits. This is one reason why private resources can contribute to total expenditure at, in particular, the tertiary level. As greater employment opportunities for better-educated workers act as stimulants to private demand for education, a development strategy that generates demand for educated labour will also stimulate private investment in education.The educational costs borne by individuals and their families are not just direct costs, such as for tuition and books: the opportunity costs such as earnings forgone in the course of education are substantial. In more mature market economies, the credit market is often used to finance private investment in education, especially higher education, providing the individual with the means to pay for his or her education in the expectation of repayment from future earnings. In most developing countries, however, the role of credit finance for financing education is very limited. Either the credit market itself is not developed, or the poor who most need such finance do not have access to it, owing to a lack of collateral or the high credit risk associated with their low social and economic status. Even in mature industrialized countries, the private credit market does not provide adequate lending to the poor. Therefore, Governments in developing countries need to intervene in this area to facilitate access to credit by the poor in order to increase their demand for education.Governments can also pursue other structural and institutional measures to increase private investment in human capital. Measures aimed at poverty reduction and income redistribution could lead to increased private investment in education by the poor. While adult education and some job training may be funded by public investment, apprenticeship and on-the-job training are likely to be privately financed, sometimes with a government subsidy or tax credits. Informal training activities such as apprenticeships, efforts to eradicate adult illiteracy and on-the-job training typically do not involve long periods spent exclusively on learning.The above analysis and country experiences show that education is crucial in facilitating economic take-off and sustained growth. Raising education levels is a process that requires not just time but resources. Yet even a poor country, by making a concerted effort, can achieve substantial progress in improving educational attainments, particularly literacy. One important lesson is that an economic development strategy that creates demand for educated and skilled workers stimulates private investment in education. Given that there exists a mutually reinforcing relationship between education and economic growth, such a strategy will help countries sustain a high rate of growth.The existence of poverty traps and feedbacks between economic growth and the supply of and demand for education implies the need to prioritize in order to maximize the effect of the often limited resources, public and private, available for education. Progress in education should itself be self-sustaining, with progress in one level generating demand for, and supplying the teachers to provide, education at a higher level. For a poor country attempting to jump-start its economy, the most effective approach would be to concentrate on providing high-quality education to everyone at the primary level, with a particular view to eliminating illiteracy. This would help the country reach the threshold level of education that creates a virtuous circle between education and economic growth. The experience of more successful countries is that continual efforts have to be made to ensure that educational institutions meet the changing demands of the economy.At the present time, as the pace of globalization quickens with the information-based economy, an educated labour force becomes even more important for any countrys effective participation in the world economy. The development and spread of information technology make it easier to relocate production to countries of lower labour costs. However, the competitiveness of a country in the global contest for foreign investment is increasingly dependent on its human capital stock: low labour costs alone are not sufficient. In this context, the importance of education for economic growth is being further strengthened by globalization. Individual countries and the international community face a strong challenge in ensuring that the digital divide does not widen. Yet advances in technology themselves open up the possibility of expanding educational opportunities, through distance learning and through making available on the Web written material that might otherwise be inaccessible.Other social programmes apart from education can also indirectly help increase investment in human capital. Both eradication of poverty and reduction in inequality boost investment in human capital by the poor, which in turn will help reduce poverty and inequality. Eliminating the borrowing constraints faced by the poor, together with other measures, can help break the vicious circle of poverty low human capital endowment low economic growth.Technological progress, or rather the ability to generate new technology and to put it to use, has been the major determinant of the wealth of nations. It was the capacity of the present-day developed countries to generate and use technology that powered the Industrial Revolution, thereby producing a hitherto unparalleled increase in the living standards of their populations. In the twentieth century, the green revolution saw the advance and application of technology to increase agricultural yields in many developing countries. This removed from many of people the spectre of famine.Even though some of the technology they used had originated in what are now developing countries, the success of the present-day developed countries can also be explained by two factors: they were able to see the potential uses of discoveries made elsewhere and had the organizational ability to put this technology and that which they developed to use. The present chapter will examine two aspects: What are the opportunities that the developments in technology open up for developing countries, and in particular the poorest of the developing countries? and, Are there any steps that can be taken to obtain the greatest possible benefits?Technology is here understood to be knowledge about how to do things and deals with techniquesthe choices made when applying technology in specific circumstances with respect to economic, physical and social conditions. If technology is seen in these terms, it is of importance not just to the developed countries, which produce the greatest number of inventions and are in the forefront of technical and scientific development, but also to the developing countries. The latter can learn from their own experience how to incorporate in their production processes the discoveries made elsewhere. The changes made have a tacit element in that they are not easily codifiable nor readily transferable. The adaptations themselves have circumstantial sensitivitythey will be determined by the specific conditions of the country. These two elementstacitness and circumstantial sensitivityshow that far more is involved in the use of technology by developing countries than simply copying the best practices of other countries.Technological development is a dynamic concept. It describes improvement: the improvement of an existing production process, allowing the same product to be produced with fewer inputs; the creation of a completely new product, such as a personal computer or mobile phone; the improvement in the quality of an existing product, as in the case of an automobile of today compared with one of years ago. It is difficult, of course, to draw the line between the improvement of an existing product and the creation of a new product. In some cases, technological development can be very specific. In agriculture, it could involve the development of a crop that can be grown in the particular soil of the country and be suited to its climate as well as resistant to the pests found there. In other cases, like that of a manufacturing process, it might be more easily replicable in other countries. In sum, technological development is a matter of the generation and application of knowledge to satisfy human needs. This does not imply that all increases in knowledge should be immediately applicable: research into basic physics, chemistry or astronomy could not be expected to lead in all cases to a new product or process, nor might it be possible to trace the exact paths through which such a discovery leads to a new product.Moreover, there are many steps from a scientific discovery to the marketing of a product that people would want. A great deal of serendipity comes into play, but good fortune has to be accompanied by hard work as well as a favourable business environment in order for the full potential of a discovery to be realized. This is illustrated by the discovery of Velcro, a patented invention. In the early s, a Swiss inventor, George de Mestral noticed, after walking his dog, that its coat and his trousers were covered with burrs. This was certainly not the first time that such a phenomenon had occurred or been observed: the seed-bearing burrs need to be able to cling to animal fur so that they can travel to new planting grounds. Yet investigating the burrs under his microscope, and observing the hooks on the burrs that enabled them to cling so tenaciously to the loops in the fabric of his trousers, de Mestral realized that this hook-and-loop principle could be used to produce a two-sided fastener, which was called Velcro, from the French words velours (velvet) and crochet (hook). It took some time for the right material to form the hook side to be developed but, in the end, with the assistance of a weaver at a textile plant in Lyon, France, and a loom maker in Basel, Switzerland, the fastener was perfected. It was found that nylon sewn under infrared light formed hooks. The invention was patented in .Good fortune also played a part in another invention. In , when Percy Spencer of the Raytheon Company was testing a magnetron in connection with the further development of radar for military purposes, he noticed that the waves from the magnetron melted a candy bar in his pocket. He then requested one of his assistants to bring him a bag of unpopped corn, and after this had been placed in front of the magnetron, it began to pop. He and Raytheon could see the potential in this phenomenonand subsequently developed the microwave oven to cook food through microwave radiation.These examples illustrate the importance of market potential and a supportive business environment in the development to the product stage of an invention or discovery. But they also show that luck is not enougheducated people with scientific knowledge were needed to see the potential of these discoveries. Throughout this chapter, the importance of education, especially at the higher levels, will be stressed. It can then be seen as a counterpart to the previous chapter, where the importance of laying the foundations in primary education was emphasized.Efforts have been made to assess the contribution of technology to economic growth and development in general. Growth can come about through an expansion of inputslabour and capitalor through more productive use of these inputs. Yet the expansion in the labour force and the additions to the capital stock alone cannot be relied upon to produce high sustainable growth, for after a point it can be expected that diminishing returns will set in. Probably the prime example of the futility of relying on expanding input growth was to be found in the former centrally planned economies, which had boasted huge rates of investment and full employment and, for some time, correspondingly great increases in output. In the end, though, as these economies reached the full utilization of available labour and capital, the inefficiencies in the system and the inability to turn into civilian products the results of technical advance were such that the system failed to produce goods that consumers actually wanted. There was no easy mechanism or powerful incentive for the inventor of a product of potential civilian use to obtain the funds to develop a prototype and to market it, generating wealth for society and for himor herself.On the other hand, the remarkable growth of the Asian countries cannot be attributed just to a larger number of people entering the labour force and working with greater capital inputs. Even those questioning the Asian miracle have drawn attention to the fact that the educational standards of the workforce were dramatically upgraded: in the case of Singapore, more than half the workers had had no formal education in and, by , two thirds had completed secondary education. The debate about the sources of growthproductivity improvements versus growth in inputscan become, then, very much one of measuring the inputs correctly and adjusting for changes in quality. The average worker in Singapore in was clearly a very different input into the production process from the average worker in the s. Yet if an attempt is made to account for the increase in workers quality by adjusting for different educational levels, this adjustment could itself capture a major part of what the whole growth process is all aboutallowing an increase in output by enabling workers to work more effectively with capital inputs of greater sophistication. To enable them to do so, they need a continual increase in educational standards. Such standards are increased not just through formal education, but also through learning on the job. Both formal education and the skills and knowledge that are acquired through work experience enable workers to make changes in the way in which they produce goods and services, come up with ways to improve the existing product and find new channels through which to sell goods and services, including to customers outside of the country.The above description highlights many of the conceptual problems involved in accounting for growth: how to account for improvements in the labour force through education, for improvements in labour quality that come about through learning on the job, for efficiency improvements that come about from modifying an existing process, for higher productivity as a result of new machinery or equipment, for quality improvements in the product that result from experience during its manufacture and for new products that are generated as a result of learning from the production process. Over short periods of time, it might be helpful to look upon growth as coming from increasing the inputsleaving part of the increase in output to be somehow accounted for by changes in the quality of the inputs and other factors. However, over longer periods of time, not only do the measurement problems increase, as serious questions have to be raised whether quality adjustments have been adequately accounted for, but such an approach risks being misleading in failing to provide an explanation for what is, ultimately, the source of long-run growth and increases in living standardstechnological progress.Technological advance, even for the developing countries, is not an external factor that is developed elsewhere or a free good that can be acquired without cost or the result of a string of totally fortuitous events. It requires an effort to generate a new technology, or to acquire, modify and exploit to the full technological advances made elsewhere. Technological development cannot be understood in a static setting, for it is constantly pushing forward the production frontier and changing relative prices. Given the centrality of technological advance to economic development, it is understandable that Governments in even the most free market countries adopt policies to promote technology. In the case of the united_states of America, for instance, there were the land grant colleges, the forerunners of many of the present-day major universities, which were established in the nineteenth century by the federal Government through the grant of lands. The lands could be sold, with the resulting funds being used to set up colleges to promote agricultural research and the mechanical arts. At that time, the united_states was a predominantly agrarian society, but was industrializing rapidly, and the agricultural research stations and extension services established through the land grants were instrumental in enhancing technological progress in agriculture in the united_states.There is evidence that market-friendly policies spur technology, by encouraging enterprise and therefore the discovery and development of new products. Yet the question remains whether the Government should adopt certain policies to promote technology in general or should encourage specific technology to address particular problems. Technology is such a crucial factor in the development process that one wonders whether it should be left solely to market forces. This question is particularly pertinent because of the public-good aspects of knowledge embodied in technology and the externalities attending that knowledge. Typically, the rewards an inventor receives from an invention are much smaller than the total benefits to society. Knowledge is difficult to privatize completely and the knowledge of one firm, institute or person spills over to others. In technology these externalities are usually large, so that social rates of return to research and development (R&D) are significantly larger than private rates. Moreover, it is difficult for an inventor to secure finance in many countries (particularly where venture capital markets are underdeveloped which is almost anywhere outside the united_states) because the knowledge acquired through investment cannot be used as collateral: the returns are uncertain and apparent only after a long period. Thus, markets supply insufficient technology and there might be room for Governments to stimulate inventive activities and adaptation. What shape these interventions should take is less clear, and the possibility that government intervention to correct for market failures will cause more problems than it resolves cannot be excluded. These issues will be discussed below.The transfer of technology and its successful application in another country are critically dependent on the technological capacities of the receiving country. An important aspect of technological progress is the adaptations to local conditions, which can be achieved only if technological capabilities are in place: Simply providing equipment and operating instructions, patents, designs or blueprints does not ensure that the technology will be effectively utilized.The Republic of Korea, for example, expended arduous effort to produce a car. It purchased foreign equipment, hired expatriate consultants and signed licensing agreements with foreign firms. Yet, Hyundai engineers repeated trials and errors for fourteen months before creating the first prototype. But the engine block broke into pieces at its first test. New prototype engines appeared almost every week, only to break in testing. ... There were , engine changes. ... Ninety-seven test engines were made before Hyundai refined its natural aspiration and turbocharger engines. ... In addition, more than transmissions and test vehicles were created before Hyundai perfected them in .The assimilation of technology has to be accompanied by local learning, in other words, technological capabilities have to be created. The more complex the technology, the more skills and effort are required to acquire them. Yet, at any level of complexity, an effort needs to be made. At low levels of technology, primary education (literacy and numeracy) and on-the-job training for skill acquisition are largely sufficient. At higher levels of technology, more specialized skills and formal technical education and vocational training are required.The acquisition of technological capabilities is a long and costly process, fraught with uncertainty and risk. This process can be encouraged by incentives provided by markets. Yet, because of the uncertainties, risk and externalities, private efforts to acquire technological capabilities are, in theory, likely to be insufficient. Solely relying on market forces could result in underinvestment in technological capabilities, which would make it difficultif not impossible for developing countries to expand exports of manufactured goods and to attract foreign direct investment (FDI). Governments have a role in enhancing technological capacities by providing education and establishing and facilitating the creation of institutions. This role changes with the level of technological sophistication. At low levels of technological development, Governments should focus on primary education and some basic training. At higher levels of technology, Governments efforts should be directed more towards creating research and training networks.Incentives and capacities are both essential ingredients for technological progress. Over the last two decades, many developing countries have improved the incentive system by stabilizing the macroeconomic environment and liberalizing markets. This, however, is one side of the equation. As examined earlier, creating technological capacity requires long-term commitment. The Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China have been so successful that they have been able to enhance both incentives and capabilities at the same time. Their Governments provided the incentives to export, enhanced technological capabilities through their emphasis on education, training, networks and information-sharing and, adopting policies that would no longer be permitted by present trade regulations, protected several industries so as to allow time for learning.Much of technology is acquired in the normal course of business relations. The results of technological advances are embodied in modern machinery and so the import of capital goods is a frequent means of transmission. Yet a country might wish to develop its own capital goods industry to supply products to local manufacturers, in the hope that, through learning by doing, it would eventually master, and hopefully later improve upon, the technology involved. Such a policy might require providing protection not only to the local producers of the capital goods, but also to the resulting consumer products. With a protected local market in, say, textiles, it might be felt that the local manufacturer of looms would be encouraged. This type of infant industry argument has been successfully applied in some countries, in conjunction with other policies, especially those that promote exports. However, in many countries it has also failed. At the present time of globalized and freer trade in goods and services and increasing international restrictions on such direct support of export industries, the feasibility of the adoption of such a policy is becoming increasingly questionable.Technological advances in the capital goods industries occur with such rapidity that newcomers would constantly risk being out of date, even if the effects of protection were such as not to make them complacent about the need to invest in technological improvement. Given the tacitness and circumstantial sensitivity of technology, improvements in production processes result not just from substituting a more modern machine for an older model, but also from improving the overall productivity of the enterprise by discovering and exploiting to the full advantages that can be derived from this equipment in the specific circumstances in which the firm operates. Thus an attempt to develop a domestic capital goods industry could result in firms not only using inferior equipment, but also adopting out-of-date production practices. Against these disadvantages would have to be set the benefits that come from learning by doing and from acquiring knowledge of production techniques, even if not state-of-the-art ones, in the course of establishing a domestic capital goods industry.An alternative to forcing domestic producers to develop their own technology by excluding foreign producers of consumer and capital goods is to build a domestic technological capacity and induce domestic producers to obtain access to foreign technology. Knowledge can be acquired with the direct purchase of capital equipment, for the manufacturers will often supply technical aid in the form of installation and service. Moreover, the accompanying manuals and blueprints can instigate further capability development, especially if the importing firm proceeds to undertake reverse engineering or imitative engineering, which was an important source of capacity development in East Asian countries. However, in future, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) administered by the world_trade_organization may prevent reverse engineering,In general, the evidence is that trade with technologically advanced countries benefits developing countries that are further behind in respect of the technology frontier. Trade makes available to them products that embody advanced knowledge and useful information that would otherwise be costly to acquire. Empirical results indicated that developing countries derive important and substantial benefits from research and development performed in the industrial countries. It was estimated that each dollar investment in united_states R&D generated in the long run about cents in extra output for developing nations.Other transfers of technology often require the foreign company to make an investment in the developing country or to establish a long-term relationship with suppliers there. In many cases, the foreign company will be a transnational corporation (TNC) with operations in several countries. However, one of the implications of the latest technological developments entails reducing the viable size of a company and so expanding the range of potential foreign partners for firms in developing countries. The results of previous research on the operations of large TNCs in developing countries might not, then, be fully applicable in the present rapidly changing environment. The general principle applies that both parties are working with imperfect knowledge and therefore the terms of any deal between the two are likely to be more difficult to negotiate the further the technological distance between them. The technological level of the receiving country is a major determinant of the nature of the transaction and the extent of the partnership. At one end, the relationship between a developed-country TNC dealing with an affiliate in another developed country is likely to approach equality in capabilities and full information-sharing. At the other end stands a least developed country, with a low skill base, where a small plant is doing final touch assembly with practically no adaptation or process engineering. In this case, the initial technology transfer could consist of limited training to local shop floor and supervisory staff, with minimal technological content.What technologies and functions TNCs actually transfer depend greatly on local capacities. There is thus a role for policy in upgrading capabilities to optimize the transfer of TNC technology and encourage its dissemination. Moreover, there is also a role for policy in attracting higher-quality FDI: providing better information to prospective investors and ensuring that their needs are met can be a vital tool for technology development. As with so much of the discussion of technology, the local capabilities to absorb and use technologydetermined by the local educational systemare vital.The relationship between foreign and local firms can develop so that the technological transfer becomes less of a one-way street. The most important determinants of this technology transfer are the levels of skills and abilities of the local firm, its competitors and the supplier network, and the competitive environment facing the affiliate. The higher the level of local capabilities and the more competitive the environment, the better the quality of the initial transfer and the more rapid its upgrading. A policy to raise the overall educational levels of a countrys workforce would certainly make it more attractive to foreign firms, as would any policy to improve the business environment. In many cases, a trade-off has to be achieved between present and futurea generous tax policy might be used to attract a TNC in the first place. Such a policy might, in retrospect, be felt to have been too generous if the foreign firms operations turn out to be more profitable than originally anticipated. There are no fixed rules, except that the more stable the environment facing the foreign partner, the more confident it will be about expanding its relationship with the host country, including expanding its technological links. Similarly, the longer the relationship lasts, the more time the local industries will have to come up to the level of state-of-the-art production methods: technology transfer is a matter not just of immediately bringing international best practices to the host country, for case studies of plants in Asian countries show that it can take many years for a firm in a developing country to learn to master and adapt techniques so as to bring the productivity of its plant to international levels. In a relationship with a foreign buyer of its products, the developing-country firm also benefits by the foreign partners setting rigorous specifications for the domestic firm to meet. This, in effect, forces it to improve its technology.Measures that seek to force or induce foreign investors to make their investment decisions in different ways from domestic firms are likely to become more difficult over time for countries to impose. There was considerable disagreement among countries during the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations over the whole issue of trade-related investment measures (TRIMs). The Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures applies only to investment measures related to trade in goods, does not actually define what a trade-related investment measure is (although it does provide an illustrative list of measures that were inconsistent with articles of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)), and focuses on the discriminatory treatment of imported and exported products, without considering the entry and treatment of foreign investors. It does not, then, cover many of the issues that were discussed in the Uruguay Round such as export performance and transfer of technology requirements. However, article of the agreement stipulates that not later than five years after it enters into force the agreement should be reviewed (that is to say, after January ), with a view to considering whether it should be supplemented with provisions on investment policy and competition policy. The direction of policy is clear thoughto make it more difficult for countries to impose restrictions on FDI and to direct FDI towards what the countries themselves perceive as their development goals. A strategy that relied on imposing transfer of technology requirements on foreign firms could become less viable in the futureeven if it were theoretically sound.The successful application and development of technology require an array of skillsranging from basic scientific research or access to it, and applied research, to the provision of extension services and learning on the job. Many of these areas require public and private institutions that, generating discoveries and adapting existing ideas to national circumstances, will help propel overall technological development. A kind of virtuous circle arises in which ideas generated in one institution (say, a research finding) can be used by another institution that is closer to the design of a consumer product. There must be feedback mechanisms between the different institutions to ensure that ideas are translated into commercial propositions (and to find the resources for their implementation).Strong cooperation between institutions is of crucial importance to the sector of most relevance to many developing countriesagriculture. It was earlier mentioned how, in the united_states, land grants were part of a successful effort to advance agriculture through the establishment of an agricultural research system, extending from basic research to extension services to the final user. In agriculture, an objective can be fairly clearly definedfor example, to increase the productivity of arable land, and develop grains that are suited to local conditions, such as harsh weather or local pestsand efforts made to achieve it. The systems that the developed countries erected and continue to maintain to foster agricultural research have resulted in the absorption by private and public research in agriculture each of about . per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), a higher proportion for both categories than in the developing countries; the share of GDP of public research in agriculture in the least technologically developed of the developing countries was about . per cent and virtually no private research was conducted.Domestic research is of vital importance to the agricultural sector because of circumstantial sensitivityagricultural inputs such as seeds have to be adapted to the local soil, and climatic and ecological characteristics of the particular country. Moreover, the development of new seed inputs is essential in agriculture because the yields of a new variety that was resistant to certain diseases and pests will eventually fall as new diseases and pests themselves evolve and overcome the varietys defensive mechanisms. This happened with the variety of rice that was developed in and released in to usher in the green revolution. By , its yields had fallen. Various breeding programmes led by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) developed new varieties that were resistant and so yields were maintained.Agricultural research can be expected, then, to exhibit a high return in respect of coming up with the new varieties needed to maintain or increase yields. Studies of public research institutes, including the international agricultural research centres, in developing countries found a mean return of per cent. The mean rates of return were high for all regions. The rate of return in the programmes in the developed countries was per cent. Public sector agricultural extension services in developing countries also exhibited a high returnof per cent.In the past, publicly funded research and extension programmes have produced impressive results in agriculture, in cases where the international and national research centres have granted free access to the knowledge of the products they were developing. Returns would have been considerably lower in the developing countries, which tend to rely on adaptive invention, if they had not been able to rely on obtaining at no direct cost the results of pioneering invention and pre-technology science emerging from international agricultural research centres and developed-country research systems.The issue arises whether the patenting of the results of private research in agriculture will stem the flow of discovery in the developing countries and increase the costs of their inputs. These questions are directly related to technological developments elsewherethe advances in digital technology which allow the amassing and manipulating of vast amounts of data, thus greatly facilitating the study of genetic material.Research into genetically modified crops by private corporations was given a boost by the decision of the united_states Supreme Court in that extended patent protection to new types of plants and plant parts, including seeds, tissue cultures and genes. This justified the heavy investment needed to develop these products. One concern is over the safety of genetically modified foods. After testing by the appropriate government authorities, genetically modified food crops were first released for large-scale commercial use by farmers in the united_states in , and by , roughly half the united_states soybean crop and one third of the corn crop were genetically modified. So far, the use of these crops is largely confined to the united_states, which accounted in for per cent of all land planted with genetically modified crops; Argentina, which accounted for another per cent; and Canada, which accounted for per cent. The advantages for the united_states farm industry were that these crops reduced the problems of pest and weed control and soil protection. For instance, a company developed soybeans with a built-in immunity to one of that companys herbicides. This herbicide could then be used once, replacing the need for more toxic and long-lasting weed killers or soil tillage. In the case of cotton, the genetically modified strain contained a toxin that minimized insect damage to plants and reduced the need for chemical sprays.Genetically modified crops have not spread to Europe because of concerns over safety. There has been a vigorous debate on this issue, conducted largely between farmers in the united_states and consumers in Europe. However, the consumers and producers in developing countries stand to gain much from the spread to them of genetically modified crops. Cheaper foodstuffs would result from producers being spared some of the present costs of fertilizers and tillage. Moreover, the foods themselves could be modified to contain nutrients, such as vitamin A and iron, that are lacking in the diets of many poor people. It is thus of considerable importance for the developing countries themselves to enter into this debate, in order to ensure that their own interests are protected and that research into genetically modified crops will address their own special climatic and soil conditions.In this context, there has been concern that biotechnology firms would patent genes, introduce terminator technology that could prevent poor farmers from reusing seeds and sue those whom they claimed were stealing their intellectual property. A hopeful recent development was the announcement in April by the Monsanto Company, a major united_states biotechnology company, that it had come up with a working structure of the genetic structure of rice and that it would supply this data to the International Rice Genome Sequencing Project (IRGSP). The project is committed to putting all its findings on public databases. The information was supplied on condition that IRGSP complete the rice sequence and publish it as quickly as possible. Monsantos contribution can reduce the time taken to decode the entire rice genome from eight to between two and three years. Monsanto had earlier announced that it would not commercialize terminator technology.The advances taking place in agricultural research make it even more imperative that developing countries ensure that they are in a position to benefit from scientific discoveries made elsewhere, to adapt and develop their own technologies and to make substantial contributions to the body of knowledge. Every effort should be made to keep their researchers up to date with respect to the latest developments and well keyed into the global agricultural research network. Developing countries will also need the detailed scientific and legal knowledge that will enable them to defend and promote their own interests in the often-complex negotiations arising as the rights of intellectual property, devised to ensure the inventor a return on his scientific discovery, have to be balanced against the tradition that knowledge should be made freely available and that expanding the corpus of knowledge itself stimulates further expansions elsewhere. This latter tradition frequently draws upon the statement by Thomas Jefferson that he who receives an idea from me, receives instructions himself without lessening mine; as he who lights a taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. Yet the same Jefferson, who stressed the non-rivalrous and public-good nature of knowledge, also wrote the first united_states patent law (of ) which reflected his philosophy that ingenuity should be given a liberal encouragement.Yet, there remains a concern that a liberal environment does not offer enough incentives. In particular, many food crops that are important staples in developing countries, such as sorghum, millet, cassava, yams and pulses, are neither consumed nor grown in developed countries. This, combined with the limited purchasing power of developing countries, generates insufficient commercial interest in the conduct of research on these crops. Governments in developed countries can contribute to the development of new technology for agriculture in developing countries in a number of ways. They can fund international research programmes, for example, those of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). They can also fund private research within firms or research institutesor offer tax incentivesand ensure that the results of this research are made available to developing countries.In the manufacturing and service sectors, the final product is not so clearly identifiable as in the agricultural sector where it can be said that the aim is the efficient production of safe, nutritious and tasty foodstuffs. New products can and do emerge in agriculture, but there is a much stronger degree of continuity than in the manufacturing and service sectors. Previously, perhaps, there was a degree of predictability in these sectors, and particularly the industrial sector, that made planning possible. Until recently, the aim of countries attempting industrialization such as Japan, and later its Asian neighbours, could be described as having been to understand the processes of mass production and to learn to use the latest production techniques. It was a matter not only of installing capital equipment from overseas, but also of acquiring the institutions and the technical knowledge that would enable production processes used elsewhere to be adapted to local conditions and tastes, leading to the development of new products for domestic and export markets. Their industrial progress was very much a process of learning by doing. Whatever were the differences in the policies they pursued, the formation of a highly trained workforce was central to all their efforts to achieve industrial modernization.However, the policies that have to be put in place to modernize the economy are themselves dependent upon the kind of directions that technology is seen as taking. In the nineteenth century, for example, steam power had generated tremendous demand for steel to be used in railways and shipping, giving rise to the kind of giant industrial conglomerates that dominated this industry. These industries were interdependent in their development, in that rail transport reduced the price of delivery of bulky products, including steel itself, while the demands of the rail sector for steel made a large and low-cost steel industry viable. Mass production in the manufacture of a fairly standard unit, such as a bottle or shovel, was justified. As in the case of many innovations, the ultimate beneficiary was the consumer who benefited from lower-cost travel and from the extension of the market that cheap transport costs had brought about. It was often the case that the initial exploiter of the invention did not fully benefit: railway development cost many shareholders dearly in the nineteenth century.In order to understand where developing countries now stand and which directions their policies towards technological development should take, the present direction of technological change and its implications must be analysed. It could be the case that a set of policy recommendations based upon the experience of those who developed and adopted an earlier technology have to be radically adjusted to take account of the particular nature of the very different technology now being introduced. Given the speed of that technologys introduction, much of the subsequent description will rely on the latest financial literature, rather than academic studies that are providing the framework for analysis. Moreover, much less analysis has been conducted on investment in technology in the industrial and service sectors of the developing countries, as opposed to the agriculture sectors: whereas studies were cited in the study referred to earlier on the returns to public sector agricultural research in the developing countries, only were cited on the returns to public sector industrial research. This lack of information at the microlevel of what actually occurs in the developing countries makes policy prescriptions difficult. Although there are strong theoretical arguments in favour of public intervention in the area of technology, more empirical research is needed to support these arguments in different settings and to determine whether it is appropriate to develop a specific policy towards technology and, if so, how technology policy can best be conducted to reach the intended objectives. There are both successes and failures. More research is needed on the factors that determine what makes the difference between success and failure, although some evidence seems to suggest that intellectual property rights, the assurance of a stable macro environment, the enforcement of competitive market behaviour and an open-economy strategy with respect to trade of all forms are important factors.Commercial implications of the new technologyThe fact that the latest wave of technological innovation has led to the commercial exploitation of digitalization and miniaturization is allowing the fast and convenient manipulation of vast amounts of information. This ability to process large volumes of information easily has been incorporated in standard products (such as drilling machines and automobiles) and so has produced a quality change that sometimes borders on a new product. Tasks that could not have previously been accomplished are now possible at a reasonable cost. For instance, the Channel Tunnels boring machines allowed for a precision that would otherwise have been very difficult, if not impossible, to achieve with earlier machines. Prototypes for products can be designed and tested on an electronic drawing board, with the calculations readily performed and the problems that might have been found only by constructing a specimen identified at very little cost. Thus, the manufacturing process has itself changed and become both more flexible and, in many cases, simpler. Now importance has shifted to the design stage: the assembling of the components of a final product, which previously might have required considerable engineering or mechanical skills, has become routine and can be readily performed almost anywhere for a wide array of products. The division of labour can be more fully exploited globally: the design stage can be carried out in one part of the world, with the manufacturing carried out elsewhere, and the invoicing somewhere else. To a great extent, then, this information processing has led to the further rise of the service sector (although some of this might be a counting problem, as functions that were previously performed in-house by employees who would have been classified as belonging in other sectors are now being performed by what is classified as a service company).Developments in the communications field have enabled the globalizing possibilities of digitalization to be more fully realized. This was achieved primarily through mobile phone technology (allowing for the communication of fairly small amounts of information at very low cost and without the need for landlines) and the Internet (allowing for access to an ever-expanding amount of information at almost zero cost by anyone anywhere in the world). The next generation of technology will merge and more fully exploit these and other developments.The new technology has already made major impacts in developing countries. Changes in the matter of a few years can be of several orders of magnitude. For instance, use of the Internet in latin_america is estimated to have doubled between and . There are estimates that about million people used the Internet in that continent in , but that million will use it in . The room for catch up with the heaviest users of the global Web is great. In latin_america, . per cent of the population is estimated to have used the Internet, as compared with per cent in the united_states. Similarly spectacular growth has been seen in mobile phones: in , there were just over million of them worldwide, and in there were about million. New mobile phone connections far outstrip fixed-line connections at the present time and one estimate is that there will be billion mobile phones in the number will be greater than the number of wired phones.The recent report of the Secretary-General on the role of the united_nations in the twenty-first century gave some indication of the speed with which the new technology, as compared with previous technologies, is being introduced. Whereas it took years for radio, and years for television, to reach million people, the same number of people adopted the Internet in just years. There were sites on the World Wide Web in and in there were more than million.The present pace of technological innovation can be seen as another in those Schumpeterian waves in which advantage is taken of a series of innovations. This innovatory wave is based on semiconductors, fibre optics, genetics and software. Its full importance cannot be measured in physical terms, such as the number of new products directly incorporating the new technology, or the flow of trade of goods classified as high technology, or even the share of high technology in the economy. It involves changes in the way almost all products are manufactured, and in the way business is conducted and brings about the creation of new industries, often in the service sector, that might not be classified as high technology, but could not exist without the possibilities that the new technologies have opened up. Its full implications, especially for the poorer countries, are only now beginning to emerge, yet certain are already apparent.The universal connectivity of the Internet has helped create a more competitive business environment. It has given more power to the buyer in the sense that the buyer can, at much reduced cost, obtain information about different products from the Web and can switch suppliers accordingly. (An example of this change in power has been the introduction of the reverse auction, in which the buyer posts the price at which he or she is prepared to purchase an item and the sellers compete to match that price.) It has also greatly decreased the cost of doing business and thus has stimulated economic activity in a way similar to that in which the development of railways in the last century opened up large areas of the world for commercial exploitation. It has been estimated that a banking transaction over the Internet costs cent, as compared with cents through an ATM (automated teller machine) and cents over the telephone. Processing an airline ticket on the Internet costs $, compared with $ when the ticket is obtained through a travel agent.In this increasingly competitive world, successful new businesses taking advantage of the Internet can start up very quickly and grow spectacularly. It can take a little over two years for a start-up company to formulate an innovative business idea, establish a Web presence and begin to establish a major presence in its chosen sector. However, as in any competitive environment, especially new ones, businesses can also fail. To start up new businesses requires entrepreneurs prepared to take risks and also financial markets that can supply the capital needed. Venture capital investments increased from $ billion in to $. billion in the first three quarters of . Whereas it previously took about five years to build a business to the point where venture capital would be entering, it is now thought to require less than a year. The new industries have been assisted by stock markets. Sums raised in initial public offerings in the united_states rose from $ billion in to over $ billion in .The ensuing rapid restructuring of the corporate sector is a phenomenon not just of developed countries. The success of the information technology companies in India has transformed the corporate scene there. In October , there were no such companies among the top private sector companies in terms of market capitalization. In , there were four. One of them, Infosys, was the first Indian company to list, in March , on the Nasdaq (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations System) stock exchange in New York. The market capitalization of listed Indian information technology companies rose from $ billion in January to $ billion in February .The very nature, then, of this technological revolution will have profound effects on different countries. The downside to rapid restructuring is that existing firms can be driven out of business by the newcomers. Questions arise whether it will be so easy for countries to raise money to exploit, say, natural resources, when the prices of mining shares are performing much worse than those of high-technology stocks. The Internet has also some monopolistic tendencies that favour existing firms, predominantly in the developed countries. The value of a network increases with those who are hooked into it. Thus, the first in the field who establishes a presence tends to dominate. This is the case, for instance, with on-line book purchasing. Moreover, the Internet creates the need for standard products, for instance, a word-processing or spreadsheet programme that enables a person to send an electronic document over the Net and have it read by the user at the other end.The technology and information innovations are shifting the balance of power among Government, the corporate sector and the individual. To take full advantage of the possibilities requires citizens to have access to the World Wide Web, which makes it harder for Governments to control the populations access to information, even if they wish to do so. Attempts to limit access to the Internet would, in effect, serve to reduce the countrys potential growth.The Internet is a powerful tool for the health and education sectors, which, through their contribution to building up human capital, can make a contribution to growth. It can provide doctors in developing countries with access to medical information and help from experts in other countries. Distance learning through the Internet is also possible by establishing virtual classrooms in which users access a national Web site or connect to international sites. Finally, the explosive growth in the technology sector is bringing about calls for even faster deregulation of business activity, which should also foster growth.The technology revolution is a matter of businesses selling not just to the individual consumer, but to each other. One estimate is that the $ billion of business-to-business electronic sales in will increase to $ billion in . Electronic business helps managers gain greater control over their operations and process costs. It increases managements control over inventory and price.The technology revolution can also affect developing countries in that, in response to growing competition and reliable and cheap communications, businesses are increasingly looking overseas for new opportunities. The Internet allows them to contact new suppliers and can bring them new customers. Electronic business has also created new business opportunities in the fields of procurement, electronic commerce, auctioning and advertising. For instance, TradeOut.com auctioned a large amount of fibre-optic cable, located in the united_states, to a utility company based in India.Some businesses in developing countries that are not on-line can be at a profound disadvantage, as more and more businesses buy from each other on-line. The Internet is also opening up markets for developing-country producers. For instance, craft makers in Africa are beginning to sell their wares through the Web, for example, with . In West Africa, a womens fishing cooperative set up a Web site that has enabled its , members to promote their produce, monitor export markets and negotiate prices with buyers overseas.There are strong theoretical arguments, related to the public-good characteristics of technology, that support a role of government policy in the area of technology. The roles range from funding of research, tax incentives and subsidies to providing a conducive environment and supporting education and training. The preceding description of the implications for the business environment of the latest wave of technological advance allows for a discussion of the proper role of Government in the development of technology. The question is whether there are special features of the digitalization and miniaturization revolutions that perhaps call into question previously successful models for the benefiting of developing countries from technological progress so as to increase their living standards.Interventionist policies to promote technologyMuch of the theoretical discussion on government promotion of technology is based upon the experience of the East Asian countriesbefore the success of the Indian high-technology sector and before the crisis in these countries raised questions about the long-term sustainability of many of the policies that they had pursued, hitherto with great success. The interventions that these countries undertook in order to promote their technological development have been categorized as selective interventions that targeted particular activities (picking winners); functional interventions, intended to improve markets, in particular factor markets, without favouring particular activities; and horizontal interventions that addressed activities for which markets were missing or particularly difficult to create in developing countries. The theoretical basis for all these interventions is broadly the same and it is soundto correct for market failures.It has been argued that technology development generally involves a mixture of functional, horizontal and vertical policies, the exact mix varying with the country context and the capabilities of its policy makers. Economically justifiable policies for technological development have been described as market stimulating policies which may involve strong interventions in free markets for extended periods, and in some circumstances may involve doing without markets altogether. There were five implications of these policies: (a) that policies had to correspond to the phase of learning and should change accordingly: those in the infant phases of learning or of R&D development must differ from those in the mature phase; (b) that any policy or programme should involve an experimental phase where alternative configurations were tested and ranked; (c) that there had to be variety in the interventionswith targeted programmes being designed along with horizontal ones; (d) that the objective of policy should be to support not only technological activity but also the generation of innovation-related routines and processes; and (e) that policies should be directed at creating demand for higher-level technological activities as well as at responding to existing demand.These policies clearly implied a substantial role for Government at all levels. This was justified in that as long as there are market failures and strategic needs, well-designed interventions will always promote faster development rather than free markets; therefore, at the present time, it is felt that there is need for an analysis of what kind of interventions work, how they can be designed and implemented and what is needed in the particular circumstances of each country.However, one can ask whether the strongly interventionist model, which might have been applicable to countries trying to advance in a different and far less globalized world where the pace of change was much slower, still has validity. It is doubtful whether the kind of interventionist and protectionist policies that some Asian developing countries adopted in the past would today be compatible with obligations under the world_trade_organization and other international agreements, or would enable them to attract foreign capital. Moreover, in previous periods, the direction of change might perhaps have been sufficiently predictable by government authorities which, it must be further assumed, had the ability to detectand to design the correct policies to rectifymarket failures. It is perhaps tautological to say that well-designed policies will always work better than the free market: in a perfect world with an all-knowing Government with perfect foresight (which is clearly impossible in the fast-moving world of technological progress), all policies would be well designed.Examples of the kind of policies that Governments used to develop technology are also indicative of the potential dangers in adopting such policies. For instance, under the heading deepening industrial structure, the policy of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China was described as None, leave to market forces, whereas that of the Republic of Korea was characterized by strong trade and credit interventions to promote capital, skill and technology-intensive industry, especially heavy intermediates and capital goods. Selective export targeting and promotion. Similarly, whereas Hong Kong SAR had no policy to promote large local enterprises, the Republic of Korea had a sustained drive to create giant private conglomerates to internalize markets, lead heavy industry, create export brands. In sum, there was no such thing as an East Asian approach to technological developmentthe various regions or countries adopted very different approaches in some of the most key areas for government action.In addition, arguments in favour of an interventionist policy to correct for market failures are based on the assumption that a country has the administrative capacity to make the correct interventions and that such market correcting policies are likely to yield a better result than the policy of letting private firms compete and achieve the best result through trial and error. This is a questionable assumption, as experience from the most developed countries would indicate. The prognostication that, as science grew stronger, technical innovation would be predictable and routine has turned out to be incorrect, indicating that the policy of promoting competition and letting the market determine the best outcome has a lot to recommend it.Creating research capability and a technologically trained workforceAlthough the market failure correcting interventionist policies might be less appropriate for the present technological environment than in the s, there is still a considerable role for Government in supporting the technology sector. The one policy that the fast-growing East Asian countries had in common was a firm determination to raise the educational standards of the population. Analysts of their growth performance have had very differing points of view on many issues but have shown virtual unanimity in drawing attention to their success in their educational efforts. Indias impressive recent growth in its software industry has also been made possible by a large number of highly educated people. Another example of a country that has successfully taken advantage of the opportunities of technology policy is Israel. Israel had long been devoting a large percentage of its GDP to education. per cent of its gross national product (GNP) in , compared with about . per cent ofGNP in the developing countriesbefore its already skilled labour force was augmented, within the space of a decade, by , people who had benefited from the educational opportunities provided by the former centrally planned economies. Creating suitable employment opportunities for this highly skilled labour force was a major factor behind many of the technology supportive policies adopted by the Government.The best policy for developing countries to pursue would appear to be to concentrate all efforts on advancing overall educational standardsfrom the primary school to vocational training and science and technology studies at the university level, including research institutes, depending on the level of technological capabilities that the country has reached. During this process of educational formation and expansion, the private sector should primarily determine where resources for commercial activities should go. This educationbased strategy stresses the importance of government funding and organization in building up a national scientific and technological infrastructure from which firms might draw assistance, but would place considerable emphasis on private enterprise, with a deep skepticism about the value of detailed government planning. The strategy would also place stress on the need to construct the requisite physical infrastructure for the full use of the new technologies and to cooperate with the representatives of technology industries to ensure that appropriate policies are adopted.The emphasis on education raises questions whether concerns over the brain drainwhereby a country invests heavily in creating an educated labour force only to see its most highly educated workers siphoned off through the desire to find lucrative employment elsewhereare justified for high-technology workers. As so much of technology is tacit and circumstantially sensitive, those with a training both inside and outside the country are particularly suited to finding profitable ways to adapt their technological knowledge to local conditions, including local markets. Assets in the knowledge-based economy, being largely the products of the intellect, rather than physical structures, are highly movable. In the case of India, with its business environment becoming increasingly favourable to enterprise, many highly skilled Indians were encouraged to develop local industries based on skills they had acquired or improved overseas, and with the assistance of foreign capital (see case study below). Israel and Ireland are two other countries that have been able to attract back with exciting business possibilities those who might otherwise have felt that they could use their skills only abroad.Role of Government in the provision of infrastructureThe case has also been made for technology parks, devoted especially to the development of a particular branch of technology, as well as for a high standard educational system, supported by research institutes. The case for science and technology parks, however, is not straightforward. The existence of a large number of universities and high-quality research institutes in a particular area provides the critical mass that allows for the development of a technological base. This was the case in Silicon Valley in California and Silicon Glen (between Glasgow and Edinburgh in Scotland). When this critical massa cluster of universities and high-technology firms, a highly skilled labour force and ready access to suppliersis present, then a demand often arises for facilities in which to conduct further research. The construction by a Government of such facilities will itself alone not necessarily spur technological innovation. In addition to the cluster of university and industrial research facilities, the existence of a venture capital industry to provide the funds for enterprises to take off, the encouragement of risk-taking by allowing payment in the form of share options and a bankruptcy code that did not penalize too harshly those whose first ventures failed were all elements behind the success of Silicon Valley: the physical buildings alone would hardly have produced this effect.One advantage of technology parks and other facilities that lead to clustering is that the construction of infrastructure, such as roads and electricity, can be concentrated. It is often cheaper to build infrastructure in one location rather than in a dispersed area. The concentration of research institutes and firms in clusters has several other advantages. Smaller geographical distances are conducive to spillovers of technology and to the diffusion and exchange of knowledge. They also generate advantages not directly related to technology. Clusters, for example, increase the division of labour among firms and attract trained and specialized labour and specialized firms that provide services to producers (such as repair, marketing and accounting services). This enhances the efficiency of all firms involved, which is also referred to as collective efficiency. Clusters can play a role in escaping a poverty trapat least locallyas they allow for the emergence of specialized firms, realize economies of scale and lead to externalities and virtuous circles. Sometimes a small advantage that a locality possesses in institutions, geography, infrastructure or taxes can ignite a virtuous circle. The fact that, as soon as a small advantage becomes apparent it will attract more companies, augments the initial advantage. Governments can play a role in generating and nurturing clusters. Governments can assist clusters through the provision of land, infrastructure and electricity and through fostering networking, for example, through business associations.Information technology requires considerable infrastructure in the communications sector. In their attempt to provide Internet access to the population, developing countries are turning to satellite and wireless to achieve telecommunications infrastructure rapidly and cost-effectively. Broadband wireless networks are falling in price, can be rapidly installed and rolled outespecially in rural areasand bring instant revenues. The needs of developing countries are for one platform for high-quality voice and data plus an easy upgrade path to emerging Internet protocol networks. Yet the provision of Internet access will itself frequently require changes in regulations so as to stimulate private investment and to provide easy access to information.Creating an environment for the penetration of new technologyTo benefit most fully from the possibilities opened up by a new technological development, the developing countries need to ensure that the incentives are in place to reward those who seek profitable opportunities from its use and adaptation. The actors are not just local entrepreneurs, but also non-governmental organizations and the foreign producers of technology who wish to encourage its spread. The long-run interests of the major technology producers require that the digital divide between the developed and developing countries be bridged so that the use of products embodying their technology spreads to developing countries. For this to be possible, people in developing countries should be able to use the new technology and, in particular, be computer-literate.One example of profitable use in a poor developing country was seen in the area of mobile phones, where costs of access are decreasing continuously. The cost of laying fixed-line services is avoided by mobile phones, and subscribers have such options as prepaid phones. In Bangladesh, for instance, where about per cent of the countrys , villages had no access to a fixed-line phone, a new industry has emergedphone ladies. They buy state-of-the-art cellular phones, using loans from the Grameen Bank, and charge customers for their use. Similarly, in Cote dIvoire, cocoa and coffee farmers club together to buy mobile phones.One of the factors favouring the rapid expansion of access to new technology is the accelerating rate of obsolescence of equipment. The non-governmental organizations, assisted by the suppliers of technology, can take advantage of this. In Brazil, for instance, the NGO Committee to Democratize Information Technology negotiated a multimillion dollar software donation with the united_states software company Microsoft. It used this software on personal computers that had been discarded as firms upgraded to set up information technology schools in the poorest neighbourhoods. These schools provided a threemonth course in Microsoft applications (Word, Windows and Excel), teaching through exercises that addressed local social issues. The spread of these schools mirrored that of the information technology industry. Having started with machines in , the Committee had expanded, by early , to schools in Brazil, providing work for teachers. About , students graduated during that period. The aim of the Committee is now to provide all the schools with a link to the Internet, thereby creating an on-line exchange for these poor communities.The above examples illustrate how the full exploitation by developing countries of the opportunities presented by fast-moving technological change requires an educated labour force and physical infrastructure, particularly in the communications sector. The new technology has made it even more vital for developing countries to make a big push to raise educational standards. The raising of such standards requires corresponding attention to health issues. Good health, quite apart from its inherent value, enhances educational performance and intellectual development. These fundamentalsa healthy and welleducated supply of labourare essential for the effective operation of the array of institutions that support the risk-taking and investment required to reap the full benefits from the new technology: property rights (including intellectual property rights), a tax system that encourages entrepreneurship, a vibrant civil society, and a fair, transparent and speedy legal system. Yet, the very spread of the new technology and the need to attract foreign investment for its full development encourage the formation of such institutions, and the sweeping away of those that stand in its way.International cooperation to foster the transfer of technologyAs the present technological change is essentially knowledge-based, there inevitably arise questions of intellectual property rightsto which always stands opposed the general idea that the freest possible flow of ideas is of great value (as, indeed, was seen in the development of the Internet in its early years). The protection of intellectual property is one of the poles of the market economy, needed to foster invention. In the case of present information technology-driven patents, these are being issued not just for a physical product incorporating a new technological advancesuch as an improved refrigeratorbut also for Internet business methods, such as one-click shopping and reverse auctions, and computer software. There are now serious questions whether the old patent laws are applicable in the present circumstances. In the first place, they hardly work against state-of-the-art competitorsfor a company can very quickly get around a patent, as the patent itself contains much useful information. One survey in of united_states companies showed that patent protection postponed a rivals entry by a few months in about half of the innovations, and by over four years in the case of only per cent. In the second place, a span of years of protection as currently provided in the united_states seems far too long in the present period of rapid technological change. Changes have been proposed in the united_states patent laws, even by those who have filed patents there and profited from the protection provided. One suggestion has been for a period of public comment before the patent is issued (similar to a feature of the European system, which allows the competition to put its case before the patent is issued) and three-to-five-year patents for business method and software patents. The result, it was claimed, could be fewer patents, of higher average quality (as entrepreneurs would not bother to go to the expense and trouble of filing for an inferior invention) and with shorter lifetimes.It is often argued that strong patent protection systems are in the interest of developing countries, as otherwise business would be deterred from making investments in those countries that incorporate their latest technology. On the other hand, it is also in the developing countries interest to ensure that protection laws enacted elsewhere do not stifle their own creativity. Patents with longer duration mean that the follow-up innovation by others is deterred. Moreover, stronger patent protection in developing countries is not likely to generate more research in areas solely of concern to developing countries, such as tropical diseases. Actually, patent protection is likely to make drugs more expensive and delay their introduction in developing countries. Developing countries thus have a stake in the implications of patent decisions handed down in other countries, but also in the ongoing international efforts to codify and regulate intellectual property protection. Much assistance in the necessarily complicated negotiations can be provided to them by international organizations and non-governmental organizations or purchased from outside consultants. However, the creation of a strong national capacity to enter into such negotiations is crucial. Again, this capacity is itself created by a well-functioning educational system.The international organizations have a considerable role to play in extending Internet usage to developing countries and fostering strong relationships with the private sector. The united_nations Development Programme (UNDP) has, in the face of some scepticism, put considerable emphasis on helping to bring the Internet to developing countries. For instance, its Africa Bureau has agreed to a $ million fund to improve Internet connectivity in Africa through the Internet Initiative for Africa project. The world_bank has also been working with the private sector to bridge the technology gap between the developed and developing countries. For example, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the private sector development arm of the world_bank, set up a $ million fund with Softbank, a Japan-based global Internet investment fund, to incubate Internet-related companies in developing countries. IFC would bring in its expertise in working with developing countries, and would work with the local governments to develop a regulatory environment and infrastructure so as to allow Internet connectivity and access at an appropriate cost. In this regard, the world_bank group has established a Global Information and Communications Technologies Department to bring together IFCs private sector expertise with its own policy and regulatory advice so as to promote the transfer of information technologies to the developing world.Softbank would own per cent of the new fund, to be known as Softbank Emerging Markets (SBEM), and IFC per cent. Softbank would nurture new Internet enterprises by investing seed money and by providing an array of technological, legal and management support to quickly turn ideas into solid businesses. It would work with a network of global industry leaders and local partners to speed the creation of Internet-anchored enterprises in developing countries. It would help entrepreneurs in developing countries use established business models to start up locally adapted versions of some of the worlds leading Internet companies. IFC would also invest in Softbanks China and Latin American Internet funds, bringing the total commitment to $ million. The venture was clearly meant to generate a profit for Softbank, but SBEM would also promote free or subsidized Internet service to schools and other educational institutions in order to increase knowledge and access for people in developing countries.To gain an appreciation of the most appropriate policy with regard to technology that a developing country should adopt in the present circumstances, three industries in India will be studied. When India became independent in , it embarked on an import-substituting industrialization strategy and, as a result, the economy became heavily regulated and protected through trade barriers. Since the s, the Government of India has started to liberalize the economy, and this process has accelerated since . Liberalization has exposed domestic industry to more intense competition on domestic and international markets but has led to an increase in Indian exports of goods and services from about $ billion in and $ billion in to more than $ billion in . Exports have been a major driving force behind GDP growth,which averaged per cent annually during the s. Continued growth of exports depends on the ability to upgrade the level of technology. The present section will look at the efforts to improve technology in three industries: one that is large, long-standing and low-technology (textiles and garments); one that is smaller, younger and high-technology (pharmaceuticals); and one that is intermediate, but rapidly expanding, in size, very young and also high-technology (information technology).TextilesAfter independence, the Government of India regulated and protected the textile industry through a number of measures, including restrictions on automatic looms and loom capacity expansion, firm size limitations, specific production lists exclusively for small-scale industries, import restrictions and export commitments and regulations that compartmentalized the industry on the basis of the raw material used. These regulations placed limitations particularly on the large vertically integrated composite mills, which spin, dye, weave, print and finish fabrics, in order to protect the of workers in the small-scale enterprises where hand looms dominated. Between million and million people operate hand looms and most of them are unskilled women in rural areas. In total, the textile industry has about million employees.During the years after independence, the textile industry showed little technological progress. Weak domestic technological capabilities, which dated back to colonial times, had a retarding effect on modernization. The structure of the industry and of exports changed little during that time and maintained its traditional orientation towards cotton. As exports and domestic demand grew only modestly, there was little investment, particularly in new technology, and the average age of the existing equipment grew older. In , almost per cent of the stock of weaving machinery was more than years old. Regulations regarding the expansion of automatic looms, man-made fibres, FDI and imports of capital goods also slowed down the modernization of technology. By , the stock of FDI in textiles (including leather) amounted only to million rupees (Rs) ($ million), or per cent of the total stock of FDI, although textiles accounted for per cent of manufacturing value-added.A turning point in policiesIn , the Government started to enhance incentives by removing some of the restrictions on the textile industry. Among the objectives were modernization and strengthening of the international competitiveness of the industry. The Textile Policy, for example, lifted restrictions on composite mill loom capacity expansion, eliminated the compartmentalization of the industry, ended the discrimination in taxation practised with regard to the composite mills, power looms and independent processing units, emphasized the import of technology and capital and reduced the bias in taxes and tariffs against man-made fibres. During the s, the liberalization of the industry continued, for example, with measures in and that eased entry and expansion of large firms. Moreover, FDI has increasingly been encouraged and between and Rs . billion of FDI in textiles was approved. Yet, it was only in the second half of the s that import liberalization of textiles and garments commenced in earnest.The Government has also provided a number of incentives to exports. The Export and Import Policy for -includes tax concessions, lower tariffs on imports of capital goods and intermediate inputs and exemption from export ceilings for cotton lint and yarn for firms that assume export obligations. As of April , the textile industry pays no tariffs on capital goods imports if export obligations are met.A Textile Modernization Fund Scheme was created in by the Industrial Development Bank of India to provide concessional loans to ailing mills, and was similar to a soft loan scheme established in . The Fund disbursed Rs . billion to mills and was discontinued in . Funds were also established to finance voluntary retirement of workers in the mills and retrain workers who had been laid off. The and soft loan schemes facilitated the expansion and modernization in the spinning sector, which was largely conducted by private investors. In addition, about new export-oriented spinning enterprises were set up with the assistance of export incentives provided by the Government. New spinning mills and the modernization of existing mills led to higher productivity in the s, although the average productivity level remains low. The most productive mills are the ones that are export-oriented, although the modernized ones are also competitive on international markets. The cuts in taxes and tariffs on intermediate inputs to man-made fibres since and export promotion schemes have contributed to investments and to a large increase in exports from this sector.In weaving, the rapid rise in exports of fabric since has been largely accounted for by the expansion of the capacity of small-scale power looms, whose productivity is higher than that of the mills. The share of mills in domestic fabric production and exports has been declining, although they still export a higher share of their output than the power looms ( versus per cent in /). Yet technological progress has been slow in weaving as well. Automatic looms accounted for per cent of all looms in , and for per cent in ; the figure currently remains about per cent, compared with a world average of per cent.There has been a brisk rise in the number of new firms in apparel production since . Consequently, per cent of the apparel-manufacturing firms that existed at the end of the s had been established between and . The level of technology in this sector has also benefited from a number of joint ventures with foreign firms. Nonetheless, labour productivity in was low compared with that of other countries, and this was partly a result of insufficient investments in auxiliary machinery, such as pre-cutting, cutting and processing machines, compared with investments in countries in east_asia.Further growth in textile exports is dependent on technological capabilitiesAccording to one estimate, India had accounted for per cent of all clothing and textiles exports from developing countries in . Subsequently, as other developing countries expanded their exports of clothing and textiles much more quickly than India, the countrys share declined to per cent in . In the second half of the s, however, textile exports started to increase more rapidly. Between and , textile exports increased from $. billion to $. billion, which amounted to an average annual growth rate of per cent (see figure VII.). Textile yarn has been the most successful,Figure VII..of dollarsTextilesa Pharmaceuticalsb especially after , increasing from $ million in to $ million in and to $ billion in , and thereby accounting for per cent of all textile exports. Cotton fabrics and clothing have also shown substantial increases but the increases were not as impressive as those of yarn. As a result, textiles enlarged their share in total merchandise exports from per cent in to per cent in .However, Indias textile exports are most competitive in the markets for goods of low-to-medium quality and price where Indias low labour costs and cheap raw materials are most advantageous. Yet further growth in the textile exports depends on aiming at higher market segments where competition is based less on price and more on quality. Higher-quality products are dependent on technological progress. Moreover, as import tariffs have been lowered and exports increasingly encouraged, competition has increased both in the domestic and in the international market, and this has raised awareness of the necessity of technology improvement.During the colonial period, new technology was often imported, mostly from the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland, and very little effort was made to adapt this imported technology or develop domestic technology for the traditional textile industry. This inclination continued after independence during the s and s. Yet imports of technology require domestic R&D, as the imported technologies often need to be adapted to local conditions, and skills need to be developed to manage and maintain the equipment. The need for domestic technological capabilities has recently increased with the relaxation of restrictions on imports of technology, more FDI and heightened competitive pressures.In April , the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme was established; it will be operational for five years, with the main objective of funding textile industries that need assistance for the modernization of technology and equipment. Five percentage points of the interest charged by the lending agency will be compensated by the scheme if the upgrading is carried out according to the rules of the Fund. During , applications were received and were approved.The Ministry of Textiles commenced upgrading research laboratories during -and two new laboratories were proposed. Moreover, the upgrading of laboratories from the previous scheme has now been completed and they have been made operational. The Ministry of Textiles has also set up computer and Internet facilities to accumulate research and information material to be used to analyse international technology improvements for the benefit of the national industry.An industrial non-profit research association of manufacturers, the Ahmedabad Textile Industry Research Association, does research in the areas of spinning and weaving, textile chemistry, machine design, energy conservation, pollution control and policy analysis, and provides training and educational facilities. Another association, the Silk and Art Silk Mills Research Association (SASMIRA), carries out research in the areas of man-made fibres, yarn and fabrics.PharmaceuticalsIndia put much emphasis on self-reliance after independence and made the production of low-cost pharmaceuticals one of the primary goals in order to provide affordable medicines to the population. The pharmaceutical industry, like the textile industry, was, for a number of decades, heavily regulated and protected. The Government used price controls to keep domestic prices low, limiting profits in the domestic market. However, price controls were never applied to exports (which account for about a third of production), enabling higher profit margins. TNCs have a much larger presence in the pharmaceutical industry than in the textile industry. The pharmaceutical industry was itself dependent upon the high quality of scientists graduating from Indias higher educational establishments.During the s and s, the domestic pharmaceutical capacity remained relatively small and in domestic firms accounted for less than per cent of the pharmaceutical domestic market. In , however, the Government of India started to encourage domestic firms to produce drugs. One important policy instrument was a new patent law, the Patents and Design Act of , which became effective in . The permissiveness of this law encouraged the development of local technological capability through imitation and adaptation rather than innovation. Domestic firms have responded by imitating drugs and developing and patenting indigenous processes to make drugs. (One Indian firm, for example, is the worlds second largest manufacturer of norfloxacin and ibuprofen.) Introduction of a patented drug by an Indian firm takes usually less than five years. Through computerized databases and the Internet, access to patent specifications has even become easier in recent years.The restrictions on patents, prices and foreign investment contributed to the increasing share of Indian firms on the pharmaceutical market. By , Indian firms accounted for per cent of the bulk drugs and per cent of the formulations produced, and the share of corporations owned by TNCs fell from over per cent in to nearly per cent in . However, most of the large Indian firms had some foreign equity.The Government started to reform and liberalize the pharmaceutical industry in . It raised the share of foreign ownership to per cent and larger foreign ownership was approved on a case-by-case basis. Complete foreign ownership is now allowed where proprietary technology is sought to be protected or sophisticated technology is proposed to be brought in; (and) where at least per cent of production is to be exported. The number of drugs subject to price controls was also reduced, first from to in and to in . The Government has also encouraged the import of technology by giving automatic approval for technology agreements.Domestic technological capabilitiesThe development of domestic technological capabilities was enhanced by the Patents and Design Act of but it had been building on a long tradition. The first pharmaceutical research institute was established as early as , followed by two others in and . Research capacity has been built up ever since. Most pharmaceutical research is conducted within the large firms, in research institutes and in nearly universities. Seventy-seven firms have in-house R&D departments approved by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Pharmaceutical companies benefit greatly from the research institutes and universities, through exchanges of knowledge and people. These positive spillovers are facilitated by the geographical concentration of pharmaceutical firms, research institutes and universities around Hyderabad. There are approximately institutions for higher learning in Hyderabad and some of the most important technology and science institutes, such as the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology and the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, are located there. The Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), for example, a laboratory under the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), conducts research in the areas of process, products, design and engineering know-how. The institute specializes in a number of areas, such as pesticides, drugs, organic intermediates and organic coatings. IICT is sponsored by the industry and has been very successful in transferring technology to the industry. Out of new technologies transferred, are used in commercial production.R&D expenditures increased during the s and s, with an increasing share having been funded by the private sector. As the Government of India decreased its financial support to research institutes, they had to expand their efforts to obtain private finance for their projects. This has made the institutes more attentive to the demands of the industry and the industry more aware of the research possibilities. R&D expenditures account for about . per cent of sales, a figure that is low compared with the international average of per cent but high compared with the figure for other developing countries. Yet, some of the firms spend nearly per cent of sales on R&D.Protection extended to domestic industry and the Patents and Design Act of contributed to the gradual expansion of domestic technological capabilities in pharmaceuticals, within firms and laboratories. This capability first allowed Indian firms to capture an increasing share of the domestic drug market and then to export. Since the s, the trade balance in pharmaceuticals has been positive. Exports have benefited from relatively low costs and various policy measures, such as the absence of price controls and income taxes on exports and export incentives such as those applied to textiles. In addition, a Pharmaceutical Export Promotion Cell has been created within the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to provide information and training on standards and quality control for potential exporters. Exports of pharmaceuticals increased from $ million in to $ million in (see figure VII.). Exports of bulk drugs have grown particularly rapidly in the s and accounted in for per cent of all pharmaceutical exports; but growth rates have fluctuated rather sharply and the strong growth of the late s has not been repeated since. The pharmaceutical industrys share of total exports increased from . per cent in to . per cent in .Yet Indias share of the international market is about per cent and it has had to change radically its permissive patent provisions to conform with world_trade_organization requirements. It has undertaken to put in place provisions so that pharmaceutical patents will be respected by the year . This will necessitate a shift from copying drugs to developing new medicines. Accordingly, in , the Government of India constituted a Pharmaceutical Research and Development Committee to recommend measures to strengthen domestic R&D capability. The report of this Committee recognized the changing global environment, and its recommendations included the establishment of product patents by January and exclusive marketing rights in the interim period and the increasing possibility of an international division of labour in R&D, where outsourcing would play a larger role. India, for example, could develop a capability for subcontracted clinical research and testing. The Committee also recommended the establishment of a Drug Development Promotion Foundation, which would promote, coordinate and finance R&D. It also proposed a per cent surcharge on all drugs sold in India to finance the expansion of R&D, which would be administered by this Foundation.Information technologyOf the three industries being studied, Indias information technology industry is undoubtedly the most successful and points the way for future policy. Exports of information technology, particularly of software, have grown very rapidly over the last decade, reaching about $. billion in -. In its initial years, the sector received little direct support from the Government, but benefited greatly from the human resources that have been created partly with government support. The Government also has a role in providing an enabling environment for the private sector, building infrastructure, creating institutions and facilitating networks among producers.Education as the basis of successThe Indian software industry, similarly to the pharmaceutical industry, owes its success to a considerable extent to human capital. India had built up the critical mass of educated people necessary to take advantage of new developments in information technology. In /, over million students were enrolled in Indias tertiary education sector, the largest number among any developing country. Yet, by comparison with other developing countries that have not enjoyed such spectacular success with the new technology, Indias enrolment ratios are not exceptional. For instance, its gross enrolment rate for tertiary education, at . per cent in , was lower than the average for all developing countries, of . per cent. However, the Indian educational system produced graduates of a very high standard, with many of them being sought by both Indian and foreign information technology companies.The example of software exports by India highlights the fact that support to all levels of education, including the highest, is essential to the development of high-technology industries. Largely because of their connections with Silicon Valley in the united_states, some highly motivated and qualified Indian entrepreneurs were able to exploit the advantages that came from the existence of this highly trained labour force. Indian entrepreneurs built up a software exporting industry of nearly firms, employing about , engineers, the second largest group of software engineers in the world after the united_states.Apart from its large pockets of highly educated English-speaking labour, coming often from Indias many educational institutes, India had apparently few advantages at the start of the information technological revolution from which it has benefited so dramatically. Its telecommunications were poor and expensive and it is still one of the least networked societies in the world, with fewer than million computers. The physical infrastructure in Bangalore, one of the centres of Indias software industry, was poor: the roads were sub-standard and power supplies were erratic.The very success of the high-technology sectors provided a spur to educational advance, thus creating a positive feedbackor virtuous circleas discussed in chapter VI. The rapid growth of the information technology sector has strained the capacity of existing institutions to cater for the demand for graduates, and is adding to pressure for their expansion, without jeopardizing quality. The Government of India proposed to establish an Indian Institute of Information Technology in every State. At this point, funding can be partly private. The Indian software industry gave a very clear example of how a good education can be translated into wealth: no other industry had created so many millionaires in such a short span of time as the software industry. These millionaires themselves can make donations to the institutions from which they graduated. Other sources of funds are Indian and foreign technology companies themselves. The private development of some parts of the tertiary education sector could be encouraged by the potential high earnings of graduates and the need of the high-technology industries for a larger supply of graduates. Finally, the success of the high-technology sector in India brought home the importance of education in general for the countrys development, and of the many shortcomings in all education sectors, which could be addressed with the help, inter alia, of information technology.Infrastructure and institutionsIndia has developed a network of Software Technology Parks which offer the following benefits: duty-free imports, per cent foreign equity, no corporate income tax for years, dedicated data communication links, singlewindow government clearance and custom bonding and export certification. Even information technology companies that are not physically located within the parks can have access to them through a satellite-based telecommunication network. Facilities at the parks are being expandedfor instance, Bangalore spent $ million on its new communications centre to enable it to offer multicasting, webcasting and videoconferencing services.The Government of India is taking steps to increase access to the Internet. As part of the new telecommunications policy adopted in , the Government encouraged the formation of private Internet providers. They would not have to pay any licence fees. Together with liberalizing the provision of Internet services, the Indian Governments Department of Telecommunications significantly lowered the price of using its bandwidth. Further liberalization steps included the Governments inviting applications from companies to set up their own international gateways. Previously, only the State-owned long-distance telephone company could operate an international gateway. Indian industry has also been pushing for private companies to be allowed to invest in their own high-speed fibre-optic links so as to compete with the State-owned monopoly.The Government of India is working closely with the National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM), which was formed in , to remove obstacles to the software industrys expansion. The association provided a major input to the Governments plans to foster a liberal approach to the setting up of foreign venture capital funds in India: previously, Indian hightechnology entrepreneurs had to approach overseas capital markets, especially in the united_states, for funds. Instead of several authorities, a single body, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) would henceforth vet prospective venture capital funds, and venture capital funds would pay a single per cent tax on income distributed as dividends. They used to pay a capital gains tax as well as the tax on distributed income.In , in response to the rapid growth of the Indian software industryof about per cent per year between and the Government of India established a Ministry of Information Technology, which NASSCOM hoped would be modelled along completely different lines than traditional ministries. It should be promotional in nature rather than get into the mode of licences. (It should) think and act at the speed of thought and be open to innovative ideas. There have been doubts among some in the information technology industry about the need for such a ministry. However, NASSCOM welcomes its formation if it increases information technology penetration in the country, promotes applications of information technology in such sectors as education, health care and E-governance and quickly creates the necessary Internet infrastructure. The Ministry of Information Technology sees its main functions as being those of a proactive facilitator, motivator and promoter of information technology, with the goals of spreading information rapidly to the masses and ensuring the rapid spread of information technology.Two factors should be stressed in connection with Indias success. One is the mobility of Indian entrepreneurs. Many of them worked outside India and developed strong contacts among overseas firms, especially those in the united_states. They brought these skills back to India and were able to tap into foreign capital markets to develop the software industry in India. The second factor is that location is less relevant for the digital economy in the sense that the industry is largely based upon the quality and entrepreneurship of its workforce. Whether they are located in India, Silicon Valley or London is less important than the ability of the cluster of high-technology firms to network among themselves and tap into other clusters of similar enterprises, to come up with solutions to problems, such as the year date conversion problem of computers (YK), that the industry could face, and to develop new software packages that meet business needs. The third factor is that Indian entrepreneurs are well educated and speak English, the lingua franca of the computer revolution.The Government of India is placing heavy reliance on knowledge-based industries for assuring Indias future economic growth, the possibility being foreseen of Indias reaching what it has described as economic maturity in yearsa period much shorter than the nearly years that it took the united_kingdom or the years that it took the united_states to achieve this stage. The Government sees that information technology is an area where India can speedily establish its global pre-eminence and that information technology has a great potential to modernize the national economy (industry, agriculture and services), the educational system, communications and the Government-citizen interface. NASSCOM wants to work with the Government to take full advantage of the possibilities opened up by information technology in the areas of education, employment, entrepreneurship and economy. It can see the industry helping to increase the levels, spread and standards of education, generating million new jobs over the next five years, encouraging entrepreneurship and contributing towards the growth of exports and the economy. The budget of gave firms in knowledge-based industries, such as information technology, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, tax breaks on their research and development expenditure, a ten-year tax holiday, support from a $ million R&D fund set up by the Government and tax exemption on export earnings if the company is located in an exported-oriented zone.Unleashing Indias creativity and intellectual talentsThe three examples discussed above illustrate how, over the decades, India has been able to build important technological capabilities in textiles, pharmaceuticals and information technology. However, different policies produced varied outcomes, and left the industries with different challenges for the futureand with varied degrees of the wherewithal to meet them. Technological progress in textiles probably suffered from the heavy regulatory and protectionist environment which, once lightened, enabled considerable expansion to take place. In pharmaceuticals, direct support to industry helped, but it did not fit out the industry for competition in the present environment where patent protection laws are to be strengthened to conform with international norms. It consequently has had to change. The information technology sector has been largely free from specific regulations and has been extremely successful, with the inventiveness and creativity of Indian entrepreneurs being allowed full rein. It might be argued that textiles and pharmaceuticals can be damaged by deregulation and liberalization as the creation of technological capabilities is a slow, complex and long-term process that is both costly and risky, while liberalization and deregulation can be implemented overnight. Yet this is hardly an argument for regulation and Governments micro-managing the industries, as shown by the success of the software industry where specific government policy did not play a role.The software industrys success points to the vital importance of the educational sector in creating the abilities necessary to develop and run high-technology industries. Upgraded capabilities have contributed to the competitiveness of the textile and pharmaceutical industries during a period when their markets have been liberalized, incentives enhanced and export opportunities increased. They remain particularly crucial in light of the changes that India is facing as a result of the implementation of international agreements. These agreements include the phasing-out of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement, which will be completed on January . This will create new export possibilities. Previously, the textile industry had been a low-technology industry whose competitiveness was largely based on low production costs. In future, sustaining export growth will increasingly depend on higher-quality products that require more R&D. The pharmaceutical industry can no longer depend solely on imitating products and low production costs. Moreover, India is committed to developing by the same date, , a stronger patent law that will grant product patents, the granting of such patents not being possible under the current patent act. The industrys future success will be determined by its ability to invent and innovate new products.The software industry has been export-oriented from its inception. Its very existence and success on export markets were to a large extent a result of the technological capabilities. Yet, its ability to continue to take advantage of the rapidly growing market for information technology is dependent on persistent efforts to upgrade technological capabilities, especially because they are quickly out of date in this field where developments are very rapid. These efforts become even more important if India wants to shift from low-level offshore programming to markets with higher profitability like packaged software.The Government can play an important role in enhancing technological capabilities. Foremost among the areas where the Government has a role is education. Although there is a small segment of highly educated people in India, per cent of the population is illiterate. Reducing illiteracy by increasing enrolment rates in primary schools will be an important condition for raising the level of technology in low-technology industries, such as textiles. And increasing vocational, technical and higher levels of education and training will be important for the technological capabilities in high-technology industries, such as pharmaceuticals and information technology.The Government also plays a role in infrastructure, such as roads and electricity generation and delivery, and in providing an environment in which private entrepreneurship can thrive. Moreover, government support is also important for the creation of networks, research institutes and, if appropriate, industry marketing organizations.Technology is one of the most important determinants of economic development and the level of technology is one of the most obvious factors that distinguish a poor country from a rich one. Although, there are strong theoretical grounds for government intervention, recent developments, such as the information technology revolution and the globalization of the world economy, have changed the scope of government intervention and called into question the kind of industrial and technology policies that might have been appropriate years ago.The agenda for developing countries, and particularly the poorest developing countries, is huge. The area where every Government should play a role is education. The first priority must be providing a quality education. In countries at low levels of technology the emphasis should be on primary education, encompasssing the reaching of literacy and numeracy, and on the acquisition of basic skills though training. This will enhance technological progress in agriculture and low-technology manufacturing. When a country develops its technological capabilities, its emphasis has to shift to higher levels of education, particularly in science and technology, and vocational training. At higher levels of technology, research institutes also become important. They can be funded and created by the private sector, although the Government can facilitate their establishment.Investment in a highly educated labour force is, in the long run, justified in its own right. Yet the creation of a critical mass of educated people also creates a partner for dialogue. This dialogue among local, and also foreign, business, civil society and the Government can be expected to increase in importance. It can help ensure a properly regulated and supervised competitive structure, which fosters risk-taking, the provision of risk capital and the enjoyment of the rewards stemming from the creation of technological advances that benefit society as a whole.Some countries might be too small to create institutions for tertiary education and research institutes. Regional cooperation between countries, for example, within existing regional organizations, can create the critical mass that is needed in areas of education and research. Cooperation at the regional level allows specific conditionsfor example, cultural or climatic onesto be taken into account.Governments also play an important role in providing the proper incentives to the private sector and in creating the institutions that improve the functioning of markets. This includes the protection of property rights and patent protection. Yet, the speed and sequencing of the enhancing incentives are crucial. For example, import liberalization before the technological capabilities are in place that will allow certain industries to face international competition, can lead to the destruction of incipient manufacturing sectors, as has been the case in Africa.FDI can be a source of technology, especially when countries have developed their own technological capabilities. TNCs will be more likely to invest in countries that have skilled labour and national technological capabilities, which make it easier to recruit personnel and find local suppliers for intermediate inputs. The higher the local skills and capabilities, the larger the quantity and quality of the technology transfers. In addition, Governments can encourage international transfers of technology by attracting FDI through, for example, the construction of infrastructure, the development of technology parks, training, information provision and (tax) incentives .Governments and the private sector can cooperate in several areas, such as infrastructure, training, research, information-sharing and the setting of standards. Governments can function as a facilitator in these areas, in particular in the creation of networks. One area where cooperation between Governments and the private sector is particularly important is that of the generation of technology that addresses specific problems in developing countries, such as those relating to tropical agriculture and tropical diseases. As the markets for new technologies that are specific to developing countries are too small, the incentives for researchto develop, for example, vaccines against malaria, tuberculosis or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or new high-yielding seeds for roots and tubersare insufficient. International public research programmes, particularly in agriculture, have yielded very high rates of return. The green revolution is the most obvious example. It is essential that the international community maintain its support for these programmes. Additionally, Governments and the private sector especially of developed countries have a crucial role to play. Several proposals that are based on public-private partnership have been aired recently, their aim being to improve the incentives for research into vaccines, for example, by establishing funds that would guarantee the purchase of the vaccines if developed or by providing tax credits.Institutions have always been considered central and indeed a prerequisite of development. Many philosophers from all different cultures have struggled over the centuries with outlining the set of institutions that assure material advance. While they have all helped build up the consensus that prevails today, a decisive theoretical advance took place in the eighteenth century, before the Industrial Revolution. Even before he wrote The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith outlined in his other major work the kinds of institutions that would enable, inter alia, his invisible hand to function to everyones benefit. He showed that, without the appropriate institutions, progress would be thwarted and human wickedness would hold sway: The characters of men, as well as the contrivances of art, or the institutions of civil government may be fitted either to promote or to disturb the happiness both of the individual and of the society. ... What institution of government could tend so much to promote the happiness of mankind as the general prevalence of wisdom and virtue? ... The fatal effects of bad government arise from nothing, but that it does not sufficiently guard against the mischiefs which human wickedness gives occasion to.This moral content of institutionsto promote the happiness of the individual and of society and to restrain the individuals tendency to evilwas central to the early political economists because civil and religious wars were a common feature of Europe at the time. A Governments duty was to prevent the practice of such vices, and to promote individual happiness. One of its first duties was to educate its citizens so that they would be able to perform their full role in society and become better people, more able to restrain their passions. Other duties of the Government were to provide for honest and fair justice and individual securityequal access to the courts, secure property rights and the greatest possible freedom from violence from others.These ideas were being developed in countries that were not necessarily the most successful economically. However, in the century that followed, those countries that put in place a set of institutions designed to promote justice and the rule of law and to ensure property rights and individual security prospered economically. Their temptation was to think that this economic success derived from some form of superiority and that they would be able to assure the advance of other peoples by transposing their institutions to them. The colonialists did bring in some useful institutions, many of which were retained after independence. However, they usually ignored existing local institutions that had previously ensured domestic tranquillity, but which were swept away. If they had been allowed to evolve naturally, these local institutions might have served their countries better over the longer term. For example, one of the most successful African countriesBotswanawas relatively neglected by the colonial authorities and was able to preserve its traditional institutions, which served it well in the negotiations that it conducted with its international business partners (see box VI.).The present chapter examines the role of institutions, defined as the formal and informal norms and rules of human society that shape the environment within which human and physical capital and technologies operate. In particular, it examines the types of institutions that are needed in order for a lowincome country to start on a path of sustainable growth. Early development economists, such as Arthur Lewis and Gunnar Myrdal, emphasized the importance of institutions as an essential foundation for growth. In subsequent decades, perhaps because the existence of well-functioning institutions was taken for granted, most economists focused on investment, labour, technology and education as the main factors that had to be given attention in order to secure economic growth.In the s, institutions regained the attention that had been assigned to them by the earlier economists as a result of several experiences at that time. The lower-than-expected performance of the African and Latin American economies after the adoption of market-oriented reforms, and the very weak performance of several of the economies in transition, after price reforms and the implementation of privatization programmes, pointed to the need for appropriate institutions to guide and buttress economic activities. The former centrally planned economies, which did not have institutions to guarantee the most basic rightssecure property rights and speedy access to a fair tribunal demonstrated the essential role that institutions play in market economies. The Asian financial crisis provided a further illustration by demonstrating that financial liberalization without a proper set of domestic and international financial regulations could disrupt the functioning of the existing financial industries, and thereby cause a severe economic crisis. Finally, developments in some countries since the end of the cold war have demonstrated the connection among weak institutions, civil strife, warfare and economic decline.Institutions mould the way individuals or groups of individuals interact to get things done. They can include formal institutions like laws and regulations, explicit contracts and market exchange rules, and informal ones like common values, norms, customs, ethics and ideology. In many cases, special care has to be taken to distinguish between the operation of an institution in practice and its formal expressionfor example, there are instances of dictatorships or kleptocracies operating under the guise of a seemingly democratic constitution. Economic, political and social institutions set the constraints within which individuals behave and the framework within which tangible and non-tangible resources are used. If such institutions are not conducive to, or lack the capability of, moulding individual actions and resources in a mutually beneficial way, a society will be unable to take full advantage of its available resources. Formal and informal institutions determine some of the most important sources of economic progress, particularly investment and technological progress. Without proper property rights, entrepreneurs have few incentives to commit their resources for long periods. If investments in a mine, a farm or a factory can easily be seized by others, including the Government, there will most likely be little investment and a country can easily be trapped at a low-income equilibrium, or even worse, slip into anarchy and chaos.These experiences have provided a number of important lessons regarding the role of institutions. Firstly, the market mechanism is the most powerful instrument for the generation of wealth, but alone it cannot solve all of the problems associated with economic transformations, such as those involved in accelerating development. The market mechanism must be supplemented or strengthened with an appropriate set of institutions, particularly rules and regulations related to economic activities. Secondly, institutions vary across time and space and need to be continually updated and upgraded to adapt to the changing environment and to respond to emerging problems. Thirdly, there are factors embedded in institutional structures that make institutional change difficult.Despite these inherent difficulties, successfully creating and changing institutions are possible. One important element in changing institutions is widespread participation in decision-making processes, which enables the creation of the critical mass of support needed to change institutions. Substantial participation in the negotiation of the changes by all the parties may slow reform processes. However, it is the necessary institutional mechanism that can reconcile the diverse, and often conflicting, interests of those involved and thereby ensure that the new institution is sustained and can contribute to sustained growth in the long run. Moreover, as was demonstrated by the demise of central planning, the speed of change in the modern, globalized world and the large number of different actors involved rule out the possibility of efficiently concentrating economic decision-making in the hands of a small group.After the Second World War, considerable emphasis was placed on government intervention in economic activity, but this came under increasing criticism during the s. An approach relying more on markets and less on government intervention spread to many developing countries and economies in transition. Reforms throughout the world enhanced the role of relative prices in allocating resources. Proper price signals in markets were thought to generate the best incentives for an economy to undertake efficient private production and investment and thus grow autonomously. The shift towards market-oriented mechanisms included financial markets, leading to financial liberalization in many countries.Markets, however, cannot operate in a vacuum. Several institutions are crucial to the proper and smooth functioning of markets and to the reduction of the imperfections of markets. Institutions are needed to guarantee that people have adequate control over the returns to their human and non-human assets and activities. Without such control, people have less incentive to undertake and invest in productive activities and invent and use new technologies. For example, peasants who have inadequate control over the returns to their labour have few incentives to work hard. The rule of law and clear contract and property rights make the completion of transactions less costly and more predictable. Without these rights, transactions involving different places or time periods cannot be negotiated and enforced effectively. Institutions ensure that those who breach a contract are penalized, thereby creating disincentives to doing so. If property rights are uncertain, for example, because contracts are poorly enforced and there is a risk of expropriation, irreversible investments in physical capital and innovative capacity are particularly affected.Markets ensure that the full benefits from trade are realized and they thus achieve a socially desirable allocation of resources. They also promote efficiency through competition among sellers and buyers and the division of labour in production processes. However, particularly in developing countries, markets may be lacking or may work imperfectly, for example, because of high transaction costs. Market participants therefore receive inadequate or inappropriate incentives and consequently do not fully exploit the potential gains from trade and production; this hinders economic growth. A typical example of this occurs when peasants who are separated from markets because of inadequate roads therefore have no incentives to produce more than they consume. An example of a missing market arises where there is no crop insurance for inclement weather. In such a case, peasants are reluctant to adopt a new and unproved technology; they know their existing technology will meet their low level of subsistence and are not willing to take the risk that an unknown technology will fail them.There are many ways to deal with markets that are missing or not perfect. Laws and regulations and different combinations of formal and informal institutions can serve to prevent or ameliorate inefficiencies and inequities that may result from market imperfections or incompleteness.Laws, regulations and trading rules help reduce the costs or uncertainties associated with transactions of goods and services. Transactions across long distances or between time periods are facilitated by clearly defined contract and property rights. Financial regulations, such as the reserve requirements and the capital adequacy ratio imposed on commercial banks, aim at ensuring the stability of the financial markets and the safety of deposits held in these banks. National and international standards for goods and services facilitate transactions in domestic and international markets.In sum, adequate institutions are needed to facilitate market transactions in many different ways. With the demise of central planning, the market mechanism is almost universally accepted as the primary institution to maximize the potential gains from trade, to facilitate the division of labour, to allocate resources and therefore to expand economic activities. However, institutions, particularly laws and regulations, are indispensable parts of the market economy and the quality of a countrys institutions is increasingly recognized as having a direct impact on a countrys economic performance.There is no one set of institutions that performs optimally for all countries. Each country needs to establish a unique set of institutions that works best in its particular historical, cultural, social and economic context. Because the functioning of a formal institution depends on informal institutions as well, this implies that institutions cannot easily be transplanted from one country toEconomists now put more emphasis on non-economic factors in their attempts to understand the process of economic growth or development. One line of research is oriented towards constructing indices of institutional quality and comparing them with levels of economic activity or growth rates.Social scientists often measure institutional quality by the effectiveness of government anti-diversion policies (such as law and order, anti-corruption measures and the quality of the bureaucracy) and the openness of the country to international trade. Anti-diversion polices are included in the measure of institutional quality because diversionary or predatory behaviour, such as rent-seeking, corruption and theft, weakens private control over agents expected returns from their economic activity and, even worse, forces individuals to invest resources in avoiding diversion. The openness of countries as an indicator of institutional strength is controversial. Trade barriers, however, often create opportunities for private diversionary and rent-seeking activities. Freer trade regimes yield less diversion and increase trade and foreign investment with the rest of the world. They lower costs of production and facilitate the specialization of production and the adoption of new technologies and ideas, all of which are important to productivity and its growth.A study comparing output per worker with the index of institutional quality across countries indicates that higher measured levels of institutional quality are associated with higher output-per-worker variables (see figure).a This result, however, does not deny the importance of human and non-human capital accumulation and technological progress in determining productivity. Rather, it points out that there are also additional economic, social and political factors that play an important, perhaps critical role in economic growth and development. This new approach produces additional insights into the growth process and affects the way that policy makers analyse domestic and international economies and devise policies.bINSTITUTIONAL QUALITY AND OUTPUT PER WORKERa .available atHallJones.asc.. . .. . .. . .. .Index of institutional qualitybBox VIII..Output per worker another. For example, the united_states Constitution was adopted (with modifications) by many Latin American countries, but with different results. The historical context, the enforcement of the law and the social norms that are prevalent in latin_america have produced different outcomes.The developed countries enjoy higher per capita incomes partly because they have put in place over a long period economic, social, governmental and legal institutions that enable technology, labour and capital to be used more effectively, resulting in technological advance and productivity increases. Their political systems have evolved into forms that enable the smooth transition of power from one party to another, making national and local governance relatively stable. While there are different checks and balances to prevent an abuse of power, political leaders, together with capable bureaucrats and experts in various fields, are empowered to devise and conduct economic, social and cultural policies to achieve goals that are deemed desirable by the population. Legal institutions, such as laws, rules and regulations, courts and law enforcement agencies, protect citizens legal rights, including property rights in tangible and non-tangible assets and contractual rights. Stable governmental institutions ensure the continuation and effectiveness of laws and regulations, or gradual changes in them. Political leaders and civil servants are generally able to prevent economic and social crises that make the return on assets more uncertain and often lower. Political and economic stability and the related stability of economic policies reduce the uncertainty that discourages such economic activities as investment and innovation.Institutions in developed countries have evolved over several decades, or even centuries. Many of them are similar among countries but rarely are they the same: in particular the role played by the Government differs markedly. In the united_states of America, for example, the market mechanism is considered to be the main institution responsible for creating an economically efficient outcome, and its citizens expect the Government to control the mechanism as little as possible. In Western Europe and Japan, Governments are expected to do more to correct market outcomes so as to achieve other objectives of society, but the market mechanism is still considered the main institution for resource allocation to different areas of production and consumption. Some of these Governments play active roles in resource allocation among different industries or among different income and social groups through taxes and subsidies. Other Governments have chosen more laissez-faire policies and regard the market mechanism as the chief device for allocating resources. There is no clear dichotomy between the roles of markets and the State; the roles of the two should be complementary.The challenge is to decide on an appropriate degree of government involvement. This depends on the history, social values and special characteristics of a country, particularly the existing structure of its institutions and the evolution of international accords to limit unfair, Government-subsidized competition. Countries must find the appropriate balance while implementing changes on two fronts: first, by providing citizens with sufficient incentives to support the creation or strengthening of economic activities; and second, institutionally, by complementing market activities and correcting undesirable economic and social outcomes that may result from market activities and related market shortcomings. Moreover, while a strong case can be made for correcting market imperfections, caution is needed, especially if the proposed correction involves government action by a poor country without a well-functioning civil service. In these cases, the costs of government failure could exceed those of the shortcoming that is being addressed.Redefining the balance between the Government and the market in the transformation of the economies in transition has highlighted the role of institutions in these countries. For the past decade, these economies have been devising institutions of their own, based on the different initial conditions in each economy at the beginning of its transition. Each started with different government structures and different degrees of autonomy for public enterprises. These initial conditions and existing institutions have affected the capacity of the economy in general, and the Government in particular, to carry out liberalization and stabilization policies. Successful transformation of an economy requires that Governments have institutions and leadership to catalyse, absorb and manage the process of change, and to manage the changed society.China has been experimenting with a dual-track approach, under which economic agents are assigned rights to and obligations for fixed quantities of goods at fixed plan prices as specified in the pre-existing plan (the first track), but the same agents also may participate in the market at free-market prices, provided that they fulfil their obligations under the pre-existing plan (the second track).The economic systems of the developing countries have been very diverse. Some had an economic system similar to that of the former centrally planned economies. Others chose a market-oriented system, but one in which the Government typically takes a leading role in allocating production and investment among sectors and geographical areas. Often Governments are major actors in the economy, producing a large share of the countrys goods and services. While government activism in the area of resource allocation does not necessarily lead to socially better outcomes, some countries, particularly in east_asia, have benefited from government interventions that are considered to have facilitated rapid economic development.Experience suggests that an institutional structure that was adequate to facilitate economic activities for a period of time may become obsolete as economic conditions and their surrounding environment change. Economic history demonstrates the necessity of changing a countrys institutions as its stage of economic development and its surrounding economic and social environment evolve. It also illustrates that building institutions or changing them often involves considerable economic and social costs, making it difficult and timeconsuming for countries to embark on major changes. Despite the costs and uncertainty involved, changes in the economic and social environment require countries to adjust their institutions if they wish to produce as many benefits for their people as the overall environment offers.Japan achieved remarkable success in economic growth for about years with a system of relatively strong guidance by the Government. The same institutional structure, however, became one of the sources of Japans economic stagnation in the s. Similarly, in the Republic of Korea, a certain set of institutions was instrumental in increasing gross domestic product (GDP) per capita about times over a -year period. Although these institutions changed regularly over the course of the countrys development, the financial crisis of made clear that some institutions needed a more fundamental overhaul while others were lacking; both shortcomings contributed to the crisis.The experiences of other countries have important implications for poor developing countries that wish to make their institutions more conducive to growth. Typically, an economic or political crisis ignites demands from the civil sector for institutional change. Major institutional reforms may require a society to bear high economic and social costs, for example, as the result of the dislocation of workers and/or industries. Countries where economic activity has been stagnant for a long period also face a difficult and time-consuming process of institutional reform and building. For many developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, which lack adequate institutions, it is a daunting task to embark on such changes and to commit themselves to many years of effort in order to carry out and consolidate the changes.Globalization of the world economy is a new and major factor that requires institutional change in all countries and in developing countries in particular. Globalization requires countries to adopt institutional reforms so that they may take advantage of more vibrant international markets, and the speed of globalization is increasing the pressure on countries to undertake these institutional changes as demonstrated by Chile (see box VIII.). At the same time, globalization may threaten the economic and social structure of a country, especially its social safety net.Many countries in addition to Chile have successfully transformed their institutions in ways that made them more conducive to development. A common element in many of these successful transformations was the countries recognition of the incentives that markets give to people as producers and consumers and their transformation of their regulatory regimes accordingly, taking into account the constraints imposed by the existing institutions and the evolving economic and social environment. Reforms often encountered resistance from various groups and some produced unexpected economic and social outcomes. Successful countries reduced the risks associated with the transformation by understanding the diverse, sometimes conflicting, interests among their people and by coordinating these interests at the national and local levels. Greater participation by diversified economic and social groups made it possible for Governments and citizens at large to remain committed to the transformation for a considerable duration. Overall, the evidence suggests that a successful transformation of institutions is not possible without the participation of all citizens in the decisions that affect their lives.The diversity of institutions across countries and over time is vast. It would be difficult to characterize in a coherent and concise way the entire economic, social and political commonality of the diverse institutions in many types of countries, although most institutions have some characteristics in common. Some of these common characteristics make it difficult to change institutions.The institutions of any country are the result of a long process of complex interactions among various economic, social and political forces, both internal and external. Most economic institutions have evolved, in a somewhat unpredictable way, in response to internal and external disturbancessuchChile has transformed its economy successfully over the past years through a series of policy changes aimed at creating a more marketand export-oriented economy. These included liberalization of trade and domestic markets, privatization of Stateowned enterprises and devaluation of exchange rates.a These reforms required complementary changes in the Governments role in fostering development strategies and in the relationship between public and private organizations.bUnder the import-substitution policy and protectionism of the s and s, many industrial associations in Chile acted as conventional interest groups; they constantly engaged in negotiations on behalf of their member firms with State-owned enterprises or the Government about the quantities and prices of their inputs and outputs. The market reforms of the s, however, liberalized imports and exports and removed price controls, thereby reducing the role of the associations. At the same time, private firms realized the inferiority of their technologies and of the quality of their products, compared with global standards. Some associations revised their relations with the Government and, in turn, the Government helped them to find ways to improve the production and distribution of their member firms.The evolution of agricultural and food processing associations in Chile provides an example. During the protectionist era of the s and s, Asociacion de Fabricantes de Conservas (ASFACO) (Association of Processed Foods) was the major association of canning firms in Chile. It represented them in negotiations with a Government-owned monopoly producer of steel and tin products. Negotiating with the Government on the prices of member firms processed foods was another important task of the association, because the country had a system of price controls covering nearly all retail food items. The new Government in the s liberalized and deregulated the Chilean economy, making the traditional role performed by ASFACO less relevant. The new policy allowed imports and thus terminated the Governments monopoly of steel and tin in the domestic market. The elimination of price controls eliminated the need for price negotiations with the Government.In , the Government created a State agency, la Direccion de Promocion de Exportaciones (Pro Chile)(Exports Promotion Board), with the purpose of encouraging an alliance among agro-industrial firms directly (but not via industrial associations) to improve product quality so as to meet international standards and to explore new markets and new products with expected high external demand. The economic crisis in -added urgency to the Governments aim of promoting export-related activities further and led to the establishment of co-financing programmes by Pro Chile, together with the Export Promotion Fund. Under the programmes, Pro Chile examined export projects proposed by groups of firms in the same industry and, if a project was approved, assisted in securing finance to cover per cent of its cost, with the remainder being financed by the proposing group. In the group only, not individually, could firms receive financing. Simultaneously, Pro Chile organized the association of firms into industry-specific committees, which would submit projects.In the agro-industy, the programme set out by Pro Chile renewed firms interests in cooperating with existing associations such as ASFACO to help develop a sense of identity and improve the competitiveness of the industry in overseas markets. At the same time, in their attempts to penetrate external markets, agro-industry firms increasingly recognized that uniformity of product quality among different producers was the key to building their reputation as reliable exporters. Agro-industry firms recognized ASFACO asECONOMIC LIBERALIZATION AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE: THE CASE OF CHILEAs a result, the average GDP growth rate per year rose from . per cent in the s to . per cent in the s and to . per cent in the s. Inflation declined from an average annual rate of over per cent in the s to per cent in the s. The share of exports in GDP increased from per cent in to over a quarter in the late s.The analysis here is based on Paola PerezAleman, Learning, Adjustment and Economic Development: Transforming Firms, the State and Associations in Chile, World Development, vol. , No. (January ), pp. -.Box VIII..Box VIII. (continued)an association that could serve that purpose. While ASFACO was originally a group formed by canning firms, other types of food processors joined the group, which eventually evolved to form an expanded association called Federacion de Procesadores de Alimentos y Agroindustriales de Chile (FEPACH)(Federation of Agro-processors of Chile). This association helped to develop new standards based on existing clients needs and on technical and market information about potential external markets. In response, member firms learned new quality control practices from each other and developed new contractual relations with their suppliers to ensure reliable long-term supplies of high-quality inputs. FEPACH encouraged member processors to submit their products to independent laboratories for scientific evaluation. Chiles fruit exports more than doubled in value in the s, and the country became the largest exporter of fresh and processed fruits. Partly owing to this success, the country now is a net exporter of agricultural products, previously having had large trade deficits in agriculture.These sectoral activities were complemented by the countrys monetary policy and exchange-rate policy. Stable domestic prices and exchange rates, particularly in relation to the united_states dollar, mitigated the uncertainties about costs of production and expected revenues from sales and therefore made it possible for agro-firms to formulate mediumto long-term strategies.Considered overall, the success of the agro-industry in Chile is not the simple result of government designc It is a result of the adaptation and diffusion of new institutions, technology and types of contracts for firms, which involve both government assistance and industry-wide learning, particularly about export markets. Such efforts have created a flexible system of production, in which firms monitor international market conditions continuously and respond to changes by adjusting production levels or offering new products. Some previous attempts to increase exports had failed, even after new contacts were made with foreign buyers and state-of-the-art equipment had been installed. The Government and the industrial associations had to modify their relationship by creating new institutions in order to take full advantage of the new economic environment. Private firms had to reorient their attitudes towards each other and the Government.as wars, demographic change, new technologies, new ideas (which often transform the economic and social structure), political change, changes in world markets and changes in domestic or international rules and regulations. They are rarely the product of a well-designed plan that has been implemented all at once.Some economists have argued that the most efficient and effective institutions arise automatically as a result of the market mechanism; this has been termed induced institutional innovation. New and more efficient institutions will, according to this view, emerge automatically if the costs to establish a more efficient and effective institution are less than the savings it will yield, for example in the form of lower transaction costs. An early example of this phenomenon was the trend, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Europe, of enclosing land and assigning individual property rights, rather than the use of common-property land, as a result of the rising prices of land and agricultural products which made enclosure more profitable for the encloser. It is hard for this theory to explain, however, why certain inefficient and ineffective institutions remain in existence. The reasons for this are that institutions are selfenforcing, complementary and subject to economies of scale, path dependency and a collective action problem.One common characteristic of economic institutions is that, for the institutions to be effective, members of a society or country must have incentives to support them and they, in turn, must serve the interests of the members, in other words, the system must be self-enforcing. Because effective institutions help reduce the costs and uncertainties associated with economic activities, the members of the society tend to support existing institutions. The economic system based on the coexistence of the market mechanism and the presence of various activities and interventions by the Government has survived for a long period because it has served the social goals and the interests of most citizens, who in turn generally support the system. On the other hand, the centrally planned system in Eastern Europe and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) collapsed, largely because it eventually failed to deliver enough of the benefits that the people expected in return for the denial of some of the most basic freedoms; the people, in turn, lost whatever confidence they had had in the system. Despite the important role of popular support, a small group in society can often block institutional change for a long time if it wishes to do so and is powerful enough.The self-enforcement principle often shapes the new economic regime that emerges when the interests of a countrys citizens change. For example, hyperinflation in and in Argentina, which had had several previous experiences with high inflation, led to a broad-based recognition of the importance of a stable peso for macroeconomic performance and general economic welfare. The enactment of the Convertibility Plan in pegged the Argentine peso to the united_states dollar at a -to-ratio and transformed the monetary and exchange-rate functions of the central bank into those of a currency board. Such a change in policy would have been difficult to implement under previous Governments because their exchange-rate policies reflected, to some extent, the conflicts of interest among various economic groups, such as industrialists, labour unions and agrarians, and did not aim primarily at achieving exchange-rate stability. One of the main difficulties in changing existing institutions is that it takes considerable time and effort to form a country-wide consensus regarding the costs and benefits of new institutions compared with those of existing institutions.A second feature of institutions is the degree of complementarity among them: the proper functioning of one institution usually requires the proper functioning of others. As one example of the complementarity of institutions (discussed above), the proper functioning of a formal institution like a constitution depends crucially on informal institutions like social norms. The agricultural reforms in China, which addressed several institutions simultaneously, also illustrate this point. Households obtained rights to collectively owned land, but these reforms were particularly successful precisely because they were complemented by the liberalization of markets (see chap. V). A similar situation prevailed in the case of Viet Nam (see box VIII.).The relation between markets and regulations is another example of this complementarity. The financial crises in the s stemmed, in a way, from the lack of recognition of the complementary role that rules and regulations assume in financial markets. Liberalized financial markets need to be compleBox VIII..Private property rights, including the right to gain an appropriate return from ones own activity or the use of ones own property, play an essential role in economic activities in general and economic development in particular. Producers would have few incentives to produce if they did not have adequate control over the return to the assets that are used in production. Land reform programmes, discussed in chapter V, are attempts to establish the legal and social recognition of rights in the agricultural sector in countries where such rights were not well recognized for historical, geographical or cultural reasons. Guaranteeing private property rights is not, however, the only means to provide adequate economic incentives for farmers.The increase in agricultural production in Viet Nam is an example of successful changes in incentives.a Viet Nam, a country that does not have a fully market-based economy, experienced a long economic decline lasting well into the s, despite economic booms in such neighbouring countries as Malaysia and Thailand. Viet Nam officially launched a policy of renovation (doi moi) in , in response to macroeconomic instability and stagnation, but poor weather in led to rural hunger in the northern part of the country and the economy suffered large trade deficits and high inflation. This led to a series of further reform plans in . Reforms in the agricultural and other sectors included heavier reliance on market-based activities and liberalization of traderelated activities and foreign direct investment (FDI).Collective farming was replaced with family farming, considered the most natural production unit. Collective farming was perceived to be the cause of the countrys agricultural stagnation, because there were few incentives to work harder than anyone else in the group when all produce was shared equally among members. In the new family farming system, land is not privately owned but farmers are allowed to sign contracts in effect, leases with the Government on parcels of land for up to years and are given freedom to sell their produce as they wish. The granting of permission for contracts to lease land led to an increase in the total area of paddy fields, although this was accompanied by a drop in the annual growth rate of paddy output per hectare, from . per cent in -to . per cent in -. Nevertheless, the result was that total rice paddy production increased from . million to . million tons between and (the latest year for which data are available), or about . per cent per year, compared with . per cent per year for the period -(see figure).b In the s, Viet Nam became the second largest rice exporter in the world after Thailand, having been dependent on rice imports in the s. With continuing government efforts to introduce new seeds and to expand the use of tractors and pumps, growth of paddy output is expected to become increasingly dependent on the growth of output per hectare, as the availability of more land for rice production is limited.The success of Viet Nams agricultural sector stemmed from the Governments understanding of incentives. The success of China, where reforms preceded Viet Nams by several years and which put similar emphasis on incentive-inducing effects (see chap. V), may have had some influence on Viet Nams choice of policies. The experience of these two countries demonstrates the importance of providing incentives to farmers by combining the liberalization of markets with the permission to lease land. It was not possible to create greater incentives for farmers to work hard without permitting freer markets, even if the Government was the issuer of the lease contracts.TOTAL PADDY PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTION PER HECTARE, VIET NAM, -YearBox VIII. (continued)(=)Total paddy output Output per hectare mented by financial disclosure requirements and financial supervision. Without strict disclosure requirements and supervision, liberalized financial markets implicitly encourage the financial industry to take excessive risks. Market activities may become more buoyant without regulations, but there is also greater risk of financial crises in the future. On the other hand, strict disclosure requirements and supervision without the liberalization of markets would restrict the potential for market-based transactions, which are vital to realizing the domestic and international financial flows that lead to a more efficient allocation of resources.The healthy development of financial markets can be expected only when market liberalization goes hand in hand with strict disclosure requirements and supervision. A single institution is a part of a complex web of institutions. Attempting to change a single institution (that is to say, a single element of the entire set of rules and regulations) does not necessarily produce the intended result and, worse, it may unnecessarily disturb the whole system.In Japan, another type of institutional complementarity is the relationship between the labour market and the schemes of work-related compensation. Japanese workers have been less mobile than their united_states counterparts and this is often cited as demonstrating inflexibility in the Japanese labour market. Rather, the inflexibility of the Japanese labour market can be explained by the system of workers incentives. Their compensation is based on the number of years of association with a single firm: a worker who goes to a different employer generally has to accept a wage reduction. In addition, with low labour mobility, employers have more incentive to train their employees. The emphasis on long association with a single company is reflected in Japans lifetime employment system, the seniority-based salary profiles and the private pension system, in which longer periods with a single company give workers a disproportionally higher pension. The retirement benefits in the national pension schemes also relate to a workers association with a single company. Thus, the immobility of the labour market and the compensation schemes complement each other and if it were felt that higher mobility of workers would help reduce unemployment, the current employment compensation system and the pension system would have to be changed in order to give workers proper incentives.A third characteristic of institutions is their often large set-up costs, in either time or money terms, particularly when they are created from scratch. The creation of some formal institutions, such as regulations, might be relatively cheap, but their enforcement and the informal institutions that uphold them are much more costly. Large set-up costs mean that the benefits from new institutions have to be even larger or there would be no incentives to create them. For example, in Europe during the Middle Ages, many new institutions became profitable only after trade reached a certain volume. The introduction of the bill of exchange, common units of weight and courts that enforced contracts took a long time to become effective and were subject to large costs. These kinds of institutional innovations were not needed or were too expensive when trade was at low levels but as trade volumes reached certain levels, several new institutions emerged. That, as a result, transaction costs declined in turn stimulated trade, creating a virtuous circle. Set-up costs imply that institutions are subject to economies of scale, in other words, the larger the volume of production or trade, the smaller the cost per unit because the fixed costs can be spread over more units.Large set-up costs also produce thresholds. In many cases, an activity has to reach a certain level before the benefits of new institutions can be distributed over a large enough output so that they outweigh the costs. Below that threshold, the economy is in a poverty trap. Old and inefficient institutions prevent development and the low level of development means that the benefits of new efficient institutions are too low to cover the costs. Yet, once the threshold is reached, the new institutions are self-enforced: as output expands and the cost per unit of output declines, more people benefit from the new institutions, and there are fewer incentives to change them.A fourth, related characteristic of institutions is that it is often not possible to calculate or assign their costs; this gives rise to a collective action problem. The fact that most institutions have the features of public goods means that, once they are created, everybody can enjoy the benefits. Each individual or organization thus hopes that some other entity will bear the cost of creating the new institution because that other entity will also be able to benefit from it once it is created. This can mean that nobody takes action and that society is saddled with inefficient institutions. The public-good features make it hard either to calculate the costs per beneficiary or per unit of output or to divide the costs among the beneficiaries. Governments can circumvent this freerider problem by creating the institutions themselves and using taxes to finance them.The final characteristic that makes it hard to change institutions is the path dependency that they create, which is also related to other characteristics. A set of institutions is the result of complex processes over a long period of time. Emerging institutions are based, to varying degrees, on existing ones and the choice of new institutions is thus limited by the existing institutions. This path dependency can imply that seemingly small events or chance circumstances may have large and long-lasting repercussions. For example, once the layout of the keyboard on the typewriter has been set, changing it becomes very expensive because of the large set-up costs: everybody who can type has to relearn it.History plays an important role in shaping both the self-enforcing aspects of and the complementarities among institutions in a particular country. These features evolve in a trial-and-error process of resolving or finding a compromise among diverse interests. The past history of a society forms the present perceptions of its members, including their subjective views of the world, their status relative to others and the role of existing institutions. The views of the members of a societyeven if shared by all membersnarrow the range of the possible new institutions that a society can expect: there is little point in aiming for an institution that would be rejected by the populace.The processes by which institutions come into existence directly affect their path of evolution. This has an important implication for development; the poor performance of economies in general, and of institutions in particular, tends to persist over a long period of time, creating the possibility of a poverty trap. It will be more difficult to redirect the development strategy of a country towards more market-oriented policies if the market activities of that country have never been given a major role in resource allocation. By the same token, a country where widespread participation has never been part of the tradition will face difficulties and uncertainty in creating mechanisms to encourage greater involvement of civil society and to coordinate its activities.The five above-mentioned characteristics imply that changing institutions can be difficult and costly. Even when changing an existing institution or creating a new one in a particular country seems to be rational, in the sense of increasing the overall efficiency and productivity of the economy, the costs of institutional change may make this difficult. People do not always accept the overall-efficiency criterion. In addition, the results of a change, even if expected to be positive, are always unknown, and many people prefer the present that they know to a potentially better future that they do not know. To bring about change, enough people must support it on the basis of their own interests. If they do not, a Government or other authority may have to compensate people who would be disadvantaged by or would bear the costs of the change.Moreover, an institutional change almost always involves unpredicted costs that are not necessarily related directly to that particular event, but are due to complementarities. Uncertain costs make implementation more difficult. As the financial crises in the s demonstrated, the liberalization of financial markets without a proper set of new regulations can generate unpredicted costs for labour and industrial adjustments or dislocations. Privatization programmes undertaken in the economies in transition in the s also led to some outcomes that were not intended or anticipated. In some countries, the management and employees of former State-owned enterprises (SOE) now have majority control of the privatized firm. In other countries, a small number of entrepreneurs bought enough shares in former SOEs to gain control of the surviving firms. In some cases, the seemingly market-friendly institutions that have evolved are supporting a kleptocracy (where it is in the owners interest to liquidate their assets as quickly as possible) rather than a functioning market system (where it would be in their interest to use these assets for long-term development). In each of these cases, the result of the privatization is at variance with the outcome that was expected and hoped for.Institutional structures often create a web of vested interests, which makes institutional change difficult to initiate and slow to implement. Some institutions favour only certain groups and, therefore, are detrimental to society as a whole. If the beneficiaries are also members of an interest group that wields political power, either directly or indirectly, they are likely to block institutional changes. It is even possible that there are powerful groups that might benefit from institutional change but would be averse to it if the distribution of the costs of the change across groups was uncertain and if the group that conceded first was likely to bear a larger share of the costs. The result is likely to resemble a war of attrition.These various characteristics of institutions can cause a country to become stuck in a poverty trap. If the countrys institutions are not conducive to longterm economic growth, it can be hard to change them into institutions that would allow the country to start a process of sustainable growth. However, a strong visionary Government, with a capable, independent civil service that aims to serve all citizens, makes it easier to create institutions that are more conducive to long-term economic growth and to dismantle those institutions that direct the distribution of the benefits of growth towards a particular group.Most institutional change requires a long period of time, with each increment building on the previous one and only the succession of such increments over time developing into an important institutional change. The demise of feudalism in Europe, for example, consisted of a gradual restructuring of a framework in which the interconnections between formal and informal constraints and enforcement characteristics evolved over centuries. However, not all incremental institutional change takes that long. Several political and mediating institutions and organizations can ease and hasten this process.In gradual processes, the support of a critical mass of people in general, and policy makers in particular, plays a crucial role in transforming new ideas into institution-building. While wider participation of people in decision-making processes is important in order to encourage new ideas, the formation of a critical mass convinces others to accept those ideas and propels the reform forward. Without the critical mass, new ideas will remain simply ideas and will not materialize as an institution. That a crucial ingredient for the creation of this critical mass is the ability to read and comprehend ideas reinforces the importance of broad-based education. Once a critical mass is formed, it becomes easier for a society to create a new institution, because a sufficient number of people recognize the potential advantage of having a new institution. At the same time, the fact that those who are not part of the critical mass will increasingly see the advantages of the new institution generates a positive feedback.In this respect, learning from foreign-born institutions or observing the results of such institutions elsewhere can act as a catalyst in forming the necessary critical mass of people. Yet, rarely can foreign institutions be adopted without adaptation to local circumstances. A dogmatic approach limits the possibility of experimenting with new ideas that stem from local sources or are attuned to local conditions, and often becomes the obstacle to the creation of the critical mass necessary to initiate new institutions.Greater participation in decision-making processesThere are rules in all societies that define the roles of its members and organizations in policy-making; these rules are part of the societys institutional structure. The broadest possible participation in decision-making, irrespective of economic position, enables the widest range of societys members to express their opinions and increases the probability that new institutions, once built, will better serve the interests of the members of society. Broad participation requires extensive coordination and cooperation to resolve conflicts among the societys members, in order to reach a politically stable result. Moreover, when changes are required, it is easier for the members of a freer society to adapt to a new economic environment. Finally, a process with checks and balances prevents the hasty adoption of what might, wrongly, appear to a few to be an appropriate institutional change. Freedom is thus conducive to development.In general, the ability of a country to allow, generate and coordinate diverse opinions and interests is part of successful development. This ability, in turn, depends critically on a Governments ability and willingness to take into account as many diverse interests as possible while withstanding demands from a minority group, even if that group is powerful. This is exemplified by the experience of some countries in east_asia that have developed procedures whereby the Government gathers information on the interests and concerns of various industries and coordinates their sometimes conflicting views. Ministries for such sectors as transportation, commerce, industry, agriculture and international trade communicate with their corresponding sectoral associations of producers, and utilize their opinions and concerns in devising sectoral production or trade policies. Because they are relatively free from the pressures exerted by individual associations, the ministries for finance and macroeconomic planning can then reconcile the conflicting interests of the different sectors in the light of national economic development goals and policies. These arrangements took advantage of the countries economic and social structures. While the initial conditions varied to some extent within the region, the relative absence of a politically dominant economic or social group and the relatively narrow disparity among economic and social classes enabled Governments in the region to conduct policies that were beneficial to most members of society. Income distribution in these countries was more equal than in other developing countries and urbanization in the s and s in East Asian countries was less pronounced than in Latin American countries.Strong coordination efforts at the national level sometimes included the direct involvement of the president or prime minister of a country. During thes, the President of the Republic of Korea regularly attended the Monthly Export Promotion Conference, one of the Governments most important and powerful support mechanisms for export promotion. The Conferencewhich consisted of the President, the Ministers from the Economic Planning Board and from Trade and Industry, and the directors of public and private export-promotion associationsregularly discussed problems hindering the achievement of export targets. Its main function was to collect information on opportunities and problems in international trade and to make it available to key decisionmakers. Such mechanisms could have fostered corruption in a situation where the Government and bureaucracy were not concerned about broad-based development and where proper legal and monitoring systems to ensure accountability were absent. However, in the case of the Republic of Korea, they provided a mix of policies that promoted unprecedented economic success over several decades, to the benefit of all segments of the population.Extensive participation by civil society can enhance the ability of a country to reduce conflicts, as shown by the experience of Mauritius, a country with a tradition of a large number of civil society associations. Widespread participation in political and social organizations underlies effective representation and consensus-building in society, which are easier in a relatively small country like Mauritius. In the early s, economic conditions in Mauritius were not encouraging, with a mono-crop economic base and an impending population explosion. The country was also ethnically and linguistically divided and a period of civil unrest between social and ethnic groups had preceded its independence in . Given the small size of the domestic economy, the country would have to depend on export-led growth, if it was to grow at all. The creation of the export-processing zone (EPZ) in was the result of political and social dialogues encouraged by the Government. The dialogues were aimed at resolving a policy dilemma, in which the need to protect import-substituting industries conflicted with the need to expand the access of other industries to international markets. The EPZ provided a means to expand opportunities for trade and employment, without infringing on the protection given to the import-substituting industries. At the same time, the segmentation of the labour market between male workers, who dominated the established import-substitution industries, and female workers, who were employed predominantly in the EPZ, buffered wage pressures as the EPZ expanded its operations. New opportunities were created at the margin, leaving the rest of the economy almost untouched. Eventually, the success of the EPZ, particularly the success of garment exports to Europe, paved the way for more liberal economic policies in the mid-s and the s.Institutions that coordinate and mediate conflicting interests are important for creating public support for those economic policies that are most conducive to broad-based economic growth. In their absence, competing social or economic interests could deteriorate into conflicts about redistributingrather than enlargingthe pie. In countries where institutions benefit only a small segment of the population, or where they cannot be trusted to protect and promote the national interest, conflicts over economic interests may lead to violent civil strife, as several civil wars have shown. For example, conflicts over the benefits of natural resources have triggered, exacerbated and/or prolonged several violent conflicts in recent years. Institutions that have consensus support and benefit all segments of the population are thus a necessary condition for a peaceful society.The experiences of Mauritius and the East Asian countries also suggest the importance of the role that knowledge of local conditions can play when creating new institutions. In the case of Mauritius, the idea of creating the EPZ was generated in the process of policy dialogues among societal members and was implemented in the context of local conditions. In case of some East Asian countries, the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (which was originally created on the basis of a political consensus to oppose the spread of Communism) played a critical role in trade-policy coordination among them. This led to the rapid expansion of intraregional trade in the s. An important source of the economic success of the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China was learning the ideas that underlay the economic policies pursued by Japan and adapting them to accord with local conditions.While the importance of participation, cooperation and coordination has increasingly been recognized as a result of events in the s, there are some economic and social factors in any country that make institutional change difficult. If it were costless or effortless to change institutions, every country could adopt the best institutional practices very quickly and change them whenever the need arose. Policy makers need to understand the factors behind the difficulty of changing institutions before they embark on such changes.Difficulties in implementing institutional change have shaped the evolution of particular institutions and institutional changes have shaped the course and outcome of development processes. Experiences with agricultural reform in Viet Nam (see box VIII.) and with export promotion in respect of food in Chile (see box VIII.) show that institutions are instrumental to long-term economic development. Every country has its own unique experience in creating institutions to cope with economic, social and political problems.All societies embody a variety of institutions and it is the nature, extent and effectiveness of those institutions that can be critical in determining the extent of a societys success in development. At the same time, there is no unique formula for a successful institution or set of institutionsneeds vary across countries, depending on an array of local traditions and circumstances. Equally importantly, institutional needs vary over time. The present rapid pace of economic and social change throughout the world requires commensurate changes in institutions, if countries are to develop.In order to confront the ever-evolving environment, a society needs to constantly restructure its existing institutions in order to enhance and sustain its economic system. However, as the preceding discussion showed, a number of factors make institutional change difficult. The self-enforcing character of existing institutions, even when their performance is suboptimal, makes it hard to change them. The presence of complementarities among a societys institutions suggests that successfully changing a single institution will often require the overhaul of other institutions. New institutions often require large set-up costs which poor economies can ill-afford, and this might keep them in a poverty trap. The public-good characteristics of institutions imply that, in most cases, it will be necessary for the Government to take a lead role in creating them. Finally, the choice of new institutions is limited by the existing ones.Nevertheless, the examples in this chapter demonstrate that institutional change is possible. In some cases, it can be substantial and fast and may be accompanied by unstable political conditions, but in most cases it is incremental and slow. The successful cases demonstrate that the more widespread is popular participation in a change, the more likely new institutions will be selfenforcing and the more quickly the critical mass in support of the new institutions will be reached. Greater participation helps to reduce possible frictions between existing and new institutions. The more predictable conflicts may be resolved in advance, through consensus-building among the participants, and the less predictable ones can be at least identified and dealt with as they arise. Moreover, countries that were successful in making institutional changes had carefully assessed their existing conditions and devised policies and institutions that took account of local conditions and were within the countrys capacity to implement.The benefits of a participatory policy-making process suggest that gradualism and experimentalism in institution-building have advantages over the socalled big-bang approach (sometimes called the blueprint approach) to reform. This does not imply, however, that ideas often associated with the big-bang approach should be dismissed altogether on the basis of their being infeasible and perhaps extreme in the light of local conditions.Furthermore, there are possible dangers in gradualism or experimentalism. Firstly, it is necessary to distinguish between self-conscious experimentalism, on the one hand, and delay and gradualism designed primarily to serve privileged interests, on the other. For useful, self-conscious experimentalism, policy makers need a clear vision of the society that they would like to build and realistic and practical goals that they hope to achieve. Secondly, there is a danger that unsuccessful experiments may not be abandoned, either for the same reasons that explain why institutions are difficult to change or because those responsible are loath to admit failure and abandon their commitment. Thirdly, gradual and experimental institution-building can be very costly in terms of both time and money.As East Asian countries have demonstrated, absorbing foreign-born ideas can be very instructive in guiding institution-building, and advice from the international community can be helpful. Learning from institutions in other countries can reduce the costs, particularly in such technically oriented areas as industrial standards, public-health guidelines and supervision of banking, accounting and security exchange. Yet even institutions in these areas often cannot be transplanted from other countries without adaptation. National expertise is required to absorb imported ideas and policies and to implement them within the constraints imposed by history and the existing institutional structure. Without due regard for local conditions, a top-down approach, which is often associated with the big-bang approach, will fail to produce the desired outcome.The international community has rightly elevated institution-building to a position high in the development agenda and is now active in helping countries develop those institutions without which economic life is difficult. However, there is a dilemma involved in attempting to advise a country on what it should do to improve its institutions. The international community has to avoid the mistakes of enlightened dictators and the paternalistic colonialists who, even with the best of intentions, did not respect their subjects ability to develop their institutions at their own speed and to suit their particular circumstances.The central dilemma facing any international assistance in institution-building is that institutions can rarely be transferred from country to country without requiring adaptations that incorporate local conditions. Institution-building is a profoundly local activity. It is the local population that can best effect the adaptation but if they feel that an institution has been imposed upon them, perhaps as a condition for obtaining finance, that institutions life expectancy is likely to be short. Moreover, it can be questioned whether international agencies are suited to this long-term commitment to a country, since they usually hope to see speedy results arising from their efforts.International institutions necessarily work in the first place with Governments, but the Government is only one actor in the complicated process that leads to the adoption of the most appropriate institutions. If international institutions reach out to embrace the wider civil society, there are also pitfalls. They risk creating a culture of dependency, whereby the efforts of non-governmental organizations are directed towards negotiating to obtain aid resources from outside donors, rather than towards improving their own societies. They could also encourage the formation of unrepresentative bodies with poor accountability whose sole aim is to attract foreign funds.There are nonetheless many potential benefits, as well as pitfalls, in providing outside help to institution-building. Successful economies have displayed a willingness to acquire knowledge and learning, to induce innovation, to undertake risk and creative activity of all sorts, as well as to resolve problems and bottlenecks of the society through time. This willingness can be assisted by outside help. However, as with any commitment, it cannot be imposed, but must arise domestically. Economic costs in the early phases of institutional change may be large, but as long as members of the society are willing to bear such costs and distribute them equitably, society has an opportunity to escape from a poverty trap. An institutional structure that restricts the participation of civil society and limits the opportunity for experiments is, on the other hand, likely to continue to stagnate.