
Part One
Introduction
Globalization, although not a new phenomenon, is unques- tionably of paramount signifi- cance for all countries, developed
or developing, rich or poor, large or small. What is globalization? How is globalization af- fecting the role and functions of the nation- State? Is globalization "good" or "bad"? Is there a universal understanding of its potential or its costs? Can all societies benefit from glob- alization? Are all States adequately pre- pared to enable their people to seize the op- portunities of globalization while minimiz- ing its negative effects? How should public administration systems be redesigned in view of the changes occurring at the global level?
Part One of this Report deals with globalization and the State, and comprises five chapters. This Part attempts to answer the above stat- ed essential questions, as well as others, in an objective and clear fashion, based on ob- served experience and the views of prominent experts on the matter. The following para- graphs present a synthesis of the contents of Part One. 
In order to assess the opportunities that globalization brings in its trail, chapter I be- gins with an overview of the subject. Much has been written on this complex phenome- non in recent years, albeit in contrasting terms. Conflicting views have resulted in a dis- cernible trend to demonize or sanctify glob- alization, ascribing to it attributes which it clearly does not possess. Chapter I analyzes the significance of globalization, which in essence is still an ill-defined concept, and de- scribes its major facets.
To be sure, globalization offers many opportunities for people across the world - in par- ticular, greater economic liberalization and increased social and political interdependence
- but it also implies costs. Economic openness, foreign direct investment, and transfer of tech- nologies promise a number of benefits to both developed and developing countries. Free trade promotes specialization among dif- ferent regions, allowing them to apply their own comparative advantages. It also ex- pands the consumption opportunities of coun- tries by allowing the efficient interchange of goods and services. Free trade provides op- portunities for developing countries in that it opens new markets for export and attracts for- eign capital, which aids development. Foreign direct investment can lead to a transfer of tech- nologies and know-how, increasing domestic productivity and employment levels.
As inferred in chapter I, increased interde- pendence, which has been made possible in part by the advancements in information and communication technologies and the reduc- tion of transportation costs, has provided peo- ple with new tools to support and dissemi- nate the universal values of democracy, hu- man rights, transparency, and alleviation of poverty. Information and communication technologies are also contributing to the in- tegration of the fastest growing developing countries in the global economy. It remains to be demonstrated, however, whether in- formation technology has the potential to al- low countries to leapfrog stages of econom- ic growth and to modernize. Finally, chapter I highlights the opportunities and costs that globalization entails, as well as the chal- lenges that public administration systems are still facing in a globalizing world.
Despite the great opportunities that global- ization presents, not all countries have been able to take full advantage of it. Experience has shown that some countries have fared much better than others, while some have not benefited at all. In view of the uneven distribution of the benefits of globalization worldwide, chapter II explores the impact of globalization on the State and the past re- forms in public administration or responses to globalization in Western Europe, Eastern and Central Europe, Asia, Arab States, Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The purpose of this analysis is to assess whether past policy prescriptions, es- pecially in developing countries and countries in transition, have fostered greater devel- opment and have allowed people to fully take advantage of globalization. The substance of the regional perspectives included in this chapter has been drawn from studies con- tributed by specialists in preparation for the Fifteenth Meeting of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, which took place in New York in May 2000.
Chapter II examines the thrust and out- comes of this outreach and related policy trans- fers. It reviews both the substance of these policy transfers and their effects on the ca- pacity of States to harness globalization. It also attempts a synthesis of lessons drawn from the experience of countries in these re- gions during the past two decades. The re- gional perspectives show that while reducing the role of the State in the economic sphere and making public administration more effi- cient have, in many instances, brought about positive results, the retreat of the State from the social area and the weakening of state in- stitutions have not allowed people to fully ben- efit from globalization for a number of reasons. States with weak institutions do not provide a stable and suitable environment to attract foreign investment, promote entrepreneurial capacity and favour economic exchanges; they do not create the conditions for the develop- ment of a vibrant civil society as they lack the capacity to address the persisting problems of poverty and inequality; they are unable to provide social safety nets to those who suffer
as a consequence of economic restructuring, thus preventing that all benefit from global- ization.
The lessons of the past also point to the ba- sic fallacy of top-down, externally-induced, supply-driven reforms, which have been overly influenced by models not always per- tinent to the needs of the recipient countries, taken insufficient cognizance of cultural di- versity and tended to play down the role of the socio-economic environment in different countries and regions. Furthermore, chapter II underlines that, in order to be successful, reforms must be "home-grown", broadly in tune with the prevalent culture and "owned" by the people concerned. The Report is strongly in favour of a "trade in high-level skills" and an exchange of experience among all Member States of the United Nations. It takes the view, however, that transfers of skills and experience produce sustainable out- comes only when they correspond to an ef- fective demand from the recipient country and when the country's government remains in control of the process of adjustment, adap- tation and reform.
Chapters III and IV look to the future, and build on lessons learned from the experience of twenty eventful years. They explore the question of how to make globalization work for all and how to reform the State so that people can fully benefit from greater integration into the world economy. Experience suggests that one of the main causes of the crises plagu- ing developing countries and the inability of some of them to integrate into the world econ- omy is state capacity deficit. In fact, only coun- tries that have in place an effective public administration, solid political and econom- ic institutions, adequate social policies (es- pecially social safety nets) and a committed leadership can ensure that all sectors of so- ciety benefit from globalization, including for- eign direct investment, trade, and access to information technology. To fully integrate in the world economy, developing countries need to modernize their public sector and en- hance their capacity for policy analysis, pol- icy formulation and implementation. High pri- ority should be given to capacity-building of
three interrelated and complementary State dimensions: institution-building; human re- sources development; and technological ad- equacy.
As suggested in chapter III, the response to globalization resides on many levels. It re- volves around the concept of an "intelligent, democratic State", which does not imply "big government" and is clearly antithetical to tra- ditional "bureaucracy", qualified as rigid, paternalistic, intrusive and authoritarian. It is fully compatible with the emergence of free markets and a vibrant civil society, both of which are predicated on the existence and de- velopment of institutional frameworks that maintain an enabling environment for pri- vate enterprise and other individual or col- lective creative pursuits. Intelligent demo- cratic States, as chapter III and IV show, are doubly necessary: (a) on the national and sub- national levels, to secure the rule of law, pro- mote economic development, foster social welfare and ensure a more even-handed dis- tribution of both the costs and benefits that flow from globalization; and (b) on the inter- governmental or supra-national level, to se- cure peace and stability, and promote the rule of law in international relations. Related to this concept are the needs for strategic re- sponses to globalization. These include in- stitution-building, reinforcement of social policies, and enhancement of professionalism and ethics. Strengthening state institutions and redefining the role of the State is para- mount to development and to enabling peo- ple to seize the opportunities of globalization. With or without globalization, the State, es- pecially in developing countries and countries with economies in transition, has a very im- portant role in financing or supplying basic social services, such as health, education and adequate infrastructure (hospitals, schools, roads, etc.). The State should focus on development and redistribution in order to empower people and to give them the in- struments to live a dignified life. At the same time, the State should refrain from pro- ducing and providing goods and non-social services. The State could, in this respect, es- tablish clear rules and solid economic insti- tutions that allow the market to function properly. Interventions in the market should clearly be directed at correcting market fail- ures in relation to sound political objectives.
Chapter III maintains that an intelligent dem- ocratic State and free markets go hand in hand. In fact, contrary to what may be the common belief, economic globalization (e.g., free trade) does not equal a laissez-faire govern- ment. Nevertheless, some political com- mentators take the position that globaliza- tion is incompatible with the Welfare State. Some urge the downsizing of government in order to meet the demands of international competition, while others decry the "race to the bottom" that globalization supposedly en- tails, and thus oppose globalization. Yet, log- ic and evidence suggest that these positions may not be correct for two reasons. First, in- ternational trade and investment, unlike oligopolistic rivalry, is not a zero-sum game. In effect, trade benefits all countries be- cause it enhances the choices of the con- sumer and the quality of products. All par- ties to voluntary exchange gain. Second, the assumption that globalization reduces the size of government is not supported by evidence. The fact is that open ("globalized") econo- mies have larger, not smaller, government ex- penditure. However, there might be other rea- sons that explain the higher government expenditure, such as the level of overall de- velopment of a country. As shown in Part Two of this Report, the majority of the "globaliz- ers" actually registered increases in expen- diture and tax revenue. Therefore, there is no evidence that globalization weakens the State. On the contrary, increased globaliza- tion goes hand in hand with higher expen- diture. As such, globalization should not be used as an excuse to abandon the role of the government in meeting the basic needs of the citizens.
Chapters III and IV maintain that, while glob- alization has great potential, without ap- propriate domestic conditions the adjust- ment costs may be too high for vulnerable groups in society. Both chapters also under- score that weak legitimization and a "dem- ocratic deficit" coupled with ineffectiveness in policy development and implementation
account to some extent for weak represen- tation in global fora, of the rights, needs and interests of a large part of humanity who live in developing countries. Though fully rec- ognizing the many limitations imposed by pow- er politics coupled with vast disparities in knowledge and technology, power and wealth, the present Report argues that as- sisting developing countries strengthen their capacity could help redress the imbalance which has adversely affected their active participation in global fora and in the world economy.
Chapter IV explores what actions must be taken to raise the capacity level of the de- veloping countries and countries with economies in transition, and highlights the concept of the State as a "learning organi- zation". It focuses in particular on enhanc- ing leadership skills and strategic planning capacities; fostering capacity-building; and strengthening cognitive capacity in the face of globalization. It also emphasizes the need of performance standards for management development; the need for top level managers; the competencies required to meet the chal- lenges of globalization; public service pro- fessionalism; organizational responses for human resources development; as well as the promise and potential for reform of information technology. 
Chapter V pulls together the various elements of the present Report, highlights its major findings, states its conclusions and underlines the substance of its proposals for action. It also touches on the role that the United Na- tions and other international organizations can play to further this objective.
In summary, this Report wants to emphasize the importance of the role which the State must assume in the face of globalization both at the national and international lev- els. As forcefully expressed by the United Na- tions Secretary-General, Kofi Annan: the many "challenges that we confront today are beyond the reach of any State to meet on its own. At the national level, we must gov- ern better, and at the international level, we must learn to govern better together. Effective States are essential for both tasks, and their capacity for both needs strengthen- ing" (UN, 2000, Millennium Report, A/54/
2000, para. 15). In fact, "notwithstanding the institutional turmoil that is often associat- ed with globalization, there exists no other entity that competes with or can substitute for the State. Successfully managing glob- alization, therefore, requires first and fore- most that States act in a manner consistent with their dual role" -- that they are respon- sible towards their own society and the plan- et as a whole (ibid., para. 43).
Chapter I
The many facets of globalization
1. Globalization: an overview
G
There is also no common understanding of whether it has produced a quantitative or a
lobalization is one of the most de- bated issues of our times elicit- ing both great enthusiasm and deep concern. It has engendered images of a peaceful borderless world characterized by prosperity for all, or it has been depicted as the progressive advancement of "frightening" multinational corporations and their control over world-wide natural re- sources, manufacturing, finance and cul- ture. The image of globalization as a prom- ise or threat is, in fact, one of the most pow- erful and persuasive images of our times (Veseth, 1998). Yet, despite the vast litera- ture on this subject and the ongoing discus- sion, globalization remains an ill-defined concept. 
Some view it as the international system that has succeeded the end of the Cold War, while others prefer to continue using the term "in- ternationalization" to describe the current changes in the international economy. As the Secretary-General of the United Nations has observed, "some emphasize the in- creased mobility of factors of production, goods and services across borders and the re- sulting emergence of a truly global market. Others see primarily the results -- and future potential -- of an explosive progress in in- formation technology, while still others view globalization primarily from societal and cultural perspectives" (UN, 1999, A/RES/
163). It is not clear, therefore, whether the term "globalization" is generally "employed [to refer to] a historical epoch, a process, a theory, or a new paradigm" (Reich, 1998, p. 2).
qualitative change in global economic and political structures. Furthermore, globaliza- tion has often been used as a rhetorical de- vice to advance specific interests or agendas at the expense of others. That is to say, glob- alization has been invoked by different pres- sure groups as a concept justifying the ideas and actions of both its proponents and de- tractors. 
Though there is some agreement among scholars and experts that globalization is pro- ducing greater interconnections and inter- dependence, there seems to be little con- sensus on the degree of integration it engenders and on its pervasiveness. Different views have emerged on this issue. As way of sim- plification, four different positions can be ac- counted for: "The first identifies globalization with an increasing homogenization within the global system, which would ultimately lead to assimilation. The second -- the \0x2018strong globalization view' -- contends that homogeneity remains highly unlikely within the global sys- tem, but that a range of qualitative and quantitative changes have combined to in- troduce a new condition, or set of processes, into world affairs that warrant the novel term
\0x2018globalization'. The third position -- the
\0x2018weak' globalization perspective -- maintains that many of the undoubtedly important de- velopments of recent decades signal a sig- nificant increase of internationalization with- in the international political economy that has complex but variable consequences for poli- tics, economics and society, but that has not ushered in a distinctively new era in human
Box I.1
affairs. The final -- rejectionist -- position de- fends the view that nothing of any great or irreversible significance has taken place" (Jones, 2000). Most observers have dis- missed the most radical views, i.e. that glob- alization is leading to assimilation or that it is not upon us. The crucial debate is thus be- tween the "strong" and "weak" globalization positions. 
This chapter is aimed at shedding light on the concept of globalization, analyzing what it implies, and what opportunities it can bring to people around the globe, as well as the costs it may entail. It also takes stock of the challenges affecting public administra- tion in an increasingly interconnected world. An overview of the main causes and char- acteristics of globalization will serve to high- light the complexities, as well as the chal- lenges and pressures that States are in- creasingly facing in a globalized world. 
THE WORLD ACCORDING TO KEYNES IN 1919
1.1. Globalization: a complex phenomenon, involving a variety of global trends and tendencies
Globalization is not a new phenomenon. In- terdependence and interconnections among nations and peoples have a long history, which can be dated in parts of the world as early as the XVI century, or even earlier during the time of the Roman, Hellenistic and even Persian Empires. The present process of increased international interconnections and technological innovation may be compared, in some respects, to the transformations of the mid XIX century to early XX century. Dur- ing that period governmental policies as well as new technologies such as the telegraph, the steam engine, the railways and steam- driven vessels brought about a dramatic in- crease in world trade, international compe- tition and interdependence (ibid.). Viewed from this perspective, globalization may be con- sidered as an advanced stage of the histor- ical process of interdependence, which although currently accelerating with unprecedented mo- mentum, is by no means irreversible, as it was not in the 1920s. Two world wars abruptly reversed the progress made in fostering international trade as autarchic sys- tems came to replace open economies, and, for decades, a political and ideological divide separated peoples on all continents. Though, as with any historical process there may be a sudden change in the direction of events, in the next few years increased interde- pendence and cross-border integration, es- pecially in specific economic areas, are more likely than not to continue given the com- mitment of many countries to further trade liberalization.
Consequence of the Peace" resembles, in many ways, an account from our times: "What an extraordinary episode in the economic progress of man that age was which came to an end in August 1914! The greater part of the population, it is true, worked hard and lived at a low standard of comfort, yet were, to all appearances, reasonably contented with this lot. But escape was possible, for any man of capacity or character at all exceed- ing the average, into the middle and upper classes, for whom life offered, at a low cost and with the least trouble, conveniences, comforts, and amenities beyond the compass of the richest and most powerful monarchs of other ages. The inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed, the various products of the whole earth, in such quantity as he might see fit, and reasonably expect their early delivery upon his doorstep; he could at the same moment and by the same means adventure his wealth in the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of the world, and share, without exertion or even trouble, in their prospective fruits and advantages; or he could decide to couple the secu- rity of his fortunes with the good faith of the townspeople of any substantial municipality in any continent that fancy or information might recommend. He could secure forthwith, if he wished it, cheap and comfortable means of transit to any country or climate without passport or other formality, could dispatch his servant to the neighbouring office of a bank for such supply of the precious metals as might seem convenient, and could then proceed abroad to foreign quarters, without knowledge of their religion, language, or customs, bearing coined wealth upon his person, and would consider himself greatly aggrieved and much surprised at the least inter- ference. But, most important of all, he regarded this state of affairs as nor- mal, certain, and permanent, except in the direction of further improve- ment, and any deviation from it as aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable"
Source: Keynes, 1919, ch. 2.
Although it is not easy to define globaliza- tion, we shall refer to it as increasing and intensified flows between countries of goods, services, capital, ideas, information and peo- ple, which produce national cross-border in- tegration of a number of economic, social and cultural activities. Thus, globalization in- cludes a variety of trends and tendencies. It is not a single process, but a combination of different processes. It has increasingly tak- en on a multidimensional character: not only economic, but also political, social and cultural. As such, we may speak of different globalizations or dimensions of globalization. 
2. What is driving globalization? The forces that lie behind globalization and which have interacted among them produc- ing greater interdependence and integra- tion, may be summarized as follows:
 Trade and investment liberalization poli- cies;
 Technological innovation and the reduction in communication and transportation costs; 
 Entrepreneurship;
 Global social networks
2.1. Trade and investment 
liberalization policies
Technological innovation and entrepreneur- ship cannot alone explain the process of globalization. We should not forget that the impetus towards greater economic integra- tion has stemmed from the efforts of gov- ernments to remove barriers to trade and in- vestment. Increased global integration in a number of economic areas began to intensi- fy in the 1980s when many governments supported economic liberalization. "The lat- ter has included financial sector deregulation, the removal of controls over foreign ex- change and enhanced freedom of trade. Fi- nancial deregulation has resulted in the pro- gressive elimination of capital controls, the removal of controls over interest rates, and the lifting of traditional barriers to entry in- to banking and other financial services" (Ca- ble, 1995, p. 3). 
State efforts to uphold free trade and to en- courage the reduction of trade barriers have been reflected in the eight successive nego- tiating rounds of the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT), which culminat- ed in 1995 with the establishment of a multilateral trading system -- the World Trade Organization (WTO). The latter has not on- ly led to the reduction of barriers to trade in goods, but has also proceeded to liberalize serv- ices and capital flows. The WTO has also fo- cused more closely on an ever-growing range of policy measures affecting the terms and conditions of market access, such as standards and regulations, subsidy practices, and in- tellectual property rights (WTO, 1998 Annual Report).
It is of great importance to underscore the political source of economic globalization in order to avoid interpreting this phenomenon as a deterministic force about which little can be done. Economic globalization is not a blind force. It is still individual governments that are setting the policies and the rules of the globalized economy. Thus, we should not forget that the State has played a pivotal role in allowing greater interdependence and economic integration of specific activities
Box I.2 
DIFFERENT VIEWS ON GLOBALIZATION
"Globalization is the inexorable integration of markets, nation-states and technologies to a degree never witnessed before -in a way that is enabling individuals, corporations and nation-states to reach around the world far- ther, deeper and cheaper than ever before. Globalization is not simply a trend or a fad but it is, rather, an international system." (Friedman, 2000, p. 9).
"Globalization is an increase in interconnections, or interdependence, a rise in international flows, ... such that the world is, in some respects, becoming a single place." (Mittleman, 2000, p. 3).
"Globalization is the internationalization of finance and production; accel- erating applications of transformational technologies; and the growing interconnections among the people of the world." (Jones, 2000, p. 21).
"Globalization is the growing interdependence of the world's people. And globalization is a process integrating not just the economy but culture, technology and governance." (UNDP, 1999, Human Development Report, p. 1).
Economic globalization is "the increasing integration of input, factor, and final product markets coupled with the increasing salience of multinational enterprises (MNEs) cross-national value-chain networks." (Prakash and Hart,
2000, p. 2).
"Globalism is a phenomenon with ancient roots and globalization is a process of increasing globalism, now or in the past" (Keohane and Nye, 2000, p. 108).
"The economy is predominantly international, not global and therefore states, although in a slightly different way, still play a central role in its gov- ernance." (Hirst and Thompson, 1996, pp. 178-189).
through the elaboration and adoption of market-oriented policies and regulations, at both the international and local levels. Eco- nomic globalization can be said to result from policy decisions made by individual countries that allow global market forces to
operate. 
vances in the past 70 years, transportation and communication costs have declined drastically. The end of State monopolies - where and when it has happened - and thereby the introduction of greater competition in the telecommunication sector, is also responsible for a sharp decline in communication costs. 
Box I.3 
The problem is which countries set the rules, whom do they favor and how can the least powerful also influence policy-making in the international arena, and do it in ways that will benefit them. Some countries do not have as much leverage as others do in set- ting the international economic and politi- cal agenda due to significant power imbal- ances among nations that are reflected in in- ternational institutions. As a consequence, the present form of globalization is largely shaped by the rules advanced by one part of the world -- namely the most influential -- and these rules do not necessarily favour devel- oping countries and countries in transition.
2.2. Technological innovation and the reduction in communication and transportation costs
Technological innovation, as well as the con- stant reduction in transportation and com- munication costs is responsible for drastically transforming the ease, speed, quantity, and quality of international information flows, as well as physical communications (Cable,
1995). In particular, information technology and multimedia communications are pro- ducing shrinkage of distance and accelera- tion of change. Due to technological adWhat is Globalization?
As shown in graph 1 below, the average cost of freight and port charges per ton has de- creased from over US$ 90 to approximately US$ 30 constant dollars between 1920 and
1990. The decrease in average revenue per passenger mile between the years 1920 and
1990 has gone from US$ 0.7 to US$ 0.1 as shown in graph 2 below. Moreover, a three- minute call between New York and London has decreased from almost US$ 300 to less than US$ 1 dollar over that period, as shown in graph 3 below, or it can be free over the Internet. The cost of computers has also dramatically decreased over the past years, as well as that of wireless communications. This implies that many transactions can be processed in no time and at relatively low cost.
Indeed, there is no field of technological progress, which has evolved more rapidly, in the past 20 years than information technol- ogy (IT). Taking shape through the conver- gence of semiconductors, computers, tele- communications and software technologies, the information revolution has produced rapid and sustained falls in the cost of pro- cessing, storing and transmitting information. Thus, it promises to make the information and knowledge base of humankind avail- able anywhere, anytime, in any language. Businesses and individuals, mainly in the de- veloped world, can now perform a wide num- ber of activities through the information highways in a matter of seconds. The grow	Globalization is increased global integration and interdependence.
	It is not a totally new phenomenon.
	It has a multidimensional character: economic, political, social and 
cultural.
	It is characterized by unprecedented rapid flows of goods and services; private capital; circulation of ideas and tendencies; and the emergence of new social and political movements.
Source: DPEPA/DESA, 2001.
ing interest in this relatively new channel of communication is reflected by the number of Internet sites, which rose by 118% in only two years, i.e. between 1997 and 1999 (NUA, 1999). 
During the past decade, two significant de- velopments have greatly accelerated the globalization of information flows. The first is that computers have invaded millions of households. The second is the emergence
and development of the Internet technologies. The former demonstrates that the role of com- puters has been extended dramatically, not only as a tool for state and business organ- izations, but also as a household electronic appliance for information retrieval and pro- cessing, for education, for entertainment and for communication. The latter leads to a great leap in the technical and human ability to access, interpret and use informa- tion. It presages the advent of a national information infrastructure (NII) and a global
It has been estimated that in March 2000 there were 400 million personal computers and about
1 billion telephones in the world; 276 million Internet users worldwide with a growth rate of roughly 150,000 persons per day; 220 mil- lion devices accessing the World-Wide Web with almost 200,000 devices being added every day. Total world bandwidth (trans- mission capacity of computer networks or other telecommunications systems worldwide)
in 1996 amounted to 200 trillion bits per sec- ond. In 2001, there will be a bandwidth of
9,000 trillion bits per second. It is also esti- mated that, 10 years from now, there will be 1
billion personal computers and 3 billion tele- phones in the world.
Governments, organizations and business enterprises are seeking to harness the Internet to advertise and disseminate information. There are millions of web-sites, homepages and diverse documents on the Internet, which cover thousands of subjects. At pres- ent, web pages total 1.5 billion with almost
2 million pages being added every day. IT has greatly stimulated the globalization of in- formation. Information flows on topics rang- ing from politics and business to sports cir- culate among organizations, cities, nations, regions and individuals day and night.
The Internet (see graph I.4 below), as well as other communication devices, such as the cellular phone and fax machines, have con- tributed to shrinking distance and time, and have allowed people to connect and com- municate instantaneously. The option of be- ing able to access the Internet from special models of cellular phones may also represent a breakthrough in the communication sec- tor, especially for developing countries that have not developed an extensive cable sys- tem and are now able to use cellular phones in their daily work activities.
However, as in the case of economic global- ization, there is nothing deterministic about globalization via the spread of IT technolo- gies and the Internet. It takes proper pub- lic policy frameworks to make it happen. For example, as mentioned above, States have a policy choice to make in the area of deregu- lating their telecommunication sector. And, increasingly, geo-locating and firewall tech- nologies allow them to shape the freedom of the spread of the Internet. A careful trade- off between perceived advantages and dis- advantages is needed here. How to handle the IT revolution promises to constitute one
of the most important policy decisions that a State will have to take at the beginning of the new millennium. The so-called digital di- vide is a by-product of underdevelopment, and lack of financial and human resources. It must be stressed though that public policy is also instrumental in the present magnitude of this divide and in the pace at which it can be bridged.
IT opens new opportunities for increased government transparency, efficiency and ef- fectiveness of its services. It gives the citi- zens a powerful tool for conducting the pub- lic discourse, organizing themselves and challenging, as the case may be, the exist- ing political parties, professional associa- tions, non-governmental organizations, and agencies of State administration -- both lo- cally and globally.
IT is rapidly transforming all the sectors of the global economy. It helps to redefine such concepts as competitiveness, quality, deliv- ery, responsiveness and innovation. IT has opened the way to advances in productivity by minimizing waste of raw materials, labour and time. With modern transportation means such as jumbo jets and contain- er vessels and computerized reservations systems, the globalization of production and services has become a reality. Global infor- mation networks are rapidly transforming the ways an enterprise operates. In the last 20 years, both manufacturing and services have become increasingly globalized -- a global pro- duction system has emerged. It goes with- out saying that IT is the central driver of this new world trend.
On the negative side, it must be said that the Internet is also being used in detrimental ways. It has become an easy communication device for all sorts of criminal and terrorist activi- ties. This shows that the Internet can be used both in social and "anti-social" ways. The In- ternet in fact, as any other device, is not a "good" or "bad" tool per se. It is a facilitator. Whether it has a positive or negative impact on society depends on how it is used -- per- haps abused -- and how its use is regulated. 
2.3. The role of entrepreneurship in accelerating globalization
Thanks to technological innovations and greater economic liberalization, entrepre- neurs, especially multinational corporations, have taken full advantage of more open mar- kets to spread production processes all over the world (WTO, 1999, Annual Report). The opening up of economic opportunities allows the movement of foreign capital, technology and management, largely from transna- tional corporations (TNCs), to host country entrepreneurs and corporations. As nation- al economies open, mergers between businesses from different countries and purchases or in- vestment in equity of businesses in one country by owners from other countries are becoming more common. Although TNCs are not new economic actors, what has dramat- ically changed is the way they operate around the world and their increased level of economic power. According to the Com- mission on Global Governance, the number of TNCs is presently estimated at 37,000 world- wide (Commission on Global Governance Report, 1995). 
2.4. International social networks:
increase in number and strength
Modern technology, transportation, and telecommunications are transforming, in many ways, how organizations and people op- erate, cooperate and interface. From a social point of view, new technologies have facili- tated greater global integration and aware- ness through the establishment of worldwide networks. Concern for democracy, human rights, the environment, and poverty is be- ing enhanced by the birth of cross-border so- cial and political networks, whose members are non-state actors such as non-govern- mental organizations (NGOs) as well as pri- vate persons who want to participate in pub- lic matters, locally and globally. 
To be sure, the growing role of non-state transnational actors adds a novel dimen- sion to globalization. TNCs are becoming increasingly powerful actors within the in- ternational arena due to their growing eco- nomic power. The creation of international organizations, such as the WTO, brings about new influential institutional actors in the global landscape. Furthermore, the greater role of global civil society is anoth- er distinctive feature of globalization, par- ticularly if we consider its increasing rele- vance in the international policy agenda and process (Ostry, 2000). International NGOs work to aggregate global values and interests like the protection of human rights. Some NGOs work to protect the interests of national groups affected by global forces. 
The increased relevance of non-state global players, such as TNCs and international so- cial networks, has set in motion much dis- cussion about the role of the State and its gov- ernance capacity in a globalized world, and whether it will be able to manage effective- ly a diverse range of pressures. In fact, the State is increasingly being pulled in differ- ent directions, and must respond to de- mands, which come from local, as well as transnational groups. Strengthening the State's networking capacity will be crucial in a complex and interconnected world. Some see an emerging role for the State as an "or 
 chestrator", catalyst of ad hoc alliances of di- verse capacities and of diverse skills possessed by these many actors for achieving ad hoc de- velopmental goals.
3. The global village: economic and social dimensions of globalization
3.1. Economic globalization 
Economic globalization is mainly character- ized by the rapid expansion of international trade, foreign direct investment and capital market flows. The last 50 years have seen trade expand faster than output by a significant mar- gin, increasing the degree to which national economies rely on international trade in over- all activity (WTO, 1998, Annual Report). The decline in transportation costs and technological innovation, in particular the Internet, have contributed to an increase in the volume of trade, financial flows and speeded-up eco- nomic transactions by decreasing the time and methods of delivery and payment of goods and services. In addition, the declining trans- portation costs have led to a greater mobili- ty of people across borders and have signifi- cantly augmented tourism world wide, as well as a growing migration of workers. 
Economic globalization is characterized by:
 Flows of labour, goods, and capital across national borders;
 The emergence of global production arrange- ments mainly through the activities of TNCs and related foreign direct investments;
 The emergence of globally integrated mar- kets for goods, services and capital.
The increase in international trade is reflected in the following data:
 On an annual basis, merchandise exports grew by 6 per cent in real terms from 1948 to 1997, compared to annual output growth of 3.7 per cent. Put differently, trade multi- plied by the factor 17, while GDP grew approximately six-fold during this period. In the case of manufacturers, trade multiplied 30 times, while GDP grew eight-fold (ibid).
 Among rich or developed countries the share of international trade in total output (exports plus imports of goods relative to GDP) rose from 27 to 39 per cent between 1987 and
1997. For developing countries it rose from
10 to 17 per cent (World Bank, 2000, World
Development Indicators). 
Foreign direct investment (FDI), which is re- lated to investments made by firms in for- eign countries to establish and run business operations, has also greatly increased. 
 US firms invested US$ 133 billion abroad in 1998, while foreign firms invested US$ 193 billion in the US.
 Overall world FDI flows more than tripled between 1988 and 1998, from US$ 192 bil- lion to US$ 610 billion, and the share of FDI to GDP is generally rising in both developed and developing countries. 
 Developing countries received about a quarter of world FDI inflows in 1988-1998 on average, though the share fluctuated quite a bit from year to year (World Bank,
2000, World Development Indicators). Between
1980 and 1997, private capital flows to de- veloping countries as a group soared to $140 billion from $12 billion.
 The report on financing for development prepared for the UN Secretary-General, notes that during the period 1993 to 1998,
20 countries accounted for over 70 per cent of all FDI inflows to all developing countries. It further notes that the majority of low-in- come countries have been largely bypassed by private finance from abroad -- least de- veloped countries as a group received 0.5 per cent of world FDI inflows in 1999. On the oth- er hand, firms from developing countries themselves increasingly invest abroad. FDI from developing countries increased from 2 per cent of total FDI outflows in the early 1980s to 10 per cent at the end of the millennium (UN, 2001, A/55/1000). For African countries this is a double blow. Not only the in- flow of FDI is relatively miniscule, espe- cially outside primary commodities, but it has been estimated that 40 per cent of African
private wealth is held overseas (United
Box I.4
DEFINING AND MEASURING FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Kingdom, 2000, para. 153). 
 Foreign exchange trading in the world's fi- nancial centers exceeds 1 trillion US dollars a day, a multiple of 50 times or more of the amount of daily world trade and greater than the total stock of foreign exchange re- serves held by all governments (Cable, 1995, p. 4).
 The liberalization of capital movements cou- pled with information technology advances has made it possible to transfer large amounts of capital across national borders in seconds. 
A major transformation has also occurred in the territorial organization of economic ac- tivity. The way multinational corporations op- erate across borders has in fact greatly changed. The pattern of production has as- sumed a truly global nature in that the pres- ent organizational structure of companies has become increasingly horizontal. This implies that the production process does not take place vertically within the same corporation and that finished products are then exported. In- stead, manufacture of the various components of a product takes place in different regions of the world, either through affiliates or through outsourcing to foreign companies. For example many American products are no longer manufactured within the same com- pany nor within the same country. The com- ponents may be produced in India, while some parts are assembled in Mexico and others in Bulgaria, and then sold in the US or other markets around the world. This interna- tionalizes the local labour markets and re- wards with quality jobs and wealth-creation opportunities the concentrations of highly ed- ucated skilled, networked professionals, a fact that has profound public policy implications.
3.2. Social globalization
Globalization of technologies has enabled inexpensive, instantaneous communication
Foreign direct investment (FDI) occurs when an investor based in one country
(the home country) acquires an asset in another country (the host country) with the intent to manage that asset. The management dimension is what dis- tinguishes FDI from portfolio investment in foreign stocks, bonds and other financial instruments. In most instances, both the investor and the asset it man- ages abroad are business firms. In such cases, the investor is typically referred to as the "parent firm" and the asset as the "affiliate" or "subsidiary".
There are three main categories of FDI:
 Equity capital is the value of the multinational corporation's investment in shares of an enterprise in a foreign country. An equity capital stake of 10 per cent or more of the ordinary shares or voting power in an incorporated enterprise, or its equivalent in an unincorporated enterprise, is normally considered as a threshold for the control of assets. This category includes both mergers and acquisitions and "greenfield" investments (the creation of new facilities). Mergers and acquisitions are an important source of FDI for developed countries, although the relative importance varies considerably. 
 Reinvested earnings are the MNC's share of affiliate earnings not distributed as dividends or remitted to the MNC. Such retained profits by affiliates are assumed to be reinvested in the affiliate. This can represent up to 60 per cent of outward FDI in countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom.
 Other capital refers to short or long-term borrowing and lending of funds 
between the MNC and the affiliate.
The available statistics on FDI, which are far from ideal, come mainly from three sources. First, there are statistics from the records of ministries and agen- cies which administer the country's laws and regulations on FDI. The request for a license or the fulfillment of notification requirements allows these agen- cies to record data on FDI flows. Typically, re-invested earnings, intra-compa- ny loans, and liquidations of investment are not recorded, and not all notified investments are fully realized in the period covered by notification. Second, there are the FDI data taken from government and other surveys which eval- uate financial and operating data of companies. While these data provide information on sales (domestic and foreign), earnings, employment and the share of value added of foreign affiliates in domestic output, they often are not comparable across countries because of differences in definitions and coverage. Third, there are the data taken from national balance-of-pay- ments statistics, for which internationally agreed guidelines exist in the fifth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual. The three main categories of FDI described above are those used in balance-of-payments statistics.
Source: WTO, 1996, Report on "Trade and Foreign Direct Investment".
and massive diffusion of information affect- ing styles of politics, culture and social or- ganization. The globalization of technology has contributed not only to the explosive growth of information exchange via the In- ternet, but also to the expansion of educa tion opportunities and the constitution of trans- national networks. Information, which had been the monopoly of the few, is becoming ac- cessible to wider and more diverse audi- ences. The relative ease of accessing infor- mation has increased citizens' ability to share views, to become aware of their rights, to make their demands known and to increase their influence generally. As a consequence, citizens are joining together to demand im- proved levels of services and higher standards of behaviour from their governments. Pub- lic opinion moves to the forefront as a basis of the legitimacy of governments.
The reduction in transportation costs over re- cent decades, especially air and train fares, has significantly facilitated the movement of people around the globe and has allowed a greater awareness of international issues. Peo- ple nowadays have greater access to and knowledge of other cultures, as well as so- cial problems and issues. Social protest has also taken on a different form. It is not any longer confined to one particular country or to local issues; it transcends national borders. The recent events in Genoa at the G8 sum- mit, in Prague in September 2000 at the In- ternational Monetary Fund and World Bank meeting, and in Seattle at the World Trade Organization meeting in 1999, are examples of these new forms of transnational organ- ized movements and of globalization itself. 
International and regional organizations, such as NGOs and transnational networks, based on shared interests rather than on geo- political similarities have proliferated in the late XX century. NGOs, however, are by no means an "invention" of the past decades (some notable NGOs, such as Save the Children, were founded at the beginning of the XX cen- tury, while others even earlier as in the case of the International Red Cross, which was founded in 1868). What has changed is per- haps the increasing number of NGOs and their growing political leverage. Four decades ago, there were fewer than 1,000 NGOs, which operated mostly at the local level. Now at the beginning of the XXI century, the United Na- tions reports that almost 30,000 NGOs op- erate internationally. Moreover, NGOs are being increasingly invited to many global fora such as United Nations conferences and meetings and the recent World Economic Forum held in Davos, Switzerland or the re- cent G8 meeting held in Genoa, 2001. In oth- er words, NGOs are becoming actively involved in policy dialogues. 
Although NGOs are generally undertaking remarkable tasks and advancing relevant world causes such as the alleviation of poverty, the protection of children's rights, or the protection of the environment, NGOs have also been criticized for a number of reasons. It has been said that some compete against each other and, once institutionalized, become closed to new ideas and positions. It has al- so been argued that powerful NGOs are mainly based in developed countries and may not be as transparent and accountable as they expect other public and private agen- cies to become. But most fundamentally, it should not be forgotten that, despite their rel- evance in articulating and expressing a di- versity of interests and concerns, NGOs should not be confused with political parties, as they are not democratically elected. Therefore, their opinions and positions re- garding different social and political issues are not representative of the people's will, as they have not received a mandate to repre- sent them. However, increased access of its members to information and networking creates a pressure for increased relevance and improved internal governance of NGOs. This is bound to make them more responsive to the changing global circumstances and to the opinion of their constituencies. 
Social globalization is a phenomenon which poses new challenges for the nation-State. In fact, the State becomes increasingly involved in a web of intricate interests and needs in order to respond to a growing number of de- mands on issues which are not solely limit- ed to its territory. This requires the State to hone its role as mediator and develop new skills to deal with diversity. 
4. The opportunities of 
globalization
4.1. Greater economic opportunities 
Greater economic openness, foreign direct in- vestment, and transfer of technologies pres- ent potential opportunities for economic growth. Free trade promotes specialization among different regions, allowing them to ap- ply their own comparative advantages; it also expands the consumption opportuni- ties of countries by providing increased op- portunities to buy goods and services from other countries.
It is very important to keep in mind that in- ternational trade is not a zero-sum game with absolute winners and absolute losers. On the contrary, trade benefits all countries because it enhances the choices of the consumer and the quality of products. If competitive, it lowers prices and raises real wages. It is al- so worthwhile to underline that contrary to what is commonly believed, "countries are not in any degree in economic competition with each other", or that "any of their major eco- nomic problems can be attributed to failures to compete on world markets" (Krugman, 1994, p. 6). Firms compete; countries do not. "If the European economy does well, it need not be at the expense of the United States; indeed, if anything a successful European economy is likely to help the U.S. economy by providing it with larger markets and selling it goods of superior quality at lower prices" (ibid.). More- over, the evidence is very strong that real GDP growth is related mainly to domestic pro- ductivity growth, not to balance of trade or to productivity relative to competitors. "Even though world trade is larger than ever be- fore, national living standards are over- whelmingly determined by domestic factors rather than by some competition for world markets" (ibid.). Trade is largely static, while productivity, which is driven by technical change, is dynamic and for that reason is pri- marily responsible for economic growth. Therefore, focusing on international com- petitiveness may lead to unwise decisions on domestic, as well as foreign policies.
Economic globalization has also provided opportunities for developing countries in that it opens new markets for export and at- tracts foreign capital, which aids development. Economic globalization is also conducive to a transfer of technologies and know-how, which increases productivity. Foreign in- vestments in developing countries have al- so increased employment. Another positive effect of globalization is greater competition among firms, which has benefited con- sumers who have access to products at in- creasingly lower prices. 
"Integrating with the world economy is a pow- erful vehicle for growth and poverty reduc- tion in developing countries, but it would be still more powerful if the rich countries fur- ther increased the openness of their own economies" (Stern, 2000, p. 5). In fact, we should recognize that many sectors like tex- tiles and agriculture, which could provide re- al new opportunities for developing countries, have not been liberalized. We should also rec- ognize the concern about intellectual prop- erty rights, and the use of anti-dumping practices, which seem to discriminate against producers in developing countries.
4.2. Greater global social awareness and opportunities for democracy
The widespread use of modern communica- tion devices -- such as the Internet -- and the media have meant a greater awareness of hu- man rights violations, child labour abuses, corruption, and violence. The advancements in information and communication tech- nologies and the reduction of transporta- tion costs, have provided people with new tools to support and disseminate the causes of democracy, human rights, transparency, and alleviation of poverty. This increased aware- ness has led to international pressure on spe- cific countries to abide by certain rules and democratic values. In some ways, it may be said that globalization is a positive process in that it forcefully brings to the attention of the international community abuses and undemocratic practices. Due to technologi- cal advances, non-state actors have been able to form effective global alliances, which
 
 are not subject to control on the part of re- pressive national governments and act as ad- vocates of specific policies. 
The new information age is also widening the range of information available to anyone anywhere, enhancing and modernizing the exchange and sharing of information, train- ing and education. The potential of on-line education for reaching individuals living in remote areas is of great importance, especially for developing countries. Greater access to education is in fact a basic prerequisite for people to be able to participate in a well-in- formed way in public life and make informed decisions. Information technology, the satel- lite, the cellular phone and the global media are also contributing to the integration of the fastest growing developing countries in the global economy. The future expansion and use of these technologies may further increase such opportunities. "From struggles around human rights, the environment and workers strikes around the world to genuinely triv- ial pursuits, the Internet has emerged as a powerful medium for non-elites to commu- nicate, support each other's struggles and cre- ate the equivalent of insider groups at scales going from the local to the global" (Sassen,
1998, p. 12).
5. Current trends and challenges affecting public administration in a globalizing world
Despite the immense advancements in all spheres of human activity, the increased global wealth, and the opportunities un- leashed by globalization, the world today still faces great challenges. These in turn af- fect public administration in a number of ways. The State and its institutions are, in fact, in- creasingly subject to pressure both from the domestic and international arena. New chal- lenges and old threats suggest that the State, especially in developing countries, needs to be strengthened and to operate dif- ferently from the past. The challenges that are affecting how the State operates and that call for major innovations in public administration are manifold. Poverty, in- equality, civil wars, and the spread of dead- ly diseases, including HIV/AIDS, are com- promising the prospects of many developing countries for a better future. It is important to emphasize that all of these problems are not caused by globalization, as some may ar- gue, but rather by local under-development that does not allow people to take full ad- vantage of the opportunities of integrating into the world economy.
Furthermore, while it is true that globalization carries many opportunities in its trail, it is also true that it has costs for the people who are integrating into the world economy. Every change has adjustment costs. However, refusing to embark on a process of change on these grounds is short-sighted. Technical change also entails costs, which are even high- er than those produced by globalization, but not for this reason has it been or should it be rejected. "Modern technology and in- creasing economic integration have been a positive force in eradicating poverty and de- velopment throughout times" (Sen, 2001). Thus, "the predicament of the poor across the world cannot be reversed by withholding from them the great advantages of contem- porary technology, the well established effi- ciency of international trade and exchange, and the social as well as economic merits of living in open, rather than closed, societies
-- what is needed is a fairer distribution of the fruits of globalization" (ibid.). In other words, integrating into the world economy has costs, but not integrating has greater costs in terms of lost opportunities. The challenge then is how to ensure that people can ben- efit from globalization, while minimizing the costs of adjusting to a changing domes- tic and international environment (UN,
2001, A/56/127-E/2001/101).
5.1. Alleviation of poverty and in- equality
It is becoming increasingly evident that so far globalization has benefited only a rela- tively small number of countries and that some regions of the world are still not integrated into the world economy. Moreover, as may be
seen in the next chapters, some States have not yet adapted to increasing interdepend- ence and as a consequence many have suf- fered from the adjustment costs of globalization. As stated by Helleiner at the 10th Raul Pre- bisch Lecture organized by the United Na- tions Conference on Trade and Development in December 2000: "The challenge -- both at the national and global levels -- is, through conscious policy choices, to make the new glob- alized system ... work for maximum human welfare. The task before us all is to make glob- alization functional, to \0x2018civilize' it" (Hellein- er, 2000, p. 5). In order to turn globalization into an opportunity for all, we need a new vision for the future, a vision that goes be- yond what Soros calls "market fundamen- talism" (Soros, 2000). In fact, "in recent decades an imbalance has emerged between successful efforts to craft strong and well-en- forced rules facilitating the expansion of global markets, while support for equally valid social objectives, be they labour standards, the environment, human rights or poverty reduction, has lagged behind" (UN, 2000, Mil- lennium Report, A/54/2000). It is becoming quite clear that, while globalization has great potentials, without appropriate do- mestic conditions it can have negative effects
for many people. 
ence its own living environment, let alone the international political arena. The impressive technological advances only benefit a small proportion of the world's population. De- spite globalization, many of the poorest countries remain marginalized from world trade and investment. Social and economic polarization is still widely spread. Therefore, it may be said that a sophisticated, global- ized, increasingly affluent world currently co- exists with a marginalized global under- class (Commission on Global Governance Report, 1995, p. 139). 
But how is poverty and inequality in the de- veloping world linked to globalization, and is it a consequence of globalization per se? According to some observers economic glob- alization leads to a "race to the bottom" characterized "by the progressive movement of capital and technology from countries with relatively high levels of wages, taxation and regulation to countries with relatively lower levels" (Spar and Yoffe, 2000, p. 37). This is said to force countries to reduce wages and social spending. However, other observers have maintained that globalization has favoured higher standards in the protection of working conditions and environmental
Eradicating poverty and ensuring sustain- able development should form the raison d'etre of public administration. Half the
Box I.5
POVERTY IN AN UNEQUAL WORLD
world, nearly 3 billion people, lives on less than US$ 2 a day while the richest 20 per cent of the global population receive more than
80 per cent of the global income. Inequality still persists between countries in the world at large, while intra-country inequality of- fers a mixed record, with some countries and regions improving their condition, while others have fallen into greater inequality. Ac- tually, whether inequality is increasing or not is besides the point. As stated by Nobel Prize winner Amartya Sen: "the basic concerns relate to the massive levels of inequality and poverty -- not whether they are also in- creasing at the margin" (Sen, 2001). 
It is a fact that a significant part of hu- manity does not have the capacity to influThe world has deep poverty amid plenty. Of the world's 6 billion people, 2.8
billion - almost half - live on less than $2 a day, and 1.2 billion - a fifth - live on less than $1 a day, with 44 percent living in South Asia. In rich countries, fewer than 1 child in 100 does not reach its fifth birthday, while in the poorest coun- tries as many as a fifth of children do not. And while in rich countries fewer than 5 percent of all children under five are malnourished, in poor countries as many as 50 percent are.
This destitution persists even though human conditions have improved more in the past century than in the rest of history - global wealth, global connections and technological capabilities have never been greater. But the distribution of these global gains is extraordinarily unequal. The average income in the richest 20 countries is 37 times the average in the poorest 20 - a gap that has doubled in the past 40 years. And the experience in different parts of the world has been very diverse. In East Asia the number of people living on less than $1 a day fell from around 420 million to 280 million between 1987 and
1998 - even after the setbacks of the financial crisis. Yet in Latin America, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa the numbers of poor people have been rising. And in the countries of Europe and Central Asia in transition to market economies, the number of people living on less than $1 a day rose more than twenty-fold.
Source: World Bank, 1999/2000, World Development Report.
standards, as well as higher wages than those offered by local employers. By refus- ing to operate under specific conditions, some corporations have contributed to the im- provement of working and environmental stan- dards.
The relationship between globalization and development is quite complex and should be analyzed in a non-ideological, impartial way. First of all, openness to foreign trade is far from being the only or most important fac- tor in fostering development (actually, trade is a small factor in the economy), nor is glob- alization solely responsible for creating dis- parities between rich and poor. As a matter of fact, human development, the reduction of poverty and increased output of goods and services depend on national policies, as much as or more than the international en- vironment. Therefore, domestic policies, both in developing and developed countries, are greatly responsible either for their poor economic performance or for the persisting gap between rich and poor. 
As shown in Part Two of this Report, the cross- section evidence on the relationship between openness and the size of central govern- ments, as measured by expenditure and tax- ation, shows that there is no conflict be- tween openness and government expenditure.
On the contrary, governments of open economies tend to spend a significantly larg- er portion of their GDP and collect the ad- ditional taxes needed for this task. Opening to the world economy might be accompa- nied by a reduction in the size of government only if policy-makers believe that small gov- ernment is a condition for open markets. In reality, there is no evidence in the decade of the 1990s that openness led to a reduction in the size of government.
The majority of the "globalizers", then, ac- tually registered increases in expenditure and tax revenue. Therefore, there is no evidence that globalization weakens the State. The ILO has reached the same conclusions and has emphasized that "up to now some of the countries with the most open economies have the highest levels of social spending (for example, most of the Nordic countries, Aus- tria, Germany, the Netherlands). Open na- tional economies in the global economy do not have to have lower social spending. On the contrary, a higher level of social protection would appear to be necessary in countries that are more exposed to external risks or have to undergo difficult structural adjustments" (ILO, 2001, p. 45). In this respect, it is im- portant to anticipate that the State will have a very significant role to play in a globaliz- ing economy. For the citizens to take advantage
of the opportunities of globalization, they need access to high quality education, health care, information and communication technolo- gies (ICT), social safety nets, and infra- structure. The role of government is to se- cure for the citizens affordable access to these services.
If globalization has exerted negative effects on certain countries, it is because many countries lag in developing a strong insti- tutional framework, as well as solid social poli- cies and networks to cope with negative ex- ternalities, as discussed in the following chapters. External factors, such as the glob- al trading environment, are also crucial in creating greater opportunities or in posing constraints on a country's economic growth. Once more, the trading rules have so far ben- efited more the industrialized countries than the less developed ones. For example, the Eu- ropean Union has lifted barriers on import of raw materials from Africa, but not on re- fined products, which would compete with lo- cal European products. As stated in a keynote address by United Nations Under- Secretary-General and Executive Secretary of ECA, K.Y. Amoako: "For all the talk on free trade, the World Bank estimates that high tariffs, anti-dumping regulations and tech- nical barriers to trade in industrialized countries cost sub-Saharan African coun- tries $20 billion annually in lost exports. In other words, we lose more because of trade barriers than we gain because of aid! If rich countries want unfettered access to our mar- kets, we require that they open their mar- kets to us so that we can earn, rather than beg, our way out of poverty. Democratization, transparency, accountability and good gov- ernance at the national level must be repli- cated at the international level!" (Amoako,
2000, p. 1).
In the words of Secretary-General of the United Nations, "we should be concerned about jobs, about human rights, about child labour, about the environment, about the com- mercialization of scientific and medical re- search. We should also be concerned about the desperate poverty in which so many peo- ple in developing countries live. But globalization should not be made a scapegoat for domestic policy failures. The industrialized world must not try to solve its own problems at the expense of the poor. It seldom makes sense to use trade restrictions to tackle prob- lems whose origins lie in other areas of pol- icy. By aggravating poverty and obstructing development, such restrictions often make the problems even worse. Practical experience has shown that trade and investment often bring not only economic development, but higher standards of human rights and environ- mental protection as well. Indeed, the peo- ple in developing countries generally insist on higher standards, once they get the chance to do so" (Annan, The Wall Street Jour- nal, Nov. 24, 1999). 
5.2. Advancement of human rights and democracy 
Globalization and greater openness to the world economy can benefit fully a country and its people only in the presence of solid democratic institutions, which help redistribute the gains from open trade and from greater ex- change. However, despite the progress made by many countries in building democratic in- stitutions and protecting human rights, democracies are still fragile in some regions of the world and protection of minority rights is not guaranteed. In some parts of the world, civil society at large and especially mi- norities are still not fully integrated into the social and economic fabric of the coun- tries they live in. Many suffer from dis- crimination, deprivation of basic rights, and abuse from the authorities. Promoting democracy and, in many cases, democratization is a pre-requisite to ensuring the respect of human rights, but it is not sufficient. Prop- er values and broad encompassing interest of the governments is needed. Freedom of speech, association, assembly, religion, and political participation, among others, are cornerstones of a constitutional democracy. Freedom from arbitrary arrest, unlawful de- tention, let alone torture and slavery, are rec- ognized as inalienable universal rights. 
Advances have been made in this field in the past decades especially since the 1980s when
 
the so-called "third wave" of democratization spread to many parts of the world. So far an increasing number of countries have ac- knowledged and recognized the rights con- tained in the Universal Declaration of Hu- man Rights adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. Yet, there are still too many cases of human rights violations in many parts of the world. This poses a great challenge to national and international gov- ernance institutions. 
5.3. Protection of the environment and sustainable development
Environmental degradation poses signifi- cant challenges to public administrations world-wide. Economic liberalization and the lifting of barriers to trade and commerce in many countries around the world has pro- vided the corporate sector with greater op- portunities for investment and profit, as well as higher access to new markets, espe- cially in the developing countries. The open- ing up of "new frontiers" has, however, also accelerated the depletion of natural re- sources and has produced higher levels of in- dustrial pollution. Although, as is well known, environmental degradation is not a consequence of globalization per se, greater access to and exploitation of previously pro- tected areas is creating further risks for the environment. Worldwide unsustainable consumption patterns, especially in the G-8 countries, is resulting in increasingly high- er demands of energy. Examples of environ- mental degradation can also be found in the former centrally planned economies of East- ern Europe. The challenge with which States are confronted, in this respect, is to combine openness to the world economy with policies aimed at protecting the environment.
"Already 20% of the world's population con- sumes 86% of its total resources, while the poorest 20% of the population consumes on- ly 1.3% of these same resources. ... Each year between 5 and 7 million hectares of agri- cultural land are lost as a result of soil degradation or urbanization. Another 16 to
20 million hectares of tropical forests are sac- rificed as a result of inadmissible practices. More than 1 billion people have no access to clean drinking water. About 2.8 billion people have no access to sanitary facilities. Tangible evidence of these problems includes the qual- ity of our air, the taste of our water, and the vast expansion of congested living areas and despoiled countryside" (Ospina, 2000, p. 32).
Though there is still much discussion about the entity of human-induced climate change, experts agree that industrial pollution and the emission of fossil fuels are damaging our global ecosystem. According to a recent Report of the United Nations Intergovern- mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) "available observational evidence indicates that regional changes in climate, particularly increases in temperature, have already af- fected a diverse set of physical and biologi- cal systems in many parts of the world (UN,
2001, IPCC, p. 3). The report, to which nu- merous scientists and a great number of ex- perts worldwide contributed, also states that "climate changes during the 21st century have the potential to lead to future large-scale and possibly irreversible changes in Earth sys- tems resulting in impacts at continental and global levels" (ibid., p. 6). Events such as droughts, floods, avalanches, heat waves and windstorms are subject to increase. Nat- ural systems at risk include glaciers, coral reefs and atolls, mangroves, boreal and trop- ical forests, polar and alpine ecosystems. 
Because of their vulnerability, it is the poor- est and least adaptable parts of the world that will suffer most from climate change in the next 100 years. "Most less-developed regions are especially vulnerable because a larger share of their economies are in climate-sensitive sec- tors and their adaptive capacity is low due to low levels of human, financial and natu- ral resources, as well as limited institution- al and technological capability" (ibid.). Ac- cording to the IPCC report, the damages that could derive from climate change are man- ifold, including:
 Decreased water availability for populations in water-scarce regions; 
 Dangers for human health, i.e. increase in vector-borne diseases such as malaria in tropical countries, or heat stress morbidity and mortality in North America;
 Decrease in agricultural production, es- pecially in Africa and Latin America;
 Widespread increase of flooding for many human settlements; 
 Rising sea levels, which will affect partic- ularly Small Island States resulting in the displacement of millions of people;
 Collapse of many eco-systems (ibid.).
The IPCC report concludes that, despite these negative previsions, there is hope for the future provided that environmental poli- cies are sustained. In particular, it is strong- ly recommended that climatic risks be included in the design and implementation of na- tional and international development ini- tiatives. Countries have the capacity to re- duce global warming and to reverse envi- ronmental degradation. But it is essential that all countries uphold the commitments made at summits in Rio and Kyoto. In this respect, "the ten-year review of the decisions of the Rio Summit in 2002 will provide an histor- ical opportunity to the global community to reinvigorate the spirit of Rio. This 2002
Summit must address the major challenges to sustainable development, particularly the
pervasive effects of poverty on a large pro- portion of the Earth's inhabitants, juxta- posed with excessive and wasteful con- sumption and inefficient resource use that perpetuates the vicious circle of environ- mental degradation and people's impover- ishment" (UNEP, 2000, Annual Report, p.5). The "Malm\0xF6 Declaration", which resulted from UNEP's First Global Ministerial Envi- ronment Forum in Sweden in May 2000, stated that: "We can decrease poverty by half by 2015 without degrading the envi- ronment, we can ensure environmental se- curity through early warning, we can better integrate environmental consideration in economic policy, we can better coordinate legal instruments and we can realize a vi- sion of a world without slums" (UNEP, 2000, First Global Ministerial Environmental Fo- rum). However, whether these goals will be achieved or not largely depends on the po- litical leadership and will of the developed countries -- who are the greatest consumers of energy and polluters -- as well as of the de- veloping world.
5.4. Mobility of workers and 
migration
The increase in migration of workers, espe- cially from developing countries to the de- veloped world, is posing serious challenges to public administration systems around the globe. Although migration is by no means a new phenomenon and is actually less extensive than in the past, it should not be underes- timated and deserves to be addressed from a developmental approach. States must be- come more attuned to these new realities and find incentives to retain skilled workers within their borders, while also ensuring that social networks are in place to support workers who suffer sudden unemployment. It is known that globalization has produced greater economic insecurity, especially among vulnerable groups of society in both developed and developing countries. People fear losing their jobs as companies can eas- ily relocate to regions of the world where wages are lower. Although this is a serious social problem in the short-run, governments can play a significant role in providing relocation
 
 grants and in promoting re-training pro- grammes for the unemployed. It is also im- portant to keep in mind that in the long run the benefits deriving from restructuring the economy more than compensate for the costs of transition.
It is also worthwhile noting that although cap- ital crosses borders rapidly, the same cannot be said for labour. In fact, even though labour has become more mobile, it is only the skilled workers who have legal access to and can benefit from a globalized economy. The migration of skilled workers represents a problem because of its "brain-drain" effect on developing countries, whereas the mi- gration of unskilled workers is a quite con- troversial issue in political and social terms. As indicated by the Executive Secretary of ECA: "Several hundred thousand highly ed- ucated Africans live and work abroad, while Africa spends $4 billion of its Overseas De- velopment Assistance (ODA) per annum on buying foreign expertise. Over 100,000 ex- perts from developed countries are current- ly employed in Africa. The brain drain is de- stroying the core of Africa's knowledge-pro- ducing institutions and universities. Very few of these academic refugees are going to the more flourishing countries within the conti- nent, most of which have adopted restrictive approaches to immigration at times border- ing on xenophobia" (Amoako, 2000). In some countries, high unemployment rates and pessimism regarding the prospects for im- provement in the foreseeable future have ac- celerated a wave of emigration, which is cre- ating problems at both the country of origin and destination.
Migration and brain-drain have taken on pro- portions which compromise the prospects of many developing countries to build a better future, and also victimize the individuals con- cerned. The countries witness the loss of scarce high-level skills developed at high cost. For migrants themselves, the time-con- suming process of trying to obtain a visa may only be the start of a protracted journey through the uncharted seas of an informal job market, in which they are all too often victims of exploitation. The employment situation in many developing countries and need for high-level skills constitute a press- ing problem, to which the countries affect- ed and the international community must turn their attention; both are vitally concerned with these questions. Another critical question in many developing countries, but also in the western world, is related to the working conditions in many multinational corporations and local firms. 
5.5. Demographic trends: ageing population and impact of HIV/AIDS 
It is crucial that public administration remains very aware of what is taking place on the de- mographic sphere so as to adjust itself and its services accordingly. In mid 2000 the world population reached 6.1 billion and is currently growing at the annual rate of 1.2 per cent or an increase of 77 million people per year. Particularly rapid growth is expected among the group of 48 countries classified as least developed.
One of the most alarming health crises is re- lated to HIV/AIDS, which is threatening to reverse a generation of accomplishments in human development. Some 50 million peo- ple have been infected with HIV since the ear- ly 1970s; 16 million have died. The impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic is worsening in terms of increased morbidity, mortality, and population loss.
Globally, the number of elder persons (60 years and older) will more than triple, increasing from 606 million today to nearly 2 billion by
2050. At the same time, international migration is projected to remain high during the XXI century with the more developed regions expected to continue as net receivers of in- ternational migrants on an average gain of about 2 million per year over the next 50 years. Because of low fertility, this migration has a significant impact on population growth in the more developed regions.
These demographic trends are posing a se- rious challenge to national and internation- al governance systems. In developing coun- tries, governments will have to deal with a
wide range of problems related to the expo- nential increase in population and the prop- agation of deadly diseases. In the developed world, administrative systems will have to undertake a number of reforms in order to meet the needs of the increasing number of elderly and an increasingly diverse society.
5.6. Bridging the digital divide
Information technology opens new vistas for humankind. IT promises to improve our study, work and leisure. IT offers possibili- ties to broaden and accelerate the global in- tegration of information networks, of economic activities, and of social, political and cultural pursuits. Currently, however, many developing countries and countries with economies in tran- sition are only passively integrated, if at all, into the global economy. The unequal ac- cess to IT is creating what is known as the digital divide generally between rich and poor countries and also within countries. 
Technological penetration is still very low in developing countries and in recent democracies if compared to the developed world. In this respect, only those who have access to the In- ternet and a variety of communication devices are globally connected, whereas a great part of the world cannot reap the benefits of glob- alization and are left at its margins. Many developing countries are still struggling to have nation-wide electricity, and infra- structures are still inadequate. In addition, the cost of computers is, in relative terms, very high for many inhabitants of the de- veloping world. Most enterprises in these coun- tries have neither the capacity nor the means to be active players in the globaliza- tion process.
The digital divide, however, is not a phe- nomenon which characterizes exclusively developing countries. An increasing gap in opportunities is also being witnessed in many industrialized countries due to this di- vide. It is mostly the young middle class who have access to information technology, whereas the poor as well as the older gen- erations are being left out of the information revolution with great repercussions on their
employment opportunities. Recent surveys indicate that, in the industrialized world, typ- ical network users are middle-class, young adult or adolescent, and male. The poor, dis- abled, older or poorly educated have not been introduced into the new technology and may continue to be excluded from it. In many de- veloping countries, access to the Internet re- mains a distant dream. Knowing how to ac- cess the Internet, as well as to master computer softwares and other communication devices, is today a must in the skilled work place. We live in a society in which information is pow- er and wealth is based on knowledge. 
On a more positive note, modern information technology offers both countries and individuals dramatic opportunities to leapfrog into the future, speeding up their economic and so- cial development. While many developed countries have spent enormous sums in- vesting in IT, many of the resulting IT prod- ucts and services have now become available at prices that may soon be affordable to en- terprises and households in the developing countries. The current trend of IT towards distributed processing and network com- puting is also very much in favour of devel- oping countries because it provides them with low cost and low risk -- as well as high benefit -- strategies to develop their information capacity and thus participate in the global information society.
With rapidly declining costs for both computers and telecommunications, it has been possi- ble to place computer power on the desktops of individuals and to communicate with any- one anywhere. This has given rise to a trend of end-user and network computing, which allows an organization to take an evolu- tionary instead of revolutionary strategy. By means of wireless technology, developing countries are now able to quickly build up basic data-communication networks and in- formation infrastructures with less invest- ment, without having to wire thousands of miles of cables.
Because of the shift from mainframe to per- sonal computers and networking (access to the Internet), IT can now provide more off 
 
 the-shelf software and user-friendly interfaces between people and machines; these have greatly reduced the cost of applications de- velopment and eased users' training. Previ- ously, the introduction of a new generation of computer and data-communication systems in developing countries would have taken place several years after their initial use in the de- veloped countries. Now, because of IT advances, acquiring new computers and software takes only a few months. The challenge States are facing is how to close the digital gap and cre- ate the opportunities for a wider participa- tion of all people in the information age.
5.7. Combating international 
criminal networks
The speed and ease of transactions through the Internet as well as the greater openness of national borders have also been used in negative ways by criminal organizations, in- cluding terrorist groups. Corruption has al- so taken on a transnational dimension, and trade has extended to the illicit commer- cialization of women, children and human body organs. Oftentimes, the Internet is being used to facilitate such "transactions'". More- over, due to the many advances in technol- ogy and communication devices, criminals have been able to trade in illicit drugs and weapons with greater ease than ever. 
The threat that international crime, partic- ularly terrorism and drug traffic, pose to the world and increased interdependence brought by globalization should not be overlooked. Terrorism, in addition to the criminal taking of innocent life, can desta- bilize societies by undermining confidence in government institutions and inspiring fear in the population. Drug traffic results in un- told harm to individuals and the consequent losses of human capital. Given their nature, only States can combat these terrible crimes. The State, with all its institutions, has no doubt a pivotal role to play in this fight.
6. Too much or too little 
globalization?
"The problem is not that we have too much globalization but rather too little" (UN,
2000, Millennium Declaration, A/RES/55/2). The benefits of globalization have been un- equally distributed and many people have been marginalized from this process. Even in countries that have integrated into the world economy not everybody has benefited from globalization as States were not prepared to cope with some of its negative effects.
Thus, the foremost preoccupation should be to ensure that the benefits of globalization are evenly spread throughout the developed and the developing world, while addressing its negative effects. The problem is not whether to go global, but rather how to glob- alize. In other words, globalization has the potential of increasing prosperity and human development for all, but this is predicated on how it is pursued. In turn, this depends on democratic processes being in place at the sub- national, national and international levels, as well as on the balance of power and meas- ure of equality among the world's nations.
Indeed, globalization may be said to bring greater opportunities to many countries pro- vided specific conditions are met. It can fos- ter prosperity, only if free trade principles are not upheld at the expense of consumers' health and the environment and if profits are not gained at the expense of workers' basic rights. That is to say, greater market open- ness cannot be divorced from a profound de- bate about common social goals and com- plementary policies. Human dignity and the promotion of enhanced quality of life should become an integral part of the internation- al policy agenda. Accordingly, globalization cannot mean the abandonment of all things to market forces. In other words, "the eco- nomic sphere cannot be separated from the more complex fabric of social and political life, and sent shooting off on its own trajectory. To survive and thrive, a global economy must have a more solid foundation in shared values and institutional practice. It must advance broader and more inclusive social pur- poses" (UN, 2000, Millennium Report, A/54/2000, p. 3). 
As emphasized in the Bangkok Declaration of February 2000, "globalization can be a pow- erful and dynamic force for growth and de- velopment. If it is properly managed, the foun- dations for enduring and equitable growth at the international level can be laid. For that, it is essential to persevere in the search for consensual solutions through open and direct dialogue that takes account of the fundamental interests of all (UNCTAD X, 2000, Bangkok Declaration). 
"With globalization there is a growing need for binding international regulations, a need for international conventions and institu- tions that cover cross-border transactions" (Beck, 2000, p. 130). Appropriate regula- tions and conventions should ensure that glob- alization does not limit the freedom of peo- ple around the globe, but rather empower them to unleash their creative forces. But for peo- ple to be able to seize the benefits of global- ization another set of conditions should be met, i.e. basic needs must be satisfied. 
This is especially true in developing countries where people can actively take part in the world trading system and benefit from the rapid transformations that mark the begin- ning of this millennium, but only if the qual- ity and access to education and health are ensured; if physical infrastructures, includ- ing transport and communication networks, hospitals and water systems are built or im- proved; if poverty amidst plenty is reduced; and if the technology gap is narrowed -- that is to say, if people have greater opportuni- ties to make choices. As argued by Sen, "what people can positively achieve is in- fluenced by economic opportunities, political liberties, social powers, and the enabling conditions of good health, basic education, and the encouragement and cultivation of ini- tiatives" (Sen, 1999/a, p. 5). In this respect, the State has a very important role to play. 
It should be kept in mind that globalization does not have the same impact everywhere
and that its effects vary according to domestic conditions, in particular to whether a coun- try has in place adequate institutions. Therefore, to label globalization in absolute terms as either a totally positive or negative phenomenon is a reductive approach. It should not be demonized nor sanctified, nor should it be used as a scapegoat or a panacea for all the major problems that are affecting the world today.
In this context, "what we need is a better un- derstanding of how to translate our values into practice, and how to make new instru- ments and institutions work more effective- ly" (UNEP, 2000, Annual Report, p. 1). This now brings to the fore important questions. What is the role of the State in a globaliz- ing economy? How is globalization affecting the role and functioning of the State? Have the reforms aimed at reducing the role of gov- ernment and reshaping State bureaucracy in many developing countries helped them to seize the benefits of globalization? What in- stitutional structures and policies are best suited to cope with globalization? What are the responses that States, as well as re- gional and inter-governmental organizations have provided and can provide for the future in order to cope with the many challenges glob- alization is posing? These issues are ad- dressed in the following chapters.
 
Chapter II
The impact of globalization on the State
1. How is globalization affecting the role and functioning of the State?
M
setting and regulation and, therefore, con- sultation and formal negotiations on a glob- al or regional scale. Many of the problems af- flicting the world today - such as poverty, enuch discussion and debate in today's policy fora are being devoted to the theme of glob- alization and its impact on the
State. Scholars and policy makers have ex- pressed concern regarding the role of the na- tion-State in the new millennium, and its ca- pacity to adapt to and manage effectively rap- id change as well as to respond to the many challenges of economic and social interde- pendence. In particular, two issues are be- ing increasingly addressed: whether global- ization is weakening the role of the State and whether it will eventually lead to the end of State sovereignty. This chapter explores both topics, and analyzes why some countries have benefited from globalization while oth- ers have lagged behind.
1.1. The role of the State in domestic and international governance
The lifting of trade barriers, liberalization of world capital markets, and swift technolog- ical progress especially in the fields of in- formation technology, transportation and telecommunications, have vastly increased and accelerated the movement of people, in- formation, commodities and capital. Corre- spondingly, they have also broadened the range of issues which spill over the borders of na- tion-States requiring international normvironmental pollution, economic crises, organized crime and terrorism - are in effect transnational in nature, and cannot be dealt with only at the national level, nor by State to State negotiations. As the Secretary-Gen- eral of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, de- clared: "No State and no organization can solve all these problems by acting alone. Nor how- ever, should any State imagine that others will solve them for it, if its own government and citizens do not apply themselves whole- heartedly to the task. Building a twenty-first century safer and more equitable than the twentieth is a task that requires the deter- mined efforts of every State and every indi- vidual" (UN, 2000, Millennium Report, A/54/
2000, para. 369). 
Greater economic and social interdependence seems to affect national decision-making processes in two fundamental ways. It calls for a transfer of decisions to the international level and, due to an increase in the demand for participation, it also requires many de- cisions to be transferred to local levels of gov- ernment. "This implies that public policies are undertaken at different levels" (Sul- brandt, 2000, p. 3). Thereby, globalization en- tails complex decision-making processes, which take place at different levels, name- ly sub-national, national and global, paving the way to a growing multi-layered system of governance. 
 The fact that cooperation and regulation are required on many levels as a consequence of the complexities and transnational nature of present world issues has led a number of schol- ars to predict the "end" of state power. Some argue that the State may only adjust to globalization, but not have an active role in it. Some believe that the State will become obsolete. Ohmae, for example, suggests that "nation-States are no longer meaningful units in which to think about economic ac- tivity ... In a borderless economy, the units that do make sense are ... region states" (Ohmae, 1995, p. 132). 
Despite the many concerns about the loss of sovereignty, the State remains the key actor in the domestic as well as international are- nas. The popular assumption that the emer- gence of global civil society, and increasing levels of cross-border trade, finance and in- vestment flows turns the nation-State into an anachronism is wrong. In the international arena, closer cooperation and concerted ac- tion among States represent an exercise of State sovereignty. Such concerted action does not necessarily weaken States; rather, it can strengthen them by making the external environment more stable and by giving them greater scope to expand their exchanges in a variety of fields. Moreover, globalization with- out effective and robust multilateralism is bound to lead to crisis because markets are neither inherently stable nor equitable. The many "challenges that we confront today are beyond the reach of any State to meet on its own. At the national level we must gov- ern better, and at the international level we must learn to govern better together. Effec- tive States are essential for both tasks, and their capacity for both needs strengthen- ing" (UN, 2000, Millennium Report, A/54/
2000, para. 15). We need to remember and fully appreciate that the entire edifice set up for global governance is currently under- pinned by nation-States and driven by the initiatives which they undertake.
In the domestic arena, the State assumes a great number of functions which cannot be performed by any other actor and will not be less relevant in a globalized world. Such
functions include safeguarding peace and security within and outside national bor- ders; providing justice; ensuring the respect of minority rights; formulating and imple- menting policies; providing public goods; en- suring social stability and welfare; and reg- ulating and arbitrating the market.
Since its birth, the State has guaranteed in- ternal and external security; underpinned the law; funded national welfare systems; pro- vided the structures for popular representation; instituted public accountability; and built the framework for economic and social activities (compromise between the public and pri- vate sectors). During the last century, the re- sponsibilities of the State have expanded in all these areas. "The need to supply collec- tive public goods, to manage externalities and to provide for minority needs will persist even in a world of expanded globalization" (Jones,
2000, p. 268). There is no evidence that glob- alization will reduce the relevance of such func- tions. If anything, it makes them even more necessary. 
Thus, the image of a borderless world in which the State has little or no relevance is in many ways misleading. As a matter of fact, two realities co-exist. One is the so called bor- derless virtual world where geography does not count, and communication and business transactions can occur in a matter of seconds. The other world is that of the everyday life of people in which borders still count, local realities are still complex and very different among themselves, and most fundamental- ly where social and economic problems still need to be addressed. "The State will persist because the need for the State has grown, but also because the local resource pools and so- cioeconomic problems on which States are based are undiminished" (ibid., 2000). 
Only the State can guarantee, through in- dependent courts, the respect of human rights and justice, promote - in tandem with other actors - the national welfare, and pro- tect the general interest. Its role is also fun- damental in operating the intricate web of multi-lateral arrangements and inter-gov- ernmental regimes. It is still States, collectively or singly, that set the rules of the game, that enter into agreements with oth- er States, and that make policies which shape national and global activities, and the agenda of integration; though this is true in principle, in reality the problem of inadequacy in capacity of individual States has become clearly pronounced. This means that some States have more political leverage in shap- ing the international agenda whereas others have a less active role, as is the case for many developing countries. 
Moreover, as pointed out in Part Two of this Report, globalization does not reduce the size of the State in terms of expenditure. Ev- idence suggests that the countries that have embraced globalization, are also those which register higher rates of public expenditure. The argument that globalization produces a reduction of the Welfare State and therefore a cut in social spending is not supported by evidence. On the contrary, as discussed fur- ther on, an intelligent, democratic State is needed to redistribute the benefits of glob- alization and to minimize the costs that some segments of the population may bear.
To put it more simply, globalization may re- quire that the State improve its capacity to deal with greater openness, but it does not seem to undermine its sovereignty or its fundamental role within the national and in- ternational landscapes. To be sure, the State remains central to the well-being of its citi- zens and to the proper management of so- cial and economic development. The State is also responsible for adopting policies which are conducive to greater economic integra- tion. We should not forget that further glob- al integration can be reversed by state poli- cies inimical to openness, as occurred between the two World Wars. Globalization does not reduce the role of the nation-State, but re- defines it given the pressures and respons- es it must give at the local, national and in- ternational levels. It has modified the mean- ing of sovereignty but not undermined it. 
Experience shows, however, that globaliza- tion does not affect all countries in the same way. In general, and as recently experienced,
if it is true, for instance, that the negative externalities of a financial crisis in one re- gion of the world affect other regions around the globe, it is also true that some countries suffer more than others because they lack the capacity to contain the adjustment costs of globalization. In order to understand what accounts for these differences, it is crucial to explore what administrative reforms have been implemented around the world in recent years, and whether they have strengthened state capacity to ensure that the benefits of globalization are evenly spread among the population.
1.2. The role of the State in 
multi-layered governance
"Globalization pressures, including economic integration, fiscal discipline and democrat- ic governance, have forced governance in- stitutions to redefine their role of universal provider as one that encompasses the roles of catalyst, enabler, gatekeeper, consensus- builder, mediator and negotiator. As such, glob- alization has led to the development of new roles, relationships and partnerships among government, citizens and business, and heightened the influence of the public on gov- ernance policies and institutions. Citizens are achieving greater input into government de- cision-making; central governments are de- centralizing to local government levels; and governments are partnering with civil soci- ety and the private sector in the delivery of programmes and services. Many examples in- clude: government-sponsored national poli- cy consultations, local service delivery schemes, joint decision-making councils, and other innovative partnership arrangements" (UN, 2000, ST/SG/AC.6/2000/L.6).
Increasingly, the State is called upon to act as linking pin of processes of planning, con- sultation, negotiation and decision-making involving diverse players, State and non- State, at different levels of governance. It is the hub of activities connecting multiple partners and stakeholders from very varied fields, activities, regions, cultures, professions and interests. Adding to the complexities of bringing these together, is what may be de 
 scribed as the decline of traditional author- ity structures and the decreased effectiveness of the old top-down command. The differen- tiation of needs, technologies, skills, ideolo- gies and interests has carried in its trail a wide diffusion of power on almost every lev- el. The compact, monocratic pyramidal structures, which constitute the legacy of XVIII century thought no longer represent the prevalent reality of the contemporary world of public administration. These structures cer- tainly do not sufficiently respond to its con- cerns and cannot meet its needs in an effective, timely and user-friendly fashion.
Moreover, as already stated, the State will increasingly need to function on three lev- els:
 The sub-national level, as a result of a process of devolution of functions to local level gov- ernment structures, or even non-State actors operating within bounds established by the State and under its supervision; 
 The national, or central government lev- el; and
 The international level, where an entire ed- ifice set up for global governance is slowly taking shape, but is clearly underpinned by nation-States and driven by the initiatives which they undertake.
In this respect, the State will need to establish specific bodies, which can be entrusted with ensuring an effective network among these different levels, and to possess the necessary skills for multi-layered governance.
2. Redesigning the State in the 1980s and 1990s
In recent years several countries have im- plemented a number of reforms in their pub- lic administration which, in many cases, have improved their position to properly function in a global context as indicated in the regional perspectives. Nonetheless, the underlying indispensable element of im- proving human resources and strengthening
State capacity have not received the same at- tention as economic liberalization.
The reforms initiated in the mid 1980s with the support and leadership of the Bretton Woods institutions introduced a new public administration paradigm and macro-eco- nomic policy framework. These reforms sought to reduce the role of the State in pro- duction, as well as in service delivery and to encourage the deregulation of public enter- prises. The emphasis was on maintaining macro-economic stability, lowering inflation, cutting deficit spending, and reducing the scope and cost of government. The reforms relat- ed to the functioning and role of the State in the economic sphere, have in many in- stances, produced positive results. The pri- vatization of public enterprises producing goods and services has reduced the role of the State in areas where the private sector has often shown to be a better alternative, with the exception perhaps of basic services of in- frastructure where the State has an intrin- sic responsibility and interest (e.g. law and order, including prisons, courts, public safe- ty, among others). In the developed world, the end of State monopolies in many areas has resulted in greater competition, lower prices and wider choices to the consumer. 
On the administrative side, New Public Management (NPM) and reinventing gov- ernment have been effective tools in im- proving the efficiency of the public sector and in reducing costs. Notwithstanding some of the positive results derived from these reforms, the retreat of the State in social areas (health care, education, housing) has been detri- mental for many developing countries. Un- der pressure from structural adjustment programmes, which were aimed at achiev- ing economic stability (by reducing hyper-in- flation, reducing the budget deficit, etc.), many States chose to cut back programmes particularly in the social area. Perhaps a bet- ter solution would have been to seek to im- prove tax collection or increase sources of in- come through equitable taxation. Just by at- tacking non-compliance and fraud in tax collections, many developing countries could have dramatically increased their income. However, that would have implied a strong po- litical will in favour of such measures and also the existence of effective public admin- istration systems, as well as greater capac- ity which many countries lacked. 
The lessons of experience have shown the lim- itations of the structural adjustment pro- grammes and pointed to the need of broad- ening the agenda of public sector reform. It has become apparent that macro-economic adjustment and stabilization were not suf- ficient to address the fundamental problems in governance and public management, which were of a political and institutional na- ture. What is more, the net effect of these ad- justment policies has been a regrettable neg- lect and further serious weakening of strate- gic institutions, notably the civil service, in countries where the process of "building the State" was still incomplete. The errors of these ways are currently, if belatedly, gaining in- creased recognition. 
To make globalization fully viable and accepted world-wide the drawbacks in the social area must be corrected, and this implies rein- forcing state capacity. Opening up to the global economy brings costs and benefits. Some gain and some lose by either improving their lot or losing their jobs. The more effective and confident a State, the more it can focus on compensating losses caused by globalization and technical change. The absence of an ef- fective public administration can often con- strain States from participating in the glob- al economy because they fear the adverse ef- fects of globalization on vulnerable segments of the population. The reform of public serv- ice would give States a better opportunity to globalize. A strong, democratic State and globalization go hand in hand. 
past two decades originated in the West- minster-system countries (Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and Canada) and the United States, which may rightly be considered as the foremost exponents of NPM. This wave of reforms first started in the UK in 1979 with the electoral victory of the Conservative Party, which produced a ma- jor agenda shift towards reducing the role of government in the economic life. The elec- tion greatly altered the status and range of items on the government agenda and this, in turn, forcefully brought public management issues onto the governmental agenda (Barzelay, 1998).
Because of their importance, capacity for outreach and technological prominence, the Westminster-system countries have exerted collectively a considerable influence on ad- ministrative developments worldwide. These countries are exceptional in many ways. They are all highly developed, demo- cratic, stable and prosperous. They share a common language and, in spite of their dif- ferences, a core of common values and tra- ditions, which have profoundly marked their administrative systems. They also share a com- bination of attributes and benefits that many other countries still manifestly lack. Home-grown in this environment, the pop- ular "New Zealand" model was soon adopt- ed widely in this group of countries and has since been exported to other parts of the world with varying degrees of success. There is no
The anatomy and impact of NPM and related State reforms in both the developed and de- veloping countries are briefly explored below in order to give a more clear picture of its merits and drawbacks in helping developing countries to meet the challenges of the new millennium.
Many administrative reforms that have
 
shaped the international policy agenda of the
 denying the merits and the considerable in- fluence of this model during the past two decades. To a greater or lesser extent, all of the countries concerned experienced an ero- sion of confidence in government during the
1980s and early 1990s. Where once the pub- lic welcomed or at least acquiesced in gov- ernment initiatives, the mood gradually swung in the opposite direction. A number of factors accounted for this change of atti- tude towards government and its role in the economic and social sphere. The first was a response to the global recession, which be- gan in the mid 1970s, and was predicated on ideas fundamentally hostile towards the State (Sulbrandt, 2000, p. 34). The second fac- tor, which was related to the first, was the need to reduce unnecessary costs and ineffi- ciencies.
The rising costs of government and of the pub- lic budget coupled with inefficient services, led to strong criticism of the State as producer of goods and services. The burden of social welfare, as the population aged, produced a transformation in attitudes. This was artic- ulated by the New Zealand Minister of Fi- nance in her 1991 budget speech: "The re- design of the welfare state is integral to our strategy for growth ... The only sustainable welfare state is one that is fair and afford- able. Our current system is neither. Real wel- fare is created by people and families through their own efforts. Our redesigned wel- fare state will support those efforts and as- sist those who cannot assist themselves" (Boston, Dalziel and St. John, 1999).
Often couched as a critique of "bureaucracy" and "big government" this new approach portended a veritable shift of paradigm re- garding the role of the State and the discharge of its functions. The reforms which it en- gendered sought to reduce the scope of the State, eliminate its role as producer of goods and services, downsize the public service, pro- mote deregulation and decentralization, and recast the role of government especially as regards service delivery, macro-economic governance, and the private sector. Re- markably, what started as a policy to cope with growing budget deficits and cure rampant inflation during the 1980s developed in- to a campaign "to roll back the State". This was defended on moral and ideological, as well as pragmatic grounds. The mounting costs of social programmes in Western European and other industrialized countries led to doubts on the wisdom and sustainability of post Second World War welfare pro- grammes. 
The need to enhance efficiency in the pub- lic sector and to cut public costs was ac- companied by a series of measures, includ- ing privatization, deregulation, and the in- troduction of market-like mechanisms in the public sector. The broad appeal of these concepts is nothing less than staggering, and although, to be sure, the measure of suc- cess varies from country to country, the ex- tent to which the principles themselves have been accepted may be taken as indicative of a worldwide trend. This trend may have been influenced by the convergence of val- ues in which multilateral agencies, the me- dia and civil society have played a part. It has been manifested in the uneven but ob- servable decline of traditional authority structures; the flattening of hierarchies; and the pressure from the people to have a voice and for that voice to count. 
Four very common targets of reorganiza- tion of the State have been implemented in many countries and advocated around the world: privatization and deregulation, mar- ket-like mechanisms, decentralization, and debureaucratization.
2.1. Privatization and deregulation
In a pattern replicated in several States, sub- stantial cuts in benefits were attempted, and steps initiated to privatize delivery of pub- lic welfare services, including education and health care, but also experimenting with private courts and prisons, and private po- lice forces. In New Zealand and elsewhere, shrinking the social programmes was only part of a much broader design of limiting the State through decentralization, devolution and transfers of power. Privatization and various forms of outsourcing were added in an attempt
to reduce public employment and, in this man- ner also, the burden of taxation. "Privatiza- tion included both industries previously seen as 'strategic' (such as steel, coal or airways) and utilities where there was previously a presumption of natural monopoly (such as gas, electricity and telephones). The privatization of the water companies and of the railways marked the high water mark of this process in the UK" (Ferlie, 1998, p. 6).
Potentially far-reaching have been reform pro- posals developed under the label "law and eco- nomics". The overriding purpose is to promote efficiency and maximize the creation of wealth. This is pursued by eliminating laws imposing restrictions on business and by re- ducing the penalties that corporations pay for negligent behaviour. Inspired, to a large extent, by lawyers and economists of the University of Chicago, the thrust of these pro- posals has been to circumscribe the role of government, restrict government spending, replace progressive income tax with a flat rate tax, and otherwise arrest and/or reverse a trend that neo-liberal economists - otherwise called "supply-siders" - trace to the Great De- pression, the New Deal and the effects of two World Wars (Clark, 1998).
2.2. Market-like mechanisms
"Where core functions (often social policy functions) were not privatized, a range of mar- ket-like mechanisms were introduced to mimic the effects of the market. This would include periodic market testing of services (such as groups within the civil service) against in- vitations to bid from outside contractors. It would also include attempts to set up inter- nal market mechanisms within health care, social care, education and even university set- tings, although these experiments reported mixed success" (Ferlie, 1998, p. 6).
2.3. Decentralization
Decentralization has been another very sig- nificant reform of the State which received a boost from the decline and fall of military dictatorships and totalitarian regimes, for which centralization and tight controls had
represented conditions of survival, or key con- stituent elements of their ideological basis. In these countries, the quest for more democracy has been coupled with attempts to abandon a highly centralized, tightly con- trolled, often paternalistic and authoritari- an bureaucratic system in favor of one ex- emplifying the merits of individual initiative and citizen participation in the affairs of government. "Almost by definition, a high- ly centralized system of government is less democratic than one in which there is a net- work of local and regional authorities com- plementing the national authority with clearly delineated powers and responsibili- ties" (UNDP, 1997, Regional Bureau for Eu- rope and the CIS, p. 23).
In Western Europe, specifically, the tenden- cy away from centralized control received a powerful boost from the process of integra- tion into the European Union. In an attempt to address and resolve the problem of dis- tribution of functions and resources among the several layers of government, the Euro- pean Union elaborated a principle which is very simple but clear. The principle of sub- sidiarity plainly states that every function must be assigned to the lowest level at which it can be discharged effectively. This means in practice that any decision to allocate a func- tion or responsibility at a higher level must be capable of being defended or explained on grounds that it could not be done effective- ly at a lower level.
2.4. Debureaucratization
"Debureaucratization", often through re-en- gineering and deregulation, has been a pre- ferred strategy in pursuit of efficiency. Con- cerned with promoting cost-consciousness, ef- ficiency and effectiveness in the public serv- ice, NPM was also geared to affirm the rights of private citizens as consumers and clients vis--vis state organizations, which too often have been marked by closure, out- datedness and paternalistic indifference to the wishes of the public. In all the countries concerned, transparency, accountability and public service integrity have made a power- ful comeback. In part, this has been due to
 
 pressures from the public to put an end to a tradition of secretiveness and obscurantism, which has long been associated with the ethos and the practice of bureaucracy. The stress on accountability has been linked to an effort to bring policy and administration back to the source - the citizen - to whom it belongs, and to account for efficient expen- diture of public funds. In other words, there has been an effort to bring government clos- er to the individual citizens, making it more intelligible, as well as more accessible, clip- ping away its prerogatives, cutting its staff down to size, empowering the public and widen- ing the latter's choices. The right of the pub- lic to know and even to be involved in the de- sign and practice of public policy has been reaffirmed. This is a development whose im- plications have only been apparent in recent decades. Such also is the objective of the re- lated re-engineering. Its quintessential method has been defined as follows: "Ques- tion everything; throw out all perceived as- sumptions and conventional wisdom; look for breakthrough strategies; focus on customers, radical change, nimble organizations and information technology" (Kettl, 1995, p. 41).
The focus on radical change, nimble organ- izations, as well as customers' preference is unmistakable. It must be emphasized, how- ever, that some of these approaches have al- so been embraced by movements of reform, in several parts of the world, which have been left untouched by the reinvention tide.
This development, however, not unlike the parallel trend towards privatization and out- sourcing, did not come without its risks. There is some reason to fear that merging the two spheres - private and public - might help create a world in which the public good might no longer remain the paramount ob- jective. Allied to this consideration was con- cern over what NPM, with its accent on re- duction of centralized procedures, might bring in its wake: greater emphasis on out- puts, separation of purchasing and providers' roles, the development of con- tractual mechanisms of accountability and departure from lifetime career employment (Hood, 1991). For a time, some of those
trends were criticized "for opening the door to the re-politicization of public administra- tion, retreating from the traditional norms of public accountability by impeding politi- cal oversight of the bureaucracy, and allow- ing the possible incursion of administrative corruption, should public managers realize
... that they could secrete their own wrong- doing. Public propriety should not be sacri- ficed on the altar of economic efficiency, nor should more businesslike public adminis- tration be allowed to breach the common law duty to act fairly in making administrative decisions which affect legitimate rights, in- terests and expectations" (Caiden, 2000, p.
12).
3. New Public Management and its main tenets
The outcome and legacy of New Public Man- agement or "reinventing government" - its Northern American variant - have been rather mixed, but its influence persists. This has been demonstrated at several global fo- ra, where it has been accorded considerable salience. Thus, in its invitation to the 2001
Annual Conference in Athens, the Interna- tional Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration introduced the Confer- ence theme "New Trends and New Tech- niques: Implications for Education and Training" with the following commentary on the role of NPM: "The New Public Man- agement is an example of globalization at work. It has promoted a powerful technological revolution, and diffused a set of values among the public services of nation-States, sub-national units, international and supra- national bodies. Across all these spheres of governance, it has re-vitalized the identity of public administration as a profession and scholarly discipline. It has helped to alter the balance of power within administration, as well as between officials and civil society. It provides an object lesson about the nature and effects of globalization on governance in the opening decade of the twenty-first cen- tury" (IASIA, 2001, Annual Conference).
NPM and "reinventing government" have greatly enriched the language of management with several new terms and graphic ex- pressions. Here are some of the most current:
 Results over process;
 Downsizing, now "rightsizing";
 "Lean and mean";
 Contracting out, off-loading or outsourcing;
 Steering rather than rowing;
 Empowering rather than serving; and
 Earning rather than spending (Freder- ickson, 1996).
Manifestly, NPM is destined to continue to exert a measure of influence on administrative developments. Arguably, this influence may go beyond the sphere of methods and tech- niques into the realm of values. It is bound to play a role in the ongoing attempts to ad- vance the cause of good governance, notably in the least developed countries. It is important, therefore, to understand the context, the strengths and the limitations of NPM in or- der both to reap the full yield of its benefits, but also to avoid repeating the mistakes of earlier attempts to spread its principles to different parts of the world.
3.1. Let the managers manage
"Let the managers manage" has been the move- ment's slogan. Simple, direct and catchy, this motto, often coupled with the related apho- rism that "management is management", exerts a strong appeal. The need for flexibility and freedom to maneuver, which these state- ments convey, makes some sense in a world where changes and discontinuity have become facts of life; where rigid structures are viewed as things of the past; and where adaptability, creative problem-solving and rap- id response to contingencies are sine qua non conditions of survival and success. It must be pointed out, however, that criticisms of rules have often served as a subterfuge to brush
aside or undermine important institutional and legal safeguards in areas of vital concern to vulnerable segments of the population. It is not accidental that the rise of manageri- alism has frequently coincided with attacks on organized labour and attempts to curb its influence. 
The quest for cost-effectiveness through nov- el styles of management and forms of or- ganization has also given prominence to a mod- ified profile of the good public manager. The profile is not new, but has immensely gained in currency and popularity since the publi- cation of Osborne and Gaebler's bestseller on Reinventing Government (1992). In this and other writings, the "entrepreneurial manager" is lionized, in contrast to the stereotyped and maligned conventional "bureaucrat". The profile is consistent with the promotion of a new prototype: hard-nosed and business- like, but also proactive, creative, focused on tasks, results-oriented, but friendly to the pub- lic. Of course, this is the antithesis of the in- different, overly cautious and rules-addict- ed bureaucrats, stereotyped by the proponents of reform. However, to suggest that these are representative of anything but a minute pro- portion of today's public servants, especial- ly in the countries to which the critique was addressed, could hardly be considered a fair and accurate statement.
Style and language shaped the substance to produce a powerful message, which claimed to address the issues of the XXI century. Here are some of its main tenets:
 Emphasis on results; stress on performance measurement, monitoring and evaluation;
 Accent on cost reduction and hence on "cutback management", reflective of con- cerns in a period of recession;
 Insistence on the need to shrink the scope of government;
 Promotion, to that end, of privatization, out- sourcing or off loading, and decentraliza- tion of state-provided services and other government functions considered non-es- sential;
 
  Focus on core competencies and top priority tasks;
 Devolution of decisional responsibilities, as far as possible closer to the end user; 
 Partiality not only for practices and meth- ods, but also for the language and values of the private sector, partly in an attempt to "de- bureaucratize" public administration, but mostly on the assumption that, in some cas- es, the private sector can provide cost-effec- tive services and enhance competition;
 Consistent with that theory, "client- ori- entation" and designation of citizens as "val- ued customers";
 Emphasis on "empowerment" of users and stakeholders, and "participative management".
3.2. Empowering citizens
"Empowerment" of the citizen also forms a major plank in the managerialist platform. It is hypothesized that citizens around the world are chafing under burdensome bu- reaucratic rules, which restrict their range of options and access to quality services (Frederickson, 1996). It is assumed, accord- ingly, that privatization, outsourcing of pub- lic services and debureaucratization are av- enues that lead not only to greater citi- zen/consumer satisfaction, but also to more freedom and more complete democracy. In oth- er words, "managerialism" has pitted "rules- bound administration" against the more ef- ficient entrepreneurial, "results-oriented" management. "Public administration" is swiftly being replaced by the more trendy "management" in many schools' curricula and even the vocabulary of public organiza- tions (e.g., human resources management).
3.3. New responsibility mechanisms
New responsibility mechanisms were de- signed, public servants were assigned "direct responsibility for their conduct, not merely a derivative responsibility through their minister and parliament" (Spigelman, 1999, p. 7). Significantly now, accountability covers
omissions as well as commissions, i.e., fail- ure to act in order to stop a wrongdoing. "A whole new range of mechanisms has come into force to review and correct the deci- sions of public administrators, thereby end- ing the defence of compliance with instruc- tions or merely \0x2018following orders'. Indeed, this newly emerging doctrine of administrative responsibility goes well beyond the bounds of public administration to the broad field of governance" (ibid, 1999, p. 9).
3.4. Introducing business principles into public affairs
The underlying assumption that "manage- ment is management" casts doubt on the va- lidity of any major difference in the manner in which public affairs and private enterprise ought to be run. Where a parting of ways has been perceived as plausible, the "manageri- alists" suggest that public affairs be conducted, as far as possible, on business principles. The premise that all management is grounded in economics has also correspondingly obscured the important role that law, psychology, po- litical theory, ethics and other social sci- ences must play in both the study and prac- tice of public administration/management. A focus on the evils of government monopoly combined with "bureaucracy bashing" have signalled the transition from public admin- istration to public management. A senior research fellow of the Cardiff Business School explained the change of paradigm in the following terms: "In contrast to public ad- ministration, the new paradigm is concerned with the economics rather than the politics of service provision, emphasizes government failure rather than market failure, and is skep- tical about the capacity of bureaucracy to pro- vide services efficiently and effectively" (Boyne, 1996, p.679).
The belief that "management is manage- ment" and private sector practices are superior to the public sector's is not exactly new. It is possible to trace it back to the XIX cen- tury. From Scientific Management to Total Quality Management, many performance improvements and related reforms had their source in private industry. However, NPM and
the reinvention movement have carried this idea one step further, arguing "that govern- ment should not only adopt the techniques of business administration, but ... also adopt the values of business" (DeLeon and Dern- hardt, 2000).
3.5. Downplaying the concept of
"public service"
Drawn to their logical conclusion, public choice and its derivatives "have tended to re- ject concepts like \0x2018public spirit', \0x2018public serv- ice' and so forth" (Kamensky, 1996). The im- plications are far-reaching. On the prag- matic level, this has led to major reforms in New Zealand, the UK, the USA and other coun- tries. The thrust of these reforms has been to separate political advice from policy im- plementation, thus also re-establishing the old and much maligned policy administration dichotomy. However, more fundamentally, these measures have purported not only to redraw the boundaries, but also to alter the purposes of the civil service profession. In- deed, it might be fair to ask whether the very concept of a "public service profession" makes any sense to the advocates and dis- ciples of public choice.
3.6. Promoting professional ethics in the public sphere
Revisiting and redefining the ethical di- mension of the public service profession has been a major facet of NPM reforms, which have been taking place in a number of coun- tries. Everywhere, the civil service appeared to be in the process of losing its former co- hesion and even its sense of identity. The agen- da for reform purported to recast the mould of public officialdom, "putting the people first", and to radically transform the style of public management.
Putting the people first did not merely entail bringing the government closer to the public it served. It meant treating people as valued customers, rather than as charges. It also sig- nified making government officials "less re- mote and more responsive", but also less "bu- reaucratic" and more "entrepreneurial", or results-oriented (Caiden, 2000). To achieve these goals, the Government in the UK adopt- ed a strategy whose keystones were inclu- siveness and integration. Its programme has been centered on five commitments: 
 "Policymaking: we will be forward-looking in developing policies to deliver results that mat- ter, not simply reacting to short- term pres- sures.
 Responsive public services: we will deliv- er public services to meet the needs of citi- zens, not the convenience of service providers.
 Quality public service: we will deliver ef- ficient, high quality public services and not tolerate mediocrity.
 Information-age government: we will use new technology to meet the needs of citizens and business, and not trail behind techno- logical developments.
 Public service: we will value public serv- ice, not denigrate it" (ibid.).
3.7. Performance management
Emphasis has been placed on performance management and inspection. Four princi- ples for performance management and in- spection have been advocated:
 "Encourage a whole systems approach: We will put the focus on assessing improve- ments in the effectiveness and value for money of a whole system, such as the crim- inal justice system, not just in its constituent parts.
 Move from counting what goes in to assessing what is being delivered: We will keep a tight rein on the management of resources. But we also need to know what is being achieved with the money spent. The targets for government departments, as far as possible, are ex- pressed either in terms of the end results or service standards, and we are working to de- velop measures for all levels of government which support this approach.
 
  Intervene in inverse proportion to success: The government is not afraid to take action where standards slip, but we do not want to run local services from the center. Where serv- ices deliver results, we will give them greater freedom to innovate.
 Use the right information at the right lev- el: We want managers to use performance measures to monitor and improve their or- ganizations. We do not want them to feel swamped by information overload or bu- reaucratic requests for irrelevant data. We will use new technology to take a more streamlined approach to managing infor- mation in the public sector" (ibid, p. 37).
Consistent with this approach was a new stress on measuring and monitoring performance in the public service. This can be found in all Westminster-system countries, albeit with cer- tain differences. 
In Canada, for instance, it has been predi- cated on the belief in the need for strong pol- icy capacity and non-partisan professional- ism as the essential preconditions of quali- ty performance and quality service delivery. By contrast, in New Zealand, a more radical approach, based on NPM precepts, de-coupled service delivery from policy advice, and em- ployed non-tenured executives, performance contracting and annual purchase agree- ments (Davis, Sullivan and Yeatman, 1997).
However, it is probably in the United States that standard-setting, benchmarking and emphasis on measuring, monitoring and evaluating performance have been devel- oped the most during the past decade. A bold step in this direction was taken in the form of the Government Performance and Re- sults Act of 1993, by which Congress has pre- scribed consultation and planning to identi- fy agency and programme goals and annu- al reporting on performance. Joseph Wholey has described the intentions and purposes of the new performance-based management system as follows: "The required planning and performance measurement, and the possibility of increased managerial flexibility in return for accountability of results, are intended to
improve management, improve programme performance, improve accountability, sup- port policy decision making, and improve pub- lic confidence in government ... With minor exceptions, federal agencies' strategic plans, annual performance plans and annual per- formance reports are and will be public doc- uments." (Wholey, 1999, p. 293).
3.8. Performance budgeting
Over the years, what has emerged in this process is a major reform of the 1990s, namely performance budgeting, which is a concept linking performance information with budget. Much still needs to be accom- plished to clarify and strengthen the links between planning and budgeting structures, and presentation in performance planning, measurement and cost accounting. Key chal- lenges include continued lack of credible and useful performance information, difficulties in achieving consensus on goals and meas- ures among various stakeholders, dissimi- larities in programme and fund reporting struc- tures, and limitations of information and ac- counting systems. 
When viewed collectively, these past initia- tives suggest three common themes: 
 First, any effort to link plans and budgets must explicitly involve the legislative branches;
 Second, the concept of performance budg- eting will likely continue to evolve. There is no single definition that encompasses the range of needs and interests of federal decision-mak- ers; and 
 Third, performance budgeting cannot be viewed in simplistic terms. In most cases, re- source allocation cannot be mechanically linked to results. 
Ultimately, the promise of any performance budgeting initiative lies in its potential to in- fuse performance information and bench- marks into budgetary deliberations, thereby changing the terms of the debate from sim- ple inputs to expected and actual results (US, GAO, 1999, GAO/AIMD/GGD-99-67, pp. 4-5). 
In summary, the "efficient", "managerial" State, advocated and implemented in several countries - especially in the Anglo-Saxon world - has focused on efficiency in the be- lief that procedural and structural reforms make it possible to have a government that works better and costs less. This approach projects the State as the object of reinven- tion ("reinventing government"), which im- plies re-engineering the civil service struc- tures. Although efficiency is extremely rel- evant, it cannot be the only guiding princi- ple of State action, and it must always be bal- anced with considerations of public interest. Efficiency must be seen as a means to im- prove State activities, not as its ultimate goal. 
4. Regional perspectives
The reforms which have been widely advo- cated in the past two decades in many parts of the world, have produced different re- sults across the globe. What started as a re- form movement to cure high public deficits, reduce the excesses of the Welfare State and modernize the public sector in the West was soon applied to other regions of the world, which had a very different set of historical, political and cultural experiences. It may be said that two different worlds co-existed. One was the world of the rich nations whose population had ample access to education, health services, clean water, unemployment benefits, and social security. The other one was the world characterized by abject pover- ty with a lack of education, no access to health services and a lack of basic infra- structures to deliver social services. In oth- er words, one had in place adequate institutions and conditions for specific reforms whereas the other lacked the basic infrastructures and pre-requisites. Reducing the role of govern- ment and cutting spending on education and health services did not produce the same results in countries which already had substantial levels of education and good health systems in place and in countries which, to begin with, did not have such con- ditions. 
In trying to redress economic and social problems many developing countries looked at - or were induced by financial institutions to do so - how developed countries were tack- ling rampant public deficits, economic crises, etc. Thus, they went directly to "how-to-do- things", namely to new managerial ap- proaches, without the solid institutional, so- cial basis already in existence in the devel- oped world. This is why one of the most em- inent proponents of the managerial State in the developing world and one who understands its relationship with the development process, namely former Brazilian Minister Bresser Pereira stated that: "If the propos- al of a minimum State is not realistic, and if the basic factor behind the economic cri- sis is the crisis of the State, there is only one possible conclusion: not to whither with the State, but to rebuild it" (Bresser Pereira, 1998).
If one aims to adopt managerial reform as a way to improve the performance of the pub- lic sector and its capacity to service the cit- izens, one must ensure that the basic con- ditions for the operation of a managerial public sector exist. Otherwise one would have a tool without the necessary political and social conditions which would enable this tool to work successfully. Let's briefly see how the past reforms have affected the different regions of the world.
4.1. Western Europe
It is worthwhile noting that in Western Eu- rope privatization, deregulation, de-bu- reaucratization and decentralization have been carefully managed and coordinated with the goals of the Welfare State and the provision of social services for all. In fact, policy mak- ers in the region have devoted much energy to find ways to reconcile their acquired so- cial structure and benefits with fiscal frugality, efficiency, and greater participation as well as innovation. Thus, it might be said that West- ern Europe has been trying to reconcile their pro-active social policies and strategies (namely, "the what-should-the-State-do"), with new ways to implement these policies (namely, "the how-to-do-it").
 
 There can be little doubt that national ad- ministrative and civic cultures in Western Eu- rope have been profoundly marked by shared traditions, legacies and institutions, some indeed going far back to the days of the Roman Empire. Of these, the Etat de droit, the bureaucratic model and a penchant for legalism and centralization, more pro- nounced in some countries than in others, stand out. These are now called into question in the form of ongoing reforms, which, predictably, present commonalities and differences. Strategies for reform try to avoid the errors of the past, leading governments to take a segmented approach to reform, that is to say to attempt the change of institutions in rel- ative isolation instead of seeking to address the modernization of public administration from a global perspective. Excessive reliance on form, and the letter of the law, and a cor- responding failure to address the substance in order to produce effective change in prac- tice, may represent another legacy which Eu- ropean Union countries share and which they now endeavour to correct.
This shift away from the past is not unre- lated to the influence of managerial think- ing on policy development and administra- tive practice in most Western European countries. It has been manifested in the adoption of new practices, but also in a change of values. Everywhere, increasing reliance on "outsourcing" goes in tandem with rethinking of past methods of recruit- ment, administration and career development of public servants. Everywhere, there is more emphasis on "output over process", "lean government", "value for money" and "cus- tomer orientation" (Timsit, 2000).
This shift in orientation has been accompa- nied by parallel moves in the direction of de- centralization, deconcentration, and priva- tization, as well as other forms of devolution of power which, taken collectively, repre- sent a marked departure from the strongly centralized, and rather paternalistic State ad- ministration of former days. An increasing emphasis on openness has also come with more reliance on networks, both national and in- ternational, and partnerships with nonState actors, including private firms and other civil society entities.
In the process of reform and the means em- ployed for this purpose there is pronounced convergence. This has been especially sig- nificant in budgetary processes and the re- orientation of civil service policies, chiefly in the direction of mobility, performance pay and incentives for efficiency and effectiveness. There has been renewed emphasis on the im- portance of professionalism and profession- al ethics, and measures have been taken to safeguard the citizen/consumer from mal- administration and the abuse of power.
Such convergence of residual differences among the several partners of the European Union is noteworthy. These differences are apparent on at least two levels: approaches to globalization and administrative culture. More than their opposite numbers in the "an- glo-saxon" countries, the governments and peoples of continental Western Europe are conscious of the adjustment costs related to globalization. The problems and the down- sides of these trends and developments should not be overlooked: they include job in- security, and for some groups, feared dete- rioration of the physical environment. Such dangers and such challenges point clearly to the importance, the core functions and the leading role of the State through its public administration. 
It is interesting to note that while the Eu- ropean Union predates the recent spread of globalization, its institutions and policies have been an excellent tool in taking advantage of the opportunities of globalization. The European Union is the most elaborate regional system of transnational integration. For some observers, the variety of economic and security arrangements represent an ad- vanced form of globalization, but for others, they represent a way to limit the effects of globalization, i.e., a way of combining pow- er and authority to contain and manage global forces through cooperation, which would be impossible to do for individual States. Some believe that such integration weakens national sovereignty, while others see the European Union as the rescuer of the nation- State, particularly the smaller ones, for which it is difficult to survive in a world of large groupings and organizations.
4.2. Eastern and Central Europe
In barely a decade, the countries of this re- gion have attempted a triple transforma- tion from a single-party State to a pluralist democracy; from a centrally planned econo- my to a free market economy, and from sub- ordination to independent statehood. Few had the wherewithal or an "institutional memo- ry" commensurate to this task. Not surpris- ingly, the pace and particular modalities of this transition process have differed from coun- try to country. Significantly, however, one is able to detect many shared characteristics, which suggest a common pattern of political and social change. These features include far- reaching deconcentration and decentraliza- tion, and the emergence of distinct spheres of economic and political life and privatiza- tion. Related to the above, was the overall purpose to restore and to reinforce respect for the rule of law.
This was no easy task. Reform had to con- tend with understandable, but still damag- ing anti-State attitudes. The transforma- tion process depended for success on support from the public sector, which was at once the target and agent of reform. This called for careful strategies combining structure with flexibility, continuity with change. In spite of the complexity of the process and the dis- tinctive patterns which emerged in particu- lar countries, it is possible to distinguish four major phases in the transition process:
 Transformation: overhauling the old struc- tures;
 Consolidation: in the measure that the "shock therapies" and "big bang" approach- es lost their appeal, design for the long- term, capacity reinforcement and imple- mentation of critical policies became in- creasingly important;
 Modernization: the quest and need to adopt "best practices" characterized this stage; and
 Adaptation to the standards and practices of the world community, and adoption of the tenets of the acquis communautaire, for those countries which aspire to join the Eu- ropean Union.
While, in the initial period, the overall con- ditions were characterized by volatility, the end of the decade brought with it indications of growing consolidation in most of the coun- tries concerned. This was especially true of the political sphere, where the process of in- stitutionalization of a framework for demo- cratic governance may be considered almost complete, and the outline of a new pluralis- tic political order is becoming increasingly ev- ident. 
A similar assertion may be applicable to the economic sphere. While the economic policies still face numerous hurdles, the structural foundations of the new market economies have slowly begun to emerge. After nearly a decade of experimentation, the countries of the region are still searching for a model of economic development. Most of them are grappling with economic stabilization and re- structuring. Significantly, however, the ear- lier unconditional support for neo-liberal principles has been replaced by more dif- ferentiated and cautious approaches. For the public sector at large, in the new mar- ket economies, the prospects for reform on the basis of pragmatic and realistic objectives appear substantially improved. "However, the tasks ahead are demanding, particularly in light of conditions for accession to the European Union and the Council of Europe, which re- mains a major goal for several regional States" (Palankai, 1995).
Far more than the political and economic con- texts, the overall social predicament con- tinues to be problematic. Continued unem- ployment on a substantial scale, increase of absolute poverty, crime and widening in- come disparities are some of the downsides which the transition process has carried in
 
 its trail. Cutbacks in social expenditures, and privatization have meant that social bene- fits have either been scaled down or have dis- appeared altogether. With social safety nets visibly disintegrating in many countries, in- dividuals are confronted with the pressing need to make major personal adjustments in an environment which is rapidly changing in fundamental ways. On the positive side, by contrast, one can emphasize the emergence of a new triangular relationship between State, society and the individual, together with the rise of an active civil society.
A difficult transition has demonstrated the critical interdependence of economic per- formance, institutional stability and social- ly sensitive policies; all three are very im- portant, though it might well be argued that economic performance conditions the success of the other two. In the last analysis, how- ever, one-sided reform processes can be counterproductive. Experience shows the dangers of top-down shock treatments and "big bangs" as ways of bringing change. "Ex- ternally-induced" reforms likewise have proven risky. Such was the case, for in- stance, of the "supply-led" approaches pro- moted by some international lending insti- tutions, which focused on economics but tended to neglect the social, institutional and legal dimensions of change.
Countries are now beginning to rely more on "internally-induced reforms", in the measure that they have come to recognize and develop their potential for reform in this particular domain. This, of course, does not rule out for- eign advice and assistance, but puts them in a new perspective. One of the limitations of foreign assistance, which soon became ap- parent, was that it overlooked the problems and complexities of implementation, especially in a turbulent context. Experience demon- strates the importance and priority of build- ing domestic capacity. Progressive rein- forcement of the necessary legal and insti- tutional bases, modes and forms of public ac- tivity, as well as human resources, may be the better way to proceed and to accommo- date the criteria of the acquis communautaire, for those countries who wish to do so.
In all too many cases, uncritical adoption of "Western" forms and standards has clearly not availed the countries of Eastern and Central Europe, and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). This was exemplified by decentralization and deregulation re- forms, which resulted in confusion, over- lapping jurisdictions and fragmentation of the local government landscape. When the dearth of professional competence at the lo- cal level especially is also taken into ac- count, it should be easy to surmise why re- ality lags behind the normative ideal. Another case in point is the tacit, unavowed, yet widespread "one-size-fits-all" concept that often went together with the notion of "glob- al convergence" (Hesse, 2000, p. 19).
"Only now is it being recognized that, with- in the environments of Central and Eastern Europe, \0x2018rowing', as well as \0x2018steering' is need- ed to keep the boat afloat, as even the most attentive steering is conditional upon the day- to-day success of those implementing public policy. To go even further, the rigid introduction of business approaches in public adminis- tration, as advocated by New Public Man- agement, may well prove disastrous in [still unstable] systems based on a continental Eu- ropean tradition, where either the preconditions may not be in place yet, or where they are rejected due to the inherent logic of the ap- proach. Particularly problematic is the all too limited ability of over-rigid management systems to cushion the impact of unre- strained market behaviour. To copy specific administrative cultures seems no answer to the problems at hand" (ibid., p. 20). In ad- dition, only recently the need for civil serv- ice legislation has begun to receive the at- tention which it deserves. This is one area where the requirements of EU accession have helped and where external assistance could prove especially helpful.
4.3. Asia
Attempting to condense, in a few pages, the administrative experience and history of re- form in Asia is an impossible task. Of all the world's regions, Asia is at once the largest, most populous and most diverse. Accordingly, the quest for overall patterns and gen- eralizations is often fraught with dangers. Com- monalities and differences exist, but must be viewed with caution and interpreted with care.
Perhaps one commonality of East and South Asia that singles these sub-regions out is a long and strong tradition of government au- thority and state administration. Both regions also, but China especially, have known the negative outcomes of the collapse of gov- ernment. In China, the country with the oldest administrative heritage, a bureau- cratic culture goes back, almost without in- terruption, to the Qin dynasty (221-206 BC). Competitive examinations tied to the merit principle represent the legacy of the Han dy- nasty, which reigned from 206 BC to 220 AD. It gave birth to the idea of a bureaucratic elite
- the mandarin class - in the service of the Emperor and of the State. Over time, this con- cept exerted a strong catalytic influence in the region and beyond.
British-governed India exemplified the suc- cessful application of this "elite" idea in ad- ministrative reform, which in the XIX cen- tury produced the Indian Civil Service in tan- dem with a centralized, monolithic, stratified and strictly hierarchical administrative structure. In spite of profound transforma- tions after the Second World War, some of these traits and institutional legacies survive, and have been replicated in many of the countries of South Asia.
East, South and Southeast Asia emerged from the Second World War and its tumultuous aftermath deeply changed. East Asia and Southeast Asia were the scene of costly and protracted civil strife or wars of national lib- eration. In South Asia, independence came, almost overnight, with a massive flow of refugees, perhaps the largest exodus of peo- ple the world has ever seen. The difficult tasks of rehabilitation and nation-building were further complicated by manifold divides of lan- guage, caste, religion and creed. In spite of all these problems, Asia as a whole experienced in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s a veritable trans- formation, on a monumental scale, affecting the lives of close to a half of humankind.
In this process of reconstruction and socio- economic development, varying models were applied. In India and Pakistan, a federal struc- ture of government and parliamentary democracy with commitment to the Welfare State were preferred. In China, Vietnam, Cam- bodia and Laos, by contrast, communist vic- tories took these countries to the path of so- cialist construction. Still, in almost every case, the State and central government were called upon to play a very major part in the development effort. Pervasive intervention through central planning mechanisms (e.g. five year plans) became the accepted strat- egy for modernization and agro-industrial growth.
Overall, the results of this drive were im- pressive, but the benefits to people in the coun- tries concerned uneven. South Asia, on the whole, performed less well than East or South East Asia. During the last three decades of the XX century, the per capita in- come of East Asian nations, excluding Japan, increased about four times compared to South Asian countries. With an average in- come per capita of only US$ 309, the latter con- stituted, in 1993, the poorest sub-region on earth, the comparable figure for Sub-Saharan African being US$ 555 (Haq, 1997, p. 33).
Though progress has been made on some fronts in a number of countries, this has seldom been the case of public administration where, generally speaking, Western solutions have proved counterproductive or have not produced the hoped-for results. The latest of these at- tempts at "externally-induced moderniza- tion" is NPM. The main planks on its plat- form, according to Dwivedi, are sound: accent on results; service to the public; delegation of authority; greater attention to cost and the quest for efficiency, notably through the adoption of private sector practices, such as "contracting out", and merit pay. What he ques- tions, however, is the NPM's market-driven rhetoric and "reductionist approach": "This paradigm is based on the premise that, by reducing the opportunities for incompetence and corruption, through narrowing down the scope of government activities, a competent, transparent, effective and accountable gov 
 ernance would emerge. The rationale ap- pears to be that, with less bureaucratic structures, there would be only a few bu- reaucratic problems. Thus Asian nations, as well as other developing nations are being urged to have market-friendly governance and administration. And since the field of de- velopment administration is posited more as a problem than a solution, New Public Man- agement, in the garb of development man- agement, is recommended as a cure-all med- icine" (Dwivedi, 2000, p. 9).
Of course, this does not mean, for Asia or oth- er regions, wholesale rejection of the prem- ises or precepts of NPM. Such a course, ac- cording to Dwivedi, would be not only unwise, but also impractical. We live in an age of in- ternationalization and global interdependence. For the developing countries, including many in Asia, this means continued reliance, to a large extent at any rate, on methods and technologies developed in the West. It can- not be overlooked, on the other hand, that reform approaches are seldom value-free. "Thus one emerging pattern, with global im- plications, is centered on the ideas of efficiency, the market and the myth of achievement, which are hallmarks of the Western, specif- ically American administrative culture" (ibid, p. 20). Its merits notwithstanding, this administrative culture tends to neglect im- portant political, social and legal dimen- sions. Its solutions are limited in face of the critical concerns, which continue to bedevil many developing countries. 
In Asia overall, but in the larger countries especially, a strong State has been able to har- ness to its advantage the winds of change, diminish the costs of adversity and steer the course of reform. Although it is an over- simplification to talk about a set of distinc- tive Asian values, certain traits and mental attitudes have helped in this regard:
 First, in Asia there is less mental resist- ance to State intervention compared to parts of "the West", because Asia has a long posi- tive experience of the administrative State. Whether in South Asia (where the State is viewed as Ma-Baap - parents), or in East Asia
(where the States' proactive role helped the Asian Tigers achieve a remarkable econom- ic progress), the State is popularly viewed as having a major responsibility for socio-eco- nomic development. The Western approach for a leaner, meaner and market-friendly state administration may be given lip-serv- ice; however, the state apparatus is not go- ing to be downsized and emaciated, as hap- pened in parts of "the West";
 Second, there are some countries in the re- gion that view Western culture as based on an extreme form of individualism; thus var- ious attempts by the West to impose its val- ues, in the name of liberal democracy and su- premacy of the market are seen as yet an- other neo-colonial attempt to "modernize" Asians. From their perspective, the values which seem most important to "the West" are less momentous worldwide. By contrast, the notion of duty and community supporting fam- ily needs, respect for authority, and consen- sual decision-making (specially in East Asia) are rooted in Asian culture; and
 Third, despite the display of Western-ori- ented formal bureaucratic and political fea- tures of governance, the style of doing busi- ness will probably remain at variance with Western models of governance.
4.4. Arab States
A somewhat specific situation developed in the Arab States of Western Asia and in the North--African part of the Arab region. In mod- ern history, the Arab States, with the exception of Morocco, was a part of the Ottoman Em- pire for more than four centuries. The French and the British colonial powers, un- der whose hegemony the geo-political borders of most Arab countries were drawn, suc- ceeded the Ottoman rulers. Most of the Arab countries achieved independence after the Sec- ond World War, although the struggle con- tinued until 1962 in the case of Algeria and
1967 in the case of Aden. This sequence of events has had a substantial impact on the political, economic and cultural life in the Arab societies. The concept of the State and the role of the state institutions (legislative and
executive bodies, the judiciary, and military and security forces) were influenced by the Ottoman and colonial experiences. 
At the moment of independence, the state struc- tures in some Arab countries embraced the republican form of government. This happened in Algeria, Egypt, Lebanon, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Yemen, and later in Iraq and Libya, where republics emerged. In other Arab countries the traditional forms of government
- monarchies - persisted. Very different ide- ologies underpinned these systems of gov- ernance. None has delivered all the basic hu- man capabilities, though no one denies huge progress in several basic social development indicators throughout the region.
One of the hallmarks of the situation in the Arab States is that by and large, the preferred method of attracting support from the peo- ple that has been practiced for decades by the governments is not through expansion of political participation, but rather by distri- bution of rewards. External sources of income controlled by the governments (i.e. in the form of oil revenues, deposits of remittances, in- come from tourism, foreign aid, borrowings, and fees imposed on the transport of oil) en- abled them to make available to the key groups of population a vast array of servic- es and benefits, at little or no cost. The same external income sources allowed the Arab gov- ernments not to pursue vigorously the col- lection of taxes from citizens. Indeed, direct taxes on incomes, profits, and capital gains in the Arab States were among the lowest in the world.
The outside boundaries of this arrangement are becoming more and more visible. With the end of the Cold War, some external sources of income have dried up. The real price of oil is not necessarily increasing, at least, by far not at the rate that is able to meet the growing expenditure bill. Increased internal taxation, reduction of public employment as well as curtailment of basic services and subsidies is starting to hit the urban middle class -- by far the most vocal group of the pop- ulation. Higher levels of education and the demonstration effect of different political
arrangements are leading people to question some features of this situation. Participation in the community is becoming a value in it- self, regardless of the role it plays in the greater scheme of things.
However, finding a remedy in such situations is neither quick nor easy. Since the 1970s, the course of events has brought adjustment to the functioning of many Arab govern- ments. The political systems began to open up in a way that has appeared to promise a significant revival or introduction of demo- cratic practices. Whether this has happened in the form of increased political participa- tion and alteration of power within the gov- ernance institutions, or in the form of an in- creasingly active civil society working to en- large the public space and defend basic free- doms -- all these events have been most en- couraging steps. 
While the process of reform is progressing slow- ly and has problems of its own, government reform has appeared on the agenda of many Arab countries. However, in view of the tra- dition of a ubiquitous State, a weak private sector and the existing backlog of human ca- pabilities (e.g. education), especially in the less affluent Arab countries, the State does not appear to be stepping back from its tra- ditional role. In these circumstances, the emphasis in these countries is on increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of its opera- tions.
4.5. Africa
It has been rightly said that, for Africa as a whole, the 1950s and 1960s were years of po- litical and economic advances, the 1970s years of relative stagnation, and the 1980s were years of decline or the "lost decade". The
1990s have been a mixed bag. (Kiggundu,
2000). Gains in Uganda, Ghana, South Africa and Mozambique were largely offset by losses in the form of civil wars, human rights abuses and state disintegration in Somalia, Angola, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Rwanda and the Congos (ibid.).
 
 The unparalleled severity of these repeated crises has served both to highlight the press- ing need for action in public service reform, and to illustrate the perils of hastily conceived and poorly executed blanket solutions to problems which, far from being a cure, quite often, on the contrary, aggravated the disease. Such were the Structural Adjustment Pro- grammes (SAPs) pursued by lending institu- tions during the 1980s, in an attempt to ad- dress the problems generated by the global re- cession, low commodity prices and the ensu- ing indebtedness of several African nations.
A negative approach, which viewed the pub- lic service chiefly as an impediment to pub- lic sector reform, had prompted the downsizing of both its staff and scope in country after country. This tendency has been arrested. The focus has now shifted from retrenchment and downsizing to capacity-building for ef- fective resource management and quality service delivery, financial accountability and efficient government. This new emphasis on capacity throws light on the paradox of re- form. The greater its complexity and scale, the more demanding the claims for individ- ual skills and institutional strengths which are required to make reform effective. Added to the issue of competencies of public insti- tutions is that of legitimation, which to this day remains particularly real in several African countries. It is against a background of very mixed results of past reforms that re- cently demands have been advanced for a "smart-government" approach to public sec- tor reform. According to Moses Kiggundu, the key components of "smart government" in- clude the following:
 "Introducing a broader and long-term ap- proach to reform relating it to the role of the State;
 Linking civil service reforms to such com- ponents as financial management, decen- tralization, sector-wide approaches, etc.;
 Adopting a long-term, system-wide pro- gramme approach to civil service and pub- lic sector reform;
 Undertaking strategic mobilization and utilization of scarce resources (financial, hu- man, institutional, technological, information, political, etc.);
 Selectively introducing NPM ideas and practices to Sub-Saharan African development administration;
 Persuading donors to avoid a "one-best-way" approach to reform and to embrace instead a home-grown creative mix of approaches, best suited to individual countries" (ibid.).
A few countries have taken initial steps and moved towards the concept of "smart gov- ernment" by beginning a consultative process, articulating a national long-term vi- sion and strategic framework for development. It appears, however, that for most of Sub-Sa- haran Africa, the promise of public sector re- form remains largely unfulfilled. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine how the public serv- ice will be reformed on a lasting basis with- out substantial improvements in governance at large: integrity, accountability, trans- parency and adherence to the rule of law, as well as the capacities and competencies needed to sustain them (ibid.).
Adoption of holistic, multi-faceted reform strategies; closer coordination of macro-eco- nomic management with public sector reform; and the involvement of civil society in this process represent the common traits of new constructive approaches, which reflect some of the lessons learned as a result of the SAPs pursued during the 1980s.
It cannot be overstressed that credible reforms, and programmes that galvanize broad-based support, must visibly address the really crit- ical problems, which touch the lives of mil- lions. In Sub-Saharan Africa, such burning is- sues include: how to cope with the AIDS epi- demic; the deficit in health care, education and social welfare services; and an inadequate or deteriorating physical infrastructure of roads, transportation and communication networks, electricity supply, sanitation and clean water.
Yet another set of problems represents the tragic legacy of years of civil strife, the de- cline of law and order, even the collapse of States, which characterized the 1980s and
1990s. Most problems have a human face: mil- lions of refugees and internally displaced per- sons; half a million or more child soldiers, phys- ical insecurity, and rampant crime and oth- er forms of anti-social behaviour.
It is futile to expect efficient markets, let alone healthy societies, to emerge where such con- ditions prevail. Redressing this situation calls for concerted action of the State and civ- il society on many areas. It calls for demo- bilization, demilitarization, re-education and training of former fighters and other victims of war; post-conflict confidence-building in mul- ti-ethnic or otherwise heterogeneous societies; support for restoration of regional security and conflict management systems; and the overall reinforcement of institutions (Kaldor,
1995). All of the above demand initiative and leadership, policy-planning, design and skillful implementation on an extensive scale. In turn, these call for strengthening the core of the State, as well as the difficult task of reinforcing, modernizing and re- forming the public service. 
As pointed out already, retrenchment and downsizing had been the goals of reforms dur- ing the 1980s and early 1990s. The outcome sought, was to reduce the government's wage bill which, in a number of countries, represented as much as 75 per cent of the op- erating budget. This was no easy task, con- sidering the importance of government em- ployment for most African countries, where government remains the single largest em- ployer. This notwithstanding, a longitudinal study prepared by the Department of Eco- nomic and Social Affairs of the United Na- tions in 1992 cast a very different light on the issue of public employment. This study of civil services in 10 African countries re- vealed that cost and size are labels for deep- er concern, which barely address the issue of public sector effectiveness. When set against the need to offer basic services, en- sure law and order, collect revenue and maintain the infrastructure, few of the countries concerned were found to be overstaffed. The vast majority of public servants were en- gaged in trying to meet the above essential requirements. Significantly, moreover, their numbers had not grown since 1980.
The study also found that, in the majority of cases, public servants did not earn a liv- ing wage. Accordingly, the government was unable to compete on the market for high lev- el skills, and equally incapable of enforcing the requisite performance standards at the other end of the scale, even though there was no shortage of the relevant skills. In sever- al African countries, governments were con- fronted with the difficult challenge of a pub- lic service at once understaffed and overstaffed: understaffed on the top management and pol- icy-advisory levels; overstaffed as regards mes- sengers and lower level clerks (ibid., 2000, p. 9). The study recommended that public sec- tor reform should concentrate on quality and focus on profiling and planning for the needs of the XXI century, rather than per- petuate the legacy of a distant colonial past. Capacity reinforcement is the common thread that runs through current pro- grammes of public service reforms in a num- ber of African countries. Other than train- ing activities, these programmes have en- compassed a number of initiatives ranging from administrative records-keeping - which seek to eliminate ghost workers - to per- formance bonus payment, and making civil servants more responsive to citizens' needs.
Democratization, decentralization, devolution of responsibility, service delivery improvement and local government reform have been ma- jor components of the public service reform drive undertaken by governments. Other important dimensions have been: a ma- chinery for the redress of grievances and han- dling of complaints, and the promotion of best practices, professionalism and ethics, job classification and grading, staff perform- ance appraisal, human resources development, and leadership development. Priorities have differed and the degree of success has obvi- ously not been the same in all the countries concerned. Available evidence indicates that the results of reform are mixed at best. 
 
 Though economy and efficiency have osten- sibly been in the forefront of public service reform, such broader considerations as hu- man rights, the rule of law and citizen par- ticipation have recently made headway on the agendas of reform. These concerns go to the core of the nation-State idea, the concept of sound governance, and the role of civil soci- ety, among others. Ideally, the objective is help- ing to create an enabling environment of re- spect for private property, entrepreneurship development and democratic government to allow people to take advantage of globaliza- tion.
As a process, democratization implied polit- ical, constitutional and administrative reforms. To those ends, many francophone African coun- tries convened national conferences with a view to discussing constitutional reforms leading to multi-party elections. Constitution- al commissions were established in some countries, paving the way to pluralistic elec- tions. Experience demonstrates the com- plexity of the process of democratization, highlighting the critical role that national his- tory, culture and institutional infrastruc- ture play. Hence the importance of activities and projects designed to develop institu- tional capacity and competencies in the management and operation of democratic struc- tures (e.g. national assemblies, political par- ties, the administration of justice, and audit institutions). The role of civil society has been highlighted in sector-wide approaches to public sector reform. 
Looking to the future, the experience of re- form in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) points to the many complexities of what visibly remains a risky undertaking. It also has been made apparent that there are no shortcuts, no quick fixes, no magic blanket formulas. In Sub- Saharan countries, current prevailing con- ditions are seldom conducive to effective re- form. In some cases, institutional weakness compounded by poverty, unemployment, cor- ruption, low levels of education, and religious or ethnic divisions can effectively under- mine the best intentions and derail the en- tire process of reform. One of the most dis- turbing factors militating against progress
in the right direction is the relative weak- ness of Sub-Saharan Africa in relation to the rest of the world. "Its share of global trade, capital flows, investments, technology, knowledge employment, and overall influence is declining or stagnant. Individual SSA countries have practically no voice in or- ganizations such as the World Trade Orga- nization. No SSA country is a member of G8, and apart from South Africa, none was in- vited to join the newly-formed G20. "Fur- thermore, Africa's diplomatic institutions are so under-resourced and badly organized that they are not in a position to defend the region's interests in the complex and fast chang- ing globalization" (Kiggundu, 2000, p. 34).
Continuing dependence of many LDCs in Sub- Saharan Africa on foreign multi-lateral and bilateral assistance is one of the visible man- ifestations of a pervasive weakness, which cannot go away overnight. The real challenge will be that of developing institutional and strategic capacities, not only for today's but also future needs. However, important as those needs are, capacity reinforcement means more than technical training and modern- ization of equipment. Developing the re- quired core entails enhancing skills, as well as cultivating new attitudes, beliefs and habits, and the institutional frameworks that make them come alive. Governments should focus on strengthening public ad- ministration, leadership skills, strategic management, operational efficiency and rap- id response to the stimuli of a complex and dynamic external environment.
4.6. Latin America and the
Caribbean
A region of stark contrasts, Latin America and the Caribbean shared with Africa the ef- fects of the slump in the world economy, which began in the mid 1970s. For Latin Amer- ica, as well as for the African continent, the
1980s have aptly been described as the "lost decade". Massive debt, increasing poverty and the growth of unemployment, informal sec- tor employment, corruption and organized crime were phenomena that often marked it, and have not gone away (Sulbrandt, 2000,
p. 4). Thus, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean reported in 1980 that 35 per cent of the people in the region lived below the poverty line. Only 10 years later, the proportion had increased to 41 per cent, with 18 per cent below the absolute pover- ty level. By 1997, a slight improvement could be reported, with 36 per cent of the popula- tion below the poverty line (ECLAC, 1998). Poverty is multi-faceted. It comes with un- employment, which in the 1980s exceeded 10 per cent of the active population. Its effects are often compounded by the deterioration of basic social services. Both health and ed- ucation suffered a major decline in that decade overall.The impact of these trends has been unequally felt in the region. In some coun- tries the aged, women, children and the na- tive populations, in general, were among those worst hit. Although an upward move- ment began in the mid 1990s, it has not touched appreciably the lives of the most vul- nerable. Besides, in the field of employment, more than half of the new jobs have been in the informal sector, a pattern also observable in Africa. As in Africa, responses to these trends in Latin America have featured the divesti- ture and downsizing of the State. Not sur- prisingly, however, the practices have differed from country to country, as has their degree of success. 
In the Latin American region as a whole, the
1990s have been marked by substantial re- forms of the State, in the following directions: 
 Democratization; 
 Debureaucratization; 
 Reduction of the scope of State interven- tion; 
 Privatization and "marketization".
At the height of the Cold War, in the 1960s,
1970s and even part of the 1980s, few would consider the Latin American region as a haven of democracy and freedom. What fol- lowed in the past decade has been nothing short of a sea change. Pluralistic regimes and governments resulting from free elections 
replaced military dictatorships from Guate- mala and El Salvador to Chile and Argenti- na. Concurrently, growing distrust in the models of development of the early post Sec- ond World War produced a revolution in statecraft and public management. Thro- ughout Latin America, the prolonged economic recession brought to the fore new doctrines which substantially transformed the hitherto generally accepted objectives and modali- ties of state intervention. The role of central government increasingly underscored the need for the maintenance of macroeconom- ic stability, the process of deregulation, trade liberalization and reduction of the scope of public administration. To some extent, those shifts and policy reforms reflected a con- scious attempt to adjust and to respond to perceived conditions in a globalized econo- my.
Deregulation and debureaucratization went hand in hand with a process of decentralization, and the devolution of power to lower levels of government and actors in civil society. Debureaucratization has taken many forms. Though traditional practices and norms die hard in many places, a paradigmatic shift is gradually transforming a hitherto closed, inward-looking, rules-bound and formalistic administration into a more open system, that seeks to be responsive to citizens' demands, accepts the current challenges of globaliza- tion and technological progress, actively looks for partnerships to accomplish its ob- jectives in close collaboration with private sec- tor groups or other non-State actors, and aims at value-for-money.
It is needless to emphasize that such a transformation is still more in the making than palpable reality, more potential than ac- tual. One of the greatest obstacles in the re- quired transition from closed to open systems, in response to globalization and technologi- cal progress, lies in the continuing difficul- ty of governments to attract, retain and de- velop the new profile of manager and policy adviser, in short the new public servants that new conditions call for.
 
 Significant, in light of these conditions, is the practice of developing Units of Policy Analy- sis in the Office of the President or similar establishments, like the Secretariat of the Pres- idency in some countries. Their task has been defined as that of analyzing and mak- ing recommendations for action in the different sectors of policy, weighing in this regard suggestions that may come either from civ- il society or the line Ministries.
It may be pointed out that, as in other re- gions, retreat of the State has been held in part responsible for not shielding people from the negative effects that accompany glob- alization. The Chilean sociologist Andres Opazo summed up the negative aspects of the situation in Latin America in a UNDP report:
 Concentration of knowledge and wealth in the hand of small elites, whose priorities take of- ten little cognizance of "the plight of the millions";
 Continuing growth of spending for military purposes and "privatization of weapons", corruption, and drug trafficking;
 Deterioration of the environment; and
 Economic growth unaccompanied by a growth of employment; thus adding to dis- parities in developed and developing coun- tries alike (UNDP, 1997, Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean).
Opazo concluded that the economic growth of Latin America not only lacked the "capacity to distribute", but also failed to generate sufficient accumulation. The effects of those trends, in his view, were apparent on the po- litical, social and administrative levels. "The social abyss which fragments the region is particularly clear in the large urban centers. The organization of the habitat is a faithful reflection of the trend toward the disintegration of society. The minority that concentrates the wealth is secluded in veritable paradises ... Their gardens are well protected by private security, their social life takes place there, they go to their own supermarkets, and they go to equally conditioned and protected lo- cations on vacation. Perhaps more significantly,
they have another type of paradise available, the world's tax havens, which constitute genuine safe deposit boxes for the wealthy. In other areas, well-differentiated and with- out contact with the previous world, the mass of the population survives, living in fave- las, tugurios or barrios populares, with ba- sic shortages, where informality predominates, drug addiction and crime proliferate, and the family disintegrates. Informality in the area of the work force generates isolation and competitiveness in the struggle for an always precarious subsistence. The effect is the loss of the worker's traditional dignity. The or- ganizations that previously provided identity and self-esteem to those workers have declined quantitatively and qualitatively" (Opazo,
1997, pp. 103-104).
This creates a chasm and a disconnection be- tween two worlds: one of the super-rich; the other of precariousness, poverty, exclusion and ignorance is seen by many critics as essen- tially the product of a reductionist vision which potentially is destructive of culture, social cap- ital and democracy itself.
Some observers maintain that the Anglophone Caribbean countries are faced with a para- dox; while some celebrate the triumph of democracy, others, by contrast, lament a sharp decline in governance. The sustainability of good governance in the region was raised in 1992 by the West Indian Commission on "Social discontent"; it noted that, "in the wake of structural adjustment programmes, no sense could be made of the democratic tra- ditions West Indian societies have zealous- ly cultivated" (West Indian Commission,
1992, pp. 493-494). In this regard, the Com- mission drew attention to the mood of grow- ing cynicism, normlessness and powerless- ness among the youth of the region. The Commission concluded: "It is perhaps time that we went a step beyond platitudinous state- ments to the effect that youth represent the future of the Caribbean." (ibid., pp. 378379).
One may conclude that there are now no threats to democracy. However, the "credibility gap" that afflicts the institutions of government in much of Latin America and the Caribbean has its source in their failure to meet people's aspirations and to respond to new expectations. Perceptions of such rele- vance, integrity and effectiveness, and the pub- lic sector's capacity to deliver public servic- es of an acceptable quality form a necessary basis of government legitimation on which the vitality of democracy depends. 
Nevertheless, it can be recognized that the overall picture is not entirely negative. De- mocratically elected governments are now the rule in the region, and a process of regional integration and greater economic openness is taking place, real or perceived shortcom- ings notwithstanding.
5. Lessons Learned
What lessons can one learn from progress and success recorded in some countries, but al- so admitted failures experienced in others? What can one do to avoid repeating past mis- takes? And lastly, can one pull the threads of experience together and try to understand what countries need to do in order to bene- fit from globalization?
A systematic review and comparative analy- sis of lessons learned from the experience of the past two decades is long overdue. This systematic review and performance evalua- tion of policies and programmes should cov- er both the substance of the proposed reforms and the methods or modalities of their im- plementation, as well as both the principles and strategies of recommended actions and the delivery systems employed by donor agencies.
Mostly in the 1980s, but also in the early 1990s, "cutback management" was offered as the uni- versal remedy and the market was advocated as the better way. Outsourcing, privatization and partnerships were actively promoted and implemented. These approaches did lit- tle to make a dent in the poverty and inequality that persist in many developing countries. A growing sense of the urgency to address the issue of poverty has been reflected on the
agenda of the Third United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries held in May
2001, which linked the eradication of pover- ty to the promotion of good governance. How inequality of power and wealth impacts on the prospects for democratic governance is a related problem that must also be ad- dressed. Polarization between the extremes of poverty and wealth, power and power- lessness does not create conditions in which convergence of values becomes a possibility. A shared-values system underpinning the process of governance and administration, na- tionally and internationally, also becomes prob- lematical. In the absence of such underpin- nings, extremes may drift apart. Slowly but surely, a process of vilification of the "other side" begins, preempting all meaningful di- alogue. Gradually, coercion and repression be- come the rulers' response to what they per- ceive as a threat and define as lawlessness. 
This may be already happening in a num- ber of countries. The trend has been de- scribed in by Loic Wacquant as the passage from the Welfare State to the "Penitentiary State" (Le Monde, 7 December 1999). Such perils notwithstanding, tolerance of in- equality has been a signal feature of policies pursued in several parts of the world during the past two decades.
In barely two decades, the "reinvention" movement and NPM have set the tone and contents of the discourse on administration and government in ways that sharply con- trast with the course of its development dur- ing the major part of the XX century. The pro- ponents of these tenets were able to carry their message literally throughout the world. There can be little doubt that this measure of success is due, to some extent, to the con- gruence of their postulates with some of the critical issues facing a number of governments in the wake of a global recession. It is equal- ly certain, however, that this measure of success owes much to the English language, in which the message was couched, and to the messengers' capacity for outreach. The thrust of their advocacy has underscored the importance of the three E's of manage- ment: economy, efficiency and effectiveness
 
 (Harlow, 2000, p. 3). The butt of their critique has been the world of "bureaucracy" but, in the last analysis, government intervention predicated on Keynesian economics and the New Deal ideology. 
Nevertheless, there is something to be said in favour of this new approach. It has reaf- firmed the rights of the individual citizen against a paternalistic and often overbear- ing, invasive State; a role for civil society, in the broad scheme of governance; decentral- ization and devolution of power against the opposite tendencies of control and command from the top; latitude for initiative and ex- perimentation; and freedom to move without preemptive barriers. In spite of limitations that have become apparent over the years, NPM and "reinvention" produced some "val- ue added" in several parts of the world, in- cluding developing countries. On the opera- tional level, their distinctive contribution has challenged one to question many tradi- tional practices and modify old ways. The strength of the proponents, it might well be said, has lain in the simplicity of their ap- proach and message. The approach has been direct, intentionally practical and cost-ef- fective. The focus on economy, efficiency and effectiveness has been of help. These values have been widely diffused through the tech- niques of audit, which also opened ways for a broader, more pervasive and radical approach to the appraisal of performance in public or- ganizations, the quest for alternative meth- ods of public service delivery, as well as tighter controls intended to promote and safeguard integrity. 
Many best-known reforms and innovations, which broadened the diversity of organiza- tional structures, can arguably be traced to an all-encompassing concern for cost-effec- tiveness. "Off-loading" and "outsourcing", "re-engineering" and "performance con- tracting" are terms which represent a new problematique, and, in a number of ways, a radical new approach toward the public sec- tor. Not surprisingly, the "pluses" are often coupled with "minuses". On the upside, the new stress on "financial management initiative" may jolt senior executives and civil servants
at large into a more acute awareness of their responsibility for the proper deployment and use of resources in their care. On the down- side however, there may be a certain danger of sacrificing quality and equity to expedi- ency, and of seeking short-term gains at the expense of long-term losses in the strength and credibility of vital institutions. There is a latent risk of fostering an attitude of mind according to which the ends justify the means. In the words of the former Director of the Royal Institute of Public Administration of the United Kingdom, "to misquote Oscar Wilde, it looks as though tomorrow's Whitehall man- ager will know the cost of everything, but the value of nothing" (Plowden, 1985, p. 408).
The dominance of economics in both the lan- guage and logic of NPM has been manifest and pervasive. It is best exemplified by the prominence accorded to the market paradigm. Thus, the State must "steer not row"; gov- ernment administration is "lean and mean" at best; citizens are consumers. The market metaphor has value insofar as it draws at- tention to the limits of State intervention, re- spect for the taxpayer and responsiveness to citizens. But the analogy stops there. Con- temporary democracy is hardly a marketplace in any sense of the term. Citizenship is a birthright or is acquired through a legal process of naturalization. Equal participation in democratic processes is predicated on in- dividual rights enshrined in the constitution or other legal enactments. In theory, at any rate, no distinctions in this respect can be coun- tenanced. By contrast, the cash nexus gov- erns a customer's access and relation to the market. The measure of his or her worth is strictly purchasing power. While both buy- ers and sellers may select one another ac- cordingly, by contrast a citizen's access to serv- ices provided by the government is based on rights and needs. An intelligent democratic State is clearly not at liberty to favour or dis- criminate. It would be fair to argue, thus, that whatever its other merits, the market par- adigm has serious limitations when it comes to public management in democratic societies. The paradigm does little to highlight two of the cardinal values of democratic gover- nance: equality and inclusiveness. 
Notwithstanding the merits, what has become apparent is the manifest disparity and strik- ing disconnect between "working reality and formal doctrine" of NPM and related ap- proaches (Barberis, 1998, p. 451 et seq.). The disconnect is traceable to inherent con- tradictions between professed objectives and an eclectic creed which formed the under- pinnings of NPM. It would be fair to argue that, contrary to claims advanced on its be- half, NPM is not so new, and not so public- oriented, and is so riveted on economics (and the 3 E's) as to frequently lose sight of the rich contextual substance and cultural di- mension, which give the practice of man- agement distinct characteristics in each par- ticular case. 
5.1. Failure to take into account history, local institutions and cultural variables
In spite of the belief implicit in the assertion that "management is management", such practice differs widely according to the en- vironment within which it is set. Failure to accord such differences due weight con- tributed substantially to erroneous policy transfers and "supply-led" reforms, often by international organizations, which "were ... unduly biased towards the economic ration- ale of the reform and overlooked basic legal and institutional adaptations" (Hesse, 2000, p. 15).
Compounding the proclivity to underesti- mate the diversity and complexity of na- tional conditions was what Professor Hesse described as the "illusion of global convergence" (ibid., p. 19). There was failure to see that convergence in some important areas (e.g., technologies and methods) may well go hand in hand with growing divergence in others (e.g., belief or value systems). Curiously, in light of the current emphasis on respect for diversity, globalization has often been por- trayed, in deterministic terms, as a one-way street. Likewise global society is often shown as invested with a hierarchy of cultures, of which one culture is destined to triumph. Pro- fessor Rune Premfors of Stockholm Univer- sity critiqued this misconception: "The basic
normative ideal was the market and the measures taken should include outright pri- vatization, and, where that was not feasible, the creation of markets or market-like con- ditions as an operative context for [almost] all public organizations" (Premfors, 1998, p. 143).
While granting certain merits in the New Zealand approach, Professor Premfors doubted its ready exportability to other parts of the world. He also questioned the ten- dency of some international agencies to as- sume a "linear homogeneous trend" in pub- lic service developments , "to interpret such developments solely in terms of conver- gence" and to show "a corresponding incli- nation against identifying and discussing any signs of divergence" (ibid.). Quoting F. Naschold and others, Premfors concluded that "plurality of ... regimes makes it impossible to derive and justify an immanent ranking of these regimes, or to presuppose that one such regime ... is necessarily more efficient than others" (ibid., p. 145).
Belatedly, some organizations and experts grav- itate towards the view quoted by Premfors. Thus, two recent articles purporting to re- flect the views of the World Bank and Sig- ma/OECD respectively cautioned against in- vesting in NPM reforms. The former warned that countries characterized by informal markets and ineffective legal frameworks were ill-equipped to attempt such ambitious reforms. Addressing itself more specifically to Central and Eastern Europe, the latter cautioned against too hasty an application of NPM principles in the region (Allen, 1999). A dis- tinguished American scholar stated that "Western devaluation of government dur- ing this historic era has contributed to ma- jor problems in the redesign of States in Central and Eastern Europe" (Newland,
1996).
Given the gravity of the crisis with which the world is faced, it may be time to address this paradox and arguably revise the policies pursued during the past decades. Though they provide a contrast to the prevailing views, voices from the developing countries and
 
 the poor everywhere also deserve a careful hearing. The world as a whole would ignore them at its peril. The United Nations, the most truly representative of humankind, can play a leading role in sponsoring and facilitating the dialogue from which a greater convergence of views on this subject can emerge.
The Fifteeth Meeting of the Group of Experts on Public Administration and Finance, in its most recent report, took a first step in this direction. It disclaimed the possibility or in- tention to "give a one-size-fits-all solution or any magic formula", preferring instead to pro- pose "potential strategies and reform paths through methodological tools that seek to un- cover what are the essential functions that the State needs to fulfill, at what level, and to what extent" (UN, 2000, E/2000/66). The report also noted that: "an overly technocratic or purely economic growth approach to in- stitutional development divorces the insti- tutional strategy from the socio-economic and political environment, which it is meant to serve. Such approaches divest the state in- stitutions of the contextual elements of their relationship to the most vital social issues of human degradation, poverty and widening social and economic inequality, which press especially on developing countries and which States must address concurrently" (ibid.). The report acknowledged that "such strategies will not solve problems of poverty and, in fact, may exacerbate inequality, making it ever more essential to invest in education, health, the reinforcement of social capital and enhanc- ing governance capacities" (ibid.). Similarly, a caveat was expressed regarding "the un- dermining of the States' moral and legal au- thority by the unquestioned ascendance of the market economy and, more dangerously, prevailing attitudes towards this ascendan- cy which has legitimized the abdication of the State in crucial areas from which the State should not retreat" (ibid., p. 11).
With respect to decentralization, it is worth- while noting that, after a number of failures, it has become apparent that "beefing up the centre" is certainly not incompatible with de- centralization but that, quite on the con- trary, the former must precede sound
progress in the latter. What has also tran- spired from the experience of the past two decades is that moves in the direction of de- bureaucratization, deregulation, decentral- ization and even deconcentration are sel- dom the result of purely technocratic processes, thoroughly studied decisions or ra- tional actors' choices. Rather, they flow from conflicts among concerned stakeholders over the distribution of functions, allocation of re- sources and the division of power. The out- come, in most cases, reflects a shift of influ- ence and decision-making power, which de- termines the thrust of reform. Thus, decen- tralization cannot succeed and work unless a transfer of responsibilities comes with commensurate powers and adequate re- sources, both human and material. This has rarely been the case. 
Likewise with deregulation and debureau- cratization, the centrality of power and pow- er distribution come into sharp relief as the principal factors of progress. Deregulation, for instance, has practical significance only in the measure that service delivery sys- tems conform as much as possible to the needs, interests and wishes of diverse clienteles, and, moreover, that such needs and wishes are as- certained periodically through genuinely participatory processes. Creating and main- taining a business-friendly environment, through either deregulation or privatiza- tion, should be balanced with provisions safeguarding citizens' rights to effective and affordable options. This is especially impor- tant when it comes to vital services like health care, education and housing. Public well-being, safety and interest must come first.
It takes more than rhetoric to make the em- powerment of citizens a palpable reality. It takes transparent processes and calls for information dissemination and sharing that truly minimize that secrecy and opaque- ness, which may be described as sources of bureaucratic power (Timsit and Wiener,
1980). According to Wildavsky, talking of the USA, this bureaucratic power is rapid- ly waning. Monopoly of information is driv- en out by the development of policy analy- sis. "All around the country, in think-tanks,
consulting firms, universities, state and lo- cal governments, congressional staffs and else- where, there are rival teams of analysts who have recently been or expect soon to be in gov- ernment. They know as much as those in the bureaucracy (or they used to know as much or more). Virtually everything that officials can say based on their expertise can be con- tradicted with conviction by these analysts in (temporary) exile. Consequently, public of- ficials can no longer say with confidence that their views should carry special weight because they know so much more than their critics" (Wildavsky, 1988, p. 254).
Potentially, this trend, supported and rein- forced by information technology, may well transform the character of public adminis- tration, promoting citizen participation and autonomy, as well as efficiency and effec- tiveness, in many critical areas. It should be pointed out, however that, in the immediate future, this prospect is more plausible in the affluent, advanced countries of the North and West. By contrast, in a world where 90 per cent of all computers are found in the OECD countries, where the continent of Africa accounts for barely one per cent of the total, where there are widening gaps be- tween skilled and unskilled, networked and isolated, this remains a distant prospect for the bulk of humanity (UNDP, 1999, Human Development Report). Access to education and IT are critical to empowerment and democ- ratization, and governments have an im- portant role to play in this respect.
Political commitment, resources and distri- bution of power determine the course of re- form and, in the last analysis, target its beneficiaries. Some doubt has been ex- pressed about the extent to which the poor and disadvantaged have indeed been in- cluded in this category. A critic of "reinven- tion" did not hesitate to describe "re-engineering theory as a top-down shake-up; a micro-rev- olution to be ironically led by elites (the po- sitions of whom were vouchsafed by the giv- en)" (Fox, 1996).
Mutatis mutandis, a similar remark could be made about deregulation and privatization.
In theory, it is intended to "debureaucratize" decision-making processes in given fields of action; to allow competition and thus lower prices; to liberate consumers from "the shackles of the government" and to expand their range of choices; and to create for busi- ness a "user-friendly environment". It often works that way. It cannot be overlooked, however, that more than half of humanity re- sides in countries where neither a bureau- cracy, in the Weberian sense, nor even a for- mal private sector of any size exist. For peo- ple who survive on less than 2 dollars a day, the alternative to state-provided services is frequently no services. Furthermore, as pointed out by a prominent African scholar: "Social and transparent regulation, or opaque and one-sided regulation, regulation is always there. Markets don't exist without it, since the forces that operate in the mar- kets are the expressions of social relations that the sect of pure economists have ban- ished out of sight. Markets (the economy in general) are embedded in these relations. "The classicists - from Smith to Ricardo, then Marx and much later Keynes - have shared, beyond the divergence of their visions, meth- ods and proposals, this recognition: that eco- nomics is political" (Amin, 1999, p. 183). Simply stated, regulations do not disappear when they cease to emanate from the State and its "bureaucracy". They simply change identity and form. 
Evaluating outcomes has never been as easy as the professed objective of making things work better and cost less might suggest. Even such simple guidelines have promot- ed disagreements among responsible offi- cers and service practitioners. "Cutting costs implies a strategy of downsizing and pro- gramme elimination; improving service sug- gests investment in personnel, training and technology" (Thompson and Ingraham,
1996, p. 291). 
It has been frequently overlooked that a de- moralized and poorly remunerated public servant makes an unlikely candidate for such innovative partnerships, but rather a good can- didate for graft and corruption. When this be- came an issue and integrity propelled into the
 
 limelight, the problem was approached, in dis- ciplinarian terms, as soluble essentially through "anti-corruption strategies".
Once again, consideration of a complex, cru- cial question has been "driven by practi- tioners and private sector consultants rather than academics and theoreticians" (Kamen- sky, 1996, p. 251). The net result has arguably been a segmented, reductionist and instru- mental approach to the multi-faceted issue of public service ethics. Ethics has been "reinvented", as if Immanuel Kant and Aris- totle had never lived. Three millennia of discourse and the wealth of global literature on ethics, moral conduct, civic rights and ob- ligations, justice and human rights, from Confucius and Ashoka to John Rawls (Sen,
1999/a) somehow escaped the purview of private sector "specialists" on ethics and ethics infrastructures. All too frequently, the outcome has been a view of ethics, in essentially instrumental, utilitarian terms, as sub- sidiary to economy, efficiency and effective- ness. Human solidarity and cosmopolitan plurality, two values crucial to the future glob- al order have never been written into this equa- tion. 
Abstracted from social reality, devoid of his- torical depth, bereft of conceptual analysis, such "ethics" have also been decoupled from professionalism. The need to match the quest for rigorous ethical standards with that of enhancing the status, learning, per- formance standards, competence and skills of public servants was not internalized. Nor was it fully accepted that ethics, loyalty and merit are conditional on attitudes which ac- cord the public service the role, considera- tion, rewards and prestige it deserves. As sub- sequently shown in the present Report, this reductionist approach has, in the past few years, gradually given way to a more balanced view of ethics and professionalism in the pub- lic service.
Most people would agree that "ethics infra- structures", like any system of rules, de- pend for their effectiveness on the leadership example and competence of those assigned the task of putting them into practice. It also stands to reason that such normative en- actments and codes of ethical conduct do not or cannot operate in a socio-cultural vac- uum. Amartya Sen expressed this thought in discussing social choice and individual be- haviour: "A basic code of good business be- haviour is a bit like oxygen: we take an in- terest in its presence only when it is absent
... What may not cause wonder or surprise in Zurich or London or Paris may, however, be quite problematic in Cairo or Bombay or Lagos (or Moscow), in their challenging struggle to establish the norms and institu- tions of a functioning market economy" (ibid., p. 264).
To produce the hoped-for impact, and to in- duce behavioural change in the required di- rection, codes of conduct must appeal to val- ues deeply ingrained in the environment or widely shared. It follows from this premise that the process of creating a code or set of rules must go in tandem with the appropri- ate public service reforms, but also must be sustained by a broad societal dialogue, with at least two aims in view: to elicit a consen- sus on public expectations of employee behaviour and to "indigenize" the code which, in all too many cases, is of distant foreign extraction. The following conclusions on the lessons of the experience of the past 20 years flow from the observations made in this chapter, from the findings in the literature consulted and from the pertinent regional studies.
First that there is a need to restore and to reinforce a truly inter-disciplinary approach to development assistance in public admin- istration and governance. Particular atten- tion should be paid to the political, legal and socio-cultural context of projected in- terventions and reforms. There are sub- stantial differences between the common law and civil law traditions, with far-reach- ing repercussions on administrative structures and the way they operate. Celebration of di- versity, moreover, does imply that the cultural dimension should be accorded its due weight. Lip service has been paid to the need of building a culture of dialogue and re- spect. But it would be fair to say that, in this regard at any rate, working reality has belied the formal theory. Notwithstanding ex- tensive research on the impact of the envi- ronment and the range of management cul- tures, the findings in the literature, includ- ing the regional studies cited, do suggest that interventions have often proceeded on the un- spoken assumption that one-size-fits-all;
Second, that attempts at policy transfers should proceed with caution. Proponents of "best practices" frequently overlook the fact that what works in one country may not nec- essarily work in another. It is relevant, to note in this regard that NPM-type reforms suc- ceeded best in countries with broadly congruent cultures and institutional frameworks pro- pitious for the task, but also with affinity to those of the country of origin (e.g. Anglo-Sax- on countries). Where these conditions were absent or minimally present, as in parts of Eastern Europe and countries in transition, the results have been unfortunate. A typical example is privatization in countries where a formal private sector was nonexistent or still in its infancy. The damage, in such in- stances, has been compounded by strategies and methods, which gave rise to such char- acterizations as "shock therapies" and "big bangs";
Third, that incrementalism may be the bet- ter way. Attention should be paid to fashioning the tools, appropriate methods, strategies and technologies that will, in due course, produce sustainable outcomes. This entails capacity- building as a priority task. A primary con- cern should be to nurture skills and build the essential structures which make effective choices and ownership of change feasible on the national level;
Fourth, that governments of countries recipient of international aid programmes assisted by civil society must be in control of the process of change. Making governments ir- relevant or, though involuntarily, creating an impression that others occupy the driver's seat has all too often served to undermine democ- racy and strengthen the prevalent mood of disaffection and cynicism which has been ob- served in several regions;
Fifth, that rebuilding national ownership of reforms and public trust, which drastically declined in the past two decades, is urgent- ly needed. One of the major strategies, with this objective in view, consists in reinforcing performance and professionalism in the pub- lic service. This entails a combination of competence, integrity, responsiveness to needs and dedication to duty; it also pre- supposes capacity to monitor and evaluate performance throughout; and 
Sixth, that reinforcing the capacity of mul- ti-lateral agencies for policy advisory serv- ices and technical backstopping is required. Both undertakings should be highly profes- sional and truly client-oriented. Though this appears self-evident, much of the criticism levelled against the donor countries and agencies has emphasized the point that, con- trary to generally-accepted theory, many programmes have not been demand-orient- ed, but rather supply-driven, that is to say more responsive to the agencies, their part- ners and associates than to the recipient governments. Furthermore, they have been predicated on premises and principles some- what removed from the needs and realities of the countries which they were supposed to serve. Donor agencies should view them- selves as providers to and trustees of the coun- tries concerned, and their role as that of safeguarding these countries' long-term in- terests.
5.2. Why have some States not been able to seize the benefits of globalization?
The lessons from the experience of the past two decades contain important messages particularly relevant to the developing coun- tries and countries with economies in tran- sition, confronted as they are with the chal- lenging environment of a globalized society and economy. 
If, as some say, for many developing coun- tries the 1980s were "the lost decade" and the
1990s a "mixed bag", at best, one may pre- sume that something went terribly wrong de- spite the good intentions and programmat 
 ic efforts spread over the last twenty years. Reducing the role of government in key so- cial areas and downsizing public services in many developing countries, especially in the South and East of the world, as well as ne- glecting the important task of reinforcing po- litical and economic institutions, left many countries unprepared to meet the challenges and rapid transformations of globalization. The "hasty retreat of the State" in the social area pursued during the 1980s and even the early 1990s has weakened States which were already fragile.
It is now being acknowledged that States with weak institutions are not well prepared to face the adjustment costs of globalization, whereas States with strong institutions have the capacity to channel globalization to their own advantage. As stated by Keohane and Nye, "globalization shrinks distance, but it does not make distance irrelevant. And the filters provided by domestic politics and political institutions play a major role in determining what effects globalization really has and how well various countries adapt to it" (Keohane and Nye, 2000, p.117). In essence, the capacity of the State to respond to external negative shocks largely depends on the degree of economic and social devel- opment, as well as political institutional- ization of a specific country.
As recent experience has shown, States with weak institutions are also vulnerable in the face of rapid change, and the uncertainty that globalization engenders. Without building strong institutions at the national level, in- cluding independent and effective judiciar- ies, strong parliaments, accountable execu- tives, and without strong social policies, in- cluding those on health, education, and so- cial security systems, there are too many risks that the benefits of globalization will be un- equally distributed among the population. Without complementarity between domestic strategies for institutional reform and strategies for opening to global market forces, developing countries may risk ex- posing themselves to the kinds of protract- ed crises from which some have just begun to recover (Raghavan, 2000). 
States with weak institutions are also more vulnerable to the upsurge of deadly con- flicts, which in turn hinder economic and so- cial development and the integration of a coun- try into the world economy. As the Secretary- General of the United Nations has recently underscored at the Cyrus Vance Lecture Se- ries on the Prevention of Deadly Conflict: "There is abundant evidence that war is less likely to happen in a country - even a poor country - which is well governed and has trans- parent, accountable institutions" (Annan,
2001). In fact, the absence of strong demo- cratic institutions and adequate social poli- cies, especially in countries marked by social and ethnic cleavages, may lead to severe conflicts over the distribution of resources and political, as well as social unrest. 
It is generally recognized that the mainte- nance of peace and security are closely linked - both in positive and negative ways
- to economic and social development. Pover- ty, especially amidst plenty, is a major cause of violence, crime and social disintegration. The disparities between rich and poor in many parts of the world are creating societies characterized by huge imbalances in terms of distribution of resources and power. These imbalances, in turn, engender among the un- der-privileged population a deep sense of resentment, injustice, hatred and alienation. This is not only unacceptable per se. It is al- so very dangerous in terms of social cohesion since it can lead to the upsurge of religious fundamentalism, to ethnically or racially-based political movements, and this, in turn, to State- engineered repression. Poverty and social ex- clusion may also lead to anti-democratic sentiments, a loss of trust in government in- stitutions and political alienation, which may pose serious threats to the longevity of a democracy.
In other words, governments with weak in- stitutions are much more vulnerable to in- ternal conflict and strife, which as experience has shown may degenerate into devastating civil wars or international conflicts. In this respect, it may be said that institution-build- ing, or creating institutions that ensure a peace- ful co-existence of all social forces within a
given polity, is a fundamental pre-requisite of conflict prevention. Only by creating sol- id democratic institutions capable of medi- ating as well as channeling diversity and con- flict can there be lasting peace. This re- quires devising appropriate political insti- tutions. These may include electoral sys- tems that ensure fair representation of all parties; clear rules for the division of power between central and local authorities; an independent and efficient judiciary; mecha- nisms that allow for tolerance and respect of plurality; equal access to the courts of jus- tice; and protection of minority groups.
The impact of globalization on the State al- so varies according to the degree of econom- ic integration that each State has so far achieved and the degree of exposure to the process of globalization. Generally, countries such as OECD members, which are more in- tegrated within the global economy, have less difficulties in further internationalizing their domestic decision-making. They are rela- tively prepared for adapting to global standards and practices, and to respond to external crises, and have the resources to maintain ef- ficient physical infrastructure. On the contrary, many developing countries are not well equipped to cope with international econom- ic crises, to counteract the outflow of skilled workers, to manage sudden loss of employment (through for example, unemployment benefits), to prevent corruption and crime and to respond to a rapidly changing international environ- ment. In many regions of the world, the State is still being constructed or is just beginning the process of modernization or undergoing a process of de-institutionalization. As such, many developing countries lack adequate physical infrastructure, are not technologically equipped, and have limited professional hu- man resources and expertise to deal with the complexities of the global market. 
If high quality responses to globalization require oftentimes local institutional reform, including reform of the State, acceleration of the globalization trends that was charac- teristic of the 1990s coincided with the most far-reaching experiment in reconstructing States since 1930s. It is important to establish whether the neo-liberal underpinnings of this experiment steer it toward results that strengthen the capacity of the States to re- spond to the challenges of globalization, or on the contrary, whether they limit them. What is becoming apparent now is that, although many of the reforms imposed by international organizations on developing countries were necessary to get their economies back on track, they were not sufficient for address- ing fundamental institutional problems and deficits in State capacity.
It is now clear that one of the major causes of the malaise which affects a number of States
- mostly the already mentioned developing countries and countries with economies in tran- sition - is a rampant capacity deficit. Noticeable on every level of State administration, it be- comes increasingly apparent in the man- agement of issues, which, because of their com- plexity and worldwide ramifications, de- mand a higher standard of competence, knowledge and sophistication. It is not so much that the countries lack the requisite skills, as might have been the case only a few decades ago. More often, the institutions have not been put in place to tap, attract, re- tain and use these skills effectively. The net result, however, is basically the same:
 Failure to adjust, in time, to changing cir- cumstances, and failure to grasp opportuni- ties and cope with emerging constraints;
 Failure to take the initiative, and to be proac- tive;
 Passivity in the face of critical decisions that must be made;
 Uncritical acceptance of "omnibus solu- tions" that do not fit the context of the re- cipient country, and "externally-induced re- forms" that often come with promises which cannot be fulfilled.
Globalization sheds light on the issue of ca- pacity deficit in several developing coun- tries. Specifically, it points to the impor- tance of reinforcing State institutions, poli- cy frameworks and trusted normative struc 
 tures, which are able to command and receive individual allegiance and enjoin individual commitment of effort and resources towards a higher purpose. Failure or inability to ad- dress, let alone resolve, this issue may, to a large extent, account for the questionable record of reforms in the 1980s. The story of transi- tion in parts of Eastern Europe and the CIS would also justify a similar remark.
How the State adapts to the new global en- vironment, how it strikes a balance between greater efficiency and equity, and how it manages greater openness and loss of em- ployment for certain sectors of society, just to mention a few, are all critical issues which deserve great attention. However these chal- lenges will be met, one lesson is clearly emerging: weak States are not the answer. A true measure of the State is not its "size", but rather the nature of the functions it per- forms, and the efficiency and effectiveness with which it performs them.
It may be safely affirmed that, more than any- thing else, it was the vacuum left by the re- treat of the State, coupled in several in- stances with the absence of a civic culture and public trust, that brought about the emergence of soft States and kleptocracies during the 1990s especially. With many trag- ic cases of human rights abuses, informali- ty, corruption, social disintegration and civ- il strife, the record of the 1990s has lessons for the future, which must not be overlooked:
 It points to the fragility of democratic structures, especially under conditions of major stress, volatility and insecurity;
 It further underscores the need to reinforce these institutions, to shore up the infra- structure of democratic government and the
\0xC9tat de droit, and to revitalize the civic cul- ture and public service ethic needed;
 It points to the role of the State as guar- antor of stability, continuity and pre- dictability at times of rapid change;
 It further emphasizes the roles of States as founders, sustainers, reformers and members of inter-governmental regimes, as well as main stakeholders in the maintenance of peace and international order;
 Accordingly, it highlights the roles that States can play as counterweights in minimizing the costs of globalization, in enlisting the sup- port of local and transnational companies, and in establishing partnerships in creative en- terprises, while also protecting citizens against the possibility of exploitation and abuse.
Two decades of trial and error, in several parts of the world, have amply demonstrated the fragility of reforms, which took insufficient cognizance of the socio-political context and cultural dimensions, and also underrated the importance of adequate strategies and in- stitutional tools in carrying out reforms. 
Many of the economic reforms undertaken in developing countries in the past decade, although costly in social terms, may have been necessary for economic stabilization, and have been an important step towards recovery. How- ever, they only represent the first step towards general prosperity; much more has to be done in terms of institution building, ca- pacity building and social reform, including the provision of basic social services to all, and of safety nets to the most vulnerable. The next two chapters analyze these issues in more detail.
Chapter III
Reinforcing state institutions and social policies
1. Making globalization work for all
N
country to mediate the impact of globaliza- tion and even to thrive in the global envi- ronment" (UN, 2000, ST/SG/AC.6/2000/L.6).
ot all countries have been able to benefit from globalization. To do so, they must strengthen their public sector and enhance
their capacity for policy analysis, policy for- mulation and implementation. In fact, "the Governments that seem to be \0x2018riding the wave of globalization' are those that have opened their [policy] analysis to uncertain- ty, ambiguity and change. In these globally aware Governments, institutions have been created or altered to scan the rapidly chang- ing environment, to promote policy invention and policy dialogue, to speed up decision-mak- ing in order to take advantage of emerging opportunities, and to embrace short-term failures in favour of creating long-term sus- tainable strategies. National governance in- stitutions are faced with dynamic transfor- mations at the global level and the [local] lev- el. Governments without adequate capacity to recognize and respond to change are des- tined to be forever behind the \0x2018waves of change'. The ability to embrace change is re- lated to an attitude of openness to diversi- ty, comfort with uncertainty, and optimism about the future. Globally aware leaders seek to build institutions that can embody these attitudes and inspire citizens to par- ticipate in the emerging aspects of globalization, while at the same time attracting global forces to participate in national develop- ment. Strategic participation by both inter- national and citizen organizations enables a
Thus, it is essential to start by re-examining the role of the State. 
This chapter explores the complex issue of redesigning the State, its institutions and poli- cies in a globalizing world. Rethinking the role of the State in the XXI century is of great importance to shape the grounds for inclu- sive globalization, one that is geared to- wards redistributing its benefits among the population, while minimizing the costs and losses of affected groups.
2. New global dynamics require a fresh approach to the State
In the 1980s, the discussion of the role of the State appeared to have been closed. Points of view predominated which considered that the State, in almost all its facets, was a market "impediment" and that the market alone would solve the problems. Conse- quently, the conclusion reached was that the State should be dismantled and reduced to the bare minimum. These views had re- placed the notion that the State alone could generate development, views which were characteristic of previous decades. Today both extremes of the pendulum have been giv- en the lie by concrete facts. So, just as the concept centering on the omnipotence of the State was erroneous, reality has proven that
 the market has a great productive potential but that without regulations it can generate far-reaching imbalances. A 1999 UNDP re- port focuses on some of them: "When the mar- ket goes too far in controlling social and po- litical effects, the opportunities and benefits of internationalization are distributed un- equally and iniquitously, concentrating pow- er and wealth among a select group of per- sons, countries and companies, while by- passing everyone else. When the market gets out of control, instabilities in "boom and bust" economies surface, as for example the financial crisis in Eastern Asia and its repercussions on a worldwide scale. When the desire for profits by market participants gets out of control, it challenges the ethics of countries and sacrifices the respect for jus- tice and human rights" (UNDP, 1999, Human Development Report).
Both extremes have produced very debatable results and, today, a new wave of question- ing begins on how to achieve a different bal- ance among the State, market and the oth- er important actor, civil society, as well as what role the State could play in this search. The rhetoric is changing. In its special report on the State, the World Bank maintains that ef- ficient development is very difficult without the State. The report states: "there can be neither economic nor social development without a good government" (World Bank,
1997). The notion of a Welfare State appar- ently completely stripped of legitimacy dur- ing the heyday of the market is being reex- amined from other angles. The idea of the pro- ductive State is being postulated and the ex- periences of countries, such as the Nordic coun- tries and the Netherlands, that have achieved progress in that direction while at the same time obtaining good economic re- sults and maintaining elevated social balances, are being examined (Kliksberg, 2000; see al- so Kliksberg, 2001).
It is an incontrovertible fact that the demo- cratic State remains the major actor on the international scene and the most reliable force for freedom and self-governance. It is the fore- most mover in the complex global network of inter-governmental regimes and organizations, on which the emerging new world order depends. It has changed and it is changing in response to a changing envi- ronment and the rise of institutions with a major regional role like the EU or ASEAN. In spite of its limitations, constitutional democracy is still the best system of gover- nance, as it is the best guarantor of freedom, human rights and social development.
What the experience of the 1990s has made apparent is that turning "globalization into an instrument of opportunity and inclusion" cannot be accomplished overnight, through "big bangs" and "quick fixes". This undertaking calls for systematic, consistent, long-term ef- forts at the sub-national, national, and in- ternational levels, involving many players, both State and non-state actors. In turn, to be constructive, these efforts require solid in- stitutional frameworks and sound gover- nance, which the World Bank has defined as
\0x2018the manner in which power is exercised in the management of a country's economic and social resources for development" (World Bank, 1994, p. vii).
Building effective constitutional democra- cies and reinforcing State institutions is therefore a theme of great relevance in an era of globalization. We cannot escape the con- clusion that, by and large, the countries that fared best through the crises of the tumul- tuous 1990s were those whose national gov- ernments remained fully in command and made their own decisions on major issues of policy. Experience demonstrates that as a rule intelligent, democratic States have so far coped much better with the effects of glob- alization. They have been able to turn op- portunities to advantage; to circumscribe the effects of downturns; to play their part in global governance in a responsible man- ner; and manage to protect their citizens from the vagaries of adverse contingencies. An in- telligent, democratic State is needed to po- sition a country in such a way that it can cope effectively with rapidly changing contin- gencies and harness to its advantage the winds of change (UN, 2000, E/2000/66, p. 8).
A democratic State, which is proactive and strategic is required to arrest and, in the medi- um-term, reverse poverty and underdevel- opment. Combating poverty both national- ly and internationally, represents an essen- tial dimension of a strategy of restoring pub- lic trust and rebuilding human capital, which is necessary not merely for develop- ment, but also for the effectiveness of dem- ocratic governance. "A healthy, educated and democratic citizenry is the most important factor in economic development" (UN, 1997, E/1997/86, p. 21).
The State has an important role to play in the establishment and preservation of an "even playing field" and an enabling environment for private enterprise, individual creativity and social action. It can also contribute to the establishment and maintenance of social safety nets; promote as well as facilitate so- cial dialogue at the sub-national, national, and international levels; establish and main- tain mechanisms for mediation of disputes, mitigation of conflicts and reconciliation of rival cultures or interests in the increas- ingly diversified contemporary societies.
Last, but not least, intelligent, democratic States are necessary to protect the children, the sick, the elderly and other vulnerable seg- ments of society, combat the social exclusion of minority groups, and ensure a more eq- uitable distribution of the benefits of glob- alization.
In brief, more than ever before what is need- ed today is an intelligent State endowed with institutions that are capable of coping with both domestic and international prob- lems, and challenges. Strong democratic in- stitutions are vital in providing a solid framework of political, economic and social rules, and in creating an enabling environ- ment for people's prosperity. In order to seize the benefits of globalization, developing countries need to strengthen and modernize their democratic institutions. "Our runaway world does not need less, but more govern- ment - and this, only democratic institu- tions can provide" (Giddens, 2000, p. 100).
2.1. What is meant by an intelligent, democratic State
Experience demonstrates that sound insti- tutional frameworks and governance, in this particular meaning, cannot be developed outside a healthy State. Indeed, it might be argued that they define this type of State. It is important to underline that an intelli- gent, democratic State is also socially proac- tive, but does not mean "big government". It means "quality" not "quantity" or volume of government activity. It implies a State with lean but strong democratic institutions. The term "intelligent, democratic State", in oth- er words, puts the accent on capacity to car- ry out effectively the tasks incumbent on the State, on the international, national and sub-national levels. "There is a growing con- sensus that governments can play a vital role in successful development efforts, but we also recognize that the wrong kind of gov- ernment intervention can be highly detri- mental. We have recognized that the scope and effectiveness of government activities, rather than simply the size of the government's budget or personnel, is the key issue. With- in a given size range, the governments' ef- fectiveness can vary widely with the scope of its activities: they can do too much of some things and too little of others, and redirecting the State's efforts could produce benefits on both accounts" (Stiglitz, 1998, p.
2).
An intelligent, democratic State is one that intervenes strategically by creating the con- ditions that support constructive endeav- ours for people-centred growth. Its role should be catalytic and supportive - i.e., pro- moting without investing - and superviso- ry/regulatory. Recent experience has shown that people often benefit when the State is not involved in the production of goods and, generally, the provision of non-social servic- es. Greater competition brings down prices and enhances the choice to consumers. In- herent in this concept of the State is the crit- ical notion of quality, in particular the qual- ity of the normative, strategic and steering tasks of the State. Manifested, first and fore- most, in the outputs of these functions, such
 
 quality is a composite of several different at- tributes: appropriateness, effectiveness, vi- ability or sustainability, timeliness, equity, and acceptability.
It is also predicated on many factors, notably:
 Thorough knowledge or expertise;
 Skill in decision-making;
 Sense of responsibility;
 Respect for due process and the rights of all stakeholders;
 Integrity and command of public trust; and
 Ability to capture and reconcile convergent or divergent group interests.
All of the above attributes and factors are cru- cial. Few policy decisions are made by experts alone or taken in a social or political vacu- um. Most are the product of inputs of very different types, the synthesis of many fields of specialization, and representative voices from segments of society affected by these de- cisions. The quality of the outputs, accord- ingly, is a function of two important variables:
 Level of individual inputs;
 Capacity of the institutional framework or decision-making structures and processes to weave these inputs together into a coherent whole and a workable project, in a timely fash- ion.
Thus, an intelligent, democratic State is one which "promotes social justice, ensures uni- versal access to quality services and productive assets, and creates an enabling environment for sustainable people-centred develop- ment", in the terms of General Assembly res- olution 50/225/1996. Greater human devel- opment and prosperity can be achieved on- ly if certain fundamental conditions are met. These include the existence of a basic dem- ocratic system; a commitment of the politi- cal leadership to work towards a more equitable distribution of wealth; strong, healthy State
institutions besides the executive, namely the legislature, the judiciary and the local au- thorities. It also entails a strong capacity of the State to develop social and economic policies and strategies; strong commitment backed by appropriate resource outlays to re- dress social inequalities, and to protect and increase social human capital. The public sec- tor should have a clear mission, with clear goals and objectives. "What is needed is a vi- sionary administration" that is capable to ad- dress the complexity of the issues and prob- lems confronting the State at the threshold of the XXI century (UN, 2000, E/2000/66).
Although experience varies, it may be said that the hallmarks of an intelligent, demo- cratic State can be summarized as follows:
 Strong institutions of governance and the rule of law;
 Credible judicial and legal institutions; 
 Effective legal frameworks for economic ac- tivity;
 An open and competitive economic envi- ronment; 
 Price stability and fiscal responsibility;
 An equitable tax system;
 Developed and competitive labour, finan- cial and capital markets;
 Adequate steering, regulatory and en- forcement capacities, together with judicious privatization and outsourcing of services to private providers;
 Public and private sector partnerships in the promotion of business, with emphasis on micro-industries and small and medium- size enterprises;
 Access to information;
 Promotion of technological and infra- structure development.
An intelligent, democratic State should al- so promote a "sharp focus on the needs of the poor; powerful watchdogs; intolerance of corruption; transparency and accountability in
Box III.1
DECLARATION OF THE MILLENNIUM ASSEMBLY OF THE UN
the management of public affairs; respect for human rights; participation by all citizens in the decisions that affect their lives; as well as the creation of an enabling environment for the private sector and civil society" (Amoako, 2000). 
It is important to underline that the State in the XXI century will differ in many ways from that of the past. It will depart signifi- cantly from the Welfare State as we knew it. Still, it might be unwise to base it on the "Min- imal State", in view of the catastrophic re- sults the latter has produced in many de- veloping countries. We should not forget that the Welfare State contributed to social and economic progress in many countries, though arguably in some cases it led to pub- lic debts, and to the inefficient use of state resources. Today efficiency has become wide- ly acknowledged as a critical attribute of good governance. Nevertheless, efficiency and ef- fectiveness should not be pursued at the ex- pense of the principles of legality and of the primacy of the public interest. 
We should avoid confusion between policy goals, set by the State, and methods of imple- menting such goals. The latter may indeed be performed by the private sector in a more efficient way. Nevertheless, there are certain policy areas which cannot be guided by effi- ciency criteria alone but rather by consid- erations of the public interest. What we need is to combine some of the goals of the Wel- fare State model with some of the methods of the "Managerial State". In what propor- tion these should be mixed is to be decided by each country according to its own degree of development and needs.
2.2. The relationship between intelligent, democratic States and free markets
The Millennium Report underscores that: "In- clusive globalization must be built on the great enabling force of the market, but market forces
"We believe that the central challenge we face today is to ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the world's people. For while globalization offers great opportunities, at present its benefits are very unevenly shared, while its costs are unevenly distributed. We recognize that developing countries and countries with economies in transition face special difficulties in responding to this central challenge. Thus, only through broad and sustained efforts to create a shared future, based upon our common humanity, in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable. These efforts must include policies and measures, at the global level, which correspond to the needs of developing countries and economies in transition, and are formulated and implemented with their effective participation.
"We consider certain fundamental values to be essential to international relations in the twenty-first century. These include:
 Freedom. Men and women have the right to live their lives and raise their children in dignity, free from hunger and from the fear of violence, oppression or injustice. Democratic and participatory governance, based on the will, of the people best assures these rights.
 Equality. No individual and no nation must be denied the opportunity to benefit from development. The equal rights and opportunities of women and men must be assured.
 Solidarity. Global challenges must be managed in a way that distributes the costs and burdens fairly in accordance with basic principles of equity and social justice. Those who suffer, or who benefit least, deserve help from those who benefit most.
 Tolerance. Human beings must respect each other, in all their diversity of belief, culture and language. Differences within and between societies should be neither feared nor repressed, but cherished as a precious asset of humanity. A Culture of Peace and Dialogue among all civilizations should be actively promoted.
 Respect for nature. Prudence must be shown in the management of all living species and natural resources, in accordance with the precepts of sustainable development. Only in this way can the immeasurable riches provided to us by nature be preserved and passed on to our descendants. The current unsustainable patterns of production and consumption must be changed, in the interest of our future welfare and that of our descendants.
 Shared responsibility. Responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally. As the most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play a central role."
Source: A/RES/55/2/2000, paras. 5-6.
alone will not achieve it" (UN, 2000, Mil- lennium Report, A/54/2000, p. 6). As shown by recent events, the "Minimal State" char- acterized by small government, deregula- tion, privatization, and basically a shift from the public to the private sector has in some cases not been sufficient to foster sustainable human development. There is growing
 agreement on the fact that economic reforms need to be complemented by better social poli- cies.
It is erroneous to think that markets should be weakened or that the State should replace the market in its fundamental functions. However, it is important to underline that not every aspect of public life should be left to market forces or be guided by corporate methods. Rather, markets should be cou- pled with "intelligent" States. In fact, mar- kets and States should not be seen as ad- versarial forces, but as truly complementa- ry. That is because markets can flourish and sustainable economic prosperity can be achieved only if there is a democratic and ef- fective State that provides, through rules and institutions, an enabling environment for private sector development and economic growth. In the absence of appropriate insti- tutions, competition is stifled and lawlessness prevails leading to instability, chaos and of- ten to the emergence of kleptocracies.
Experience has shown that Governments can continue to play a vital role in creating an effective legal and regulatory framework in which the private sector is enabled to op- erate. As those in countries moving towards a market economy keep pointing out, the pri- vate sector cannot develop fully unless the Government institutes a legal framework that guarantees and protects private prop- erty, govern business relationships and en- forces the commitments involved in busi- ness contracts. Suitable enforceable legisla- tion is needed as related to the personal li- abilities of owners and the bankruptcy of busi- nesses as well as the obligations of those in- volved. An adequate legal framework is vi- tal in developing an enabling environment in which business creation and operation can function successfully. Therefore, the role of the State in this respect is to establish the rules of the game for the operation of the mar- ket and at the same time to perform the role of arbitrator.
Experience also demonstrates that, without proper structures, enforceable laws and so- cially sensitive policies, markets can degenerate into instruments of exploitation, mar- ginalization, corruption and social exclu- sion. Poorly managed States and exclusion- ary politics contribute to holding back eco- nomic and social development. To be sure, eco- nomic growth alone is not sufficient to sus- tain equitable human development. Provid- ing health care and education, public infra- structure, safety nets for the unemployed, equal opportunities for all and the respect of ba- sic human rights is a fundamental respon- sibility of the State, which is not unrelated to the goal of economic prosperity for all and to the enhancement of people's free- doms and quality of life. Poverty is reduced and development is more easily achieved when the State has a larger redistributive role. In the words of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, speaking at the Global Compact meeting, in July 2000, "... let's choose to unite the powers of markets with the authority of universal ideas. Let us choose to reconcile the creative forces of private entrepreneur- ship with the needs of the disadvantaged and the requirements of the future genera- tions..." (UN, 2000, Global Compact Meeting).
Although markets perform invaluable func- tions within an economy, not all aspects of public life are best served by market prin- ciples. On the one hand, States remain im- portant actors because their actions help determine the extent to which economic and social prosperity occur within their own bor- ders, as well as the extent to which prosperity is widely spread among the population. On the other hand, a free market and policies to promote a vibrant private sector are in- dispensable if a country wishes to increase its living standards and seize the opportu- nities of integration into the global market.
2.3. The role of the State in creating an enabling environment for the private sector
Governments have a crucial role in creating an enabling environment for the development and/or reinforcement of the private sector, and the institutional and regulatory capacities of governments to interact with the private sector should be enhanced. However, creating an enabling environment involves more than removing obstacles. Governments must perform a dual task. First, to create a polit- ical and economic system in which entre- preneurship can flourish; second, to facilitate entrepreneurial undertakings. The first task requires a stable and secure political order in which contracts are enforced, necessary adjudicating machinery exists for resolution of disputes, and the social order is backed by democratic institutions. The second task in- volves the establishment of financial, legal and market institutions, and of a regulato- ry apparatus that enables people to open a business without too much difficulty, to have access to affordable credit, and to invest in
productive activities.
ulations for the registration and licensing of businesses. Without simplifying bureau- cratic procedures and rules to set up a busi- ness, entrepreneurial initiative will be sti- fled. A study conducted by Hernando De So- to shows how red tape and byzantine pro- cedures pose a serious hurdle to people's entrepreneurial capacities. To open a small business in Lima and get it registered takes
289 days, and the cost of legal registration is $1,231 - thirty one times the monthly minimum wage. "To obtain legal authoriza- tion to build a house on State-owned land takes six years and eleven months, requiring 207 administrative steps in 52 government offices. To obtain a legal title for that piece of land
takes 728 steps. ... In Egypt, the person who
Designing appropriate rules for the func- tioning of the market is essential because "where there are no rules, the rich and the
powerful bully the poor and the powerless (UK,
Box III.2
A COMPACT FOR THE NEW CENTURY
2000). The existence of an appropriate and effective legal framework is a basic pre-con- dition for successful efforts to promote sus- tainable development. Yet, legal frame- works, as formulated and applied so far, have not always stimulated adequate par- ticipation in economic development activities. While it is the duty of the State to enhance the development of civil society and to enable the private sector to operate efficiently by en- acting appropriate laws, experience shows that "state laws" have not been utilized by local communities and indigenous people. The main reason for this attitude is that, often transposed from outside and moulded according to foreign concepts and experiences, the le- gal framework for development is not always adapted to the needs of the people in devel- oping countries and countries with economies in transition. In fact, past events show that business organizations, contracts, bankruptcy, and banking laws are not always respected or well defined. Legal frameworks should always reflect the ideologies, atti- tudes and aspirations of the people for whom they are meant, rather than be imposed from outside.
Most importantly, governments should take the lead in simplifying procedures and regAt the World Economic Forum, held in Davos on 31 January 1999, UN Secretary-General Kofi A. Annan challenged world business leaders to "embrace and enact" the Global Compact, both in their individual corporate practices and by supporting appropriate public policies. These principles cover topics in human rights, labour and environment:
Human Rights
The Secretary-General asked world business to:
Principle 1: support and respect the protection of international human rights within their sphere of influence; and
Principle 2: make sure their own corporations are not complicit in human right abuses.
Labour
The Secretary-General asked world business to uphold:
Principle 3: freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining;
Principle 4: the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labour; Principle 5: the effective abolition of child labour; and 
Principle 6: the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and 
occupation. 
Environment
The Secretary-General asked world business to: 
Principle 7: support a precautionary approach to environmental challenges; Principle 8: undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental 
responsibility; and
Principle 9: encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally 
friendly technologies.
Source: UN, 2000, Global Compact Meeting.
 wants to acquire and legally register a lot on State-owned desert land must wend his way through at least 77 bureaucratic procedures at 31 public and private agencies. ... This ex- plains why 4.7 million Egyptians have cho- sen to build their dwellings illegally (De So- to, 2000, p. 20).
Additionally, there needs to be a permanent mechanism for consultation with represen- tatives of the private sector on the formula- tion of relevant policies and the monitoring of their impact. Collaboration is needed in ways that safeguard the interests of consumers and small enterprises from cozy, at times of- ten corrupt, coalitions of government and big business, or vice versa. Corporations and companies should be encouraged to adopt a new relationship with the environment and society. In this respect, one of the most alarming issues is related to child abuse and labor exploitation. Both the Director-Gen- eral of the International Labour Organiza- tion, Juan Somavia and several participants at the Global Compact Meeting, called for strong action to stop the current pandemic of child abuse. Today, as many as 250 mil- lion children throughout the world work in appalling conditions both in multinationals and local businesses. 
The OECD recently elaborated new standards on corporate governance, workplace conditions, environmental safeguards, bribery and pro- tection for whistleblowers. The rules, how- ever, are not legally binding, although gov- ernments are expected to promote compliance. In a more general manner, it is essential to have national legislation in place that sets clear security and health standards in the workplace, which corporations should re- spect. This represents an urgent yet difficult task ahead. Moreover, a greater commit- ment by the private sector should be pursued to engender a new culture of environmental accountability, environmental performance indicators and reporting, and the establish- ment of a precautionary approach in in- vestment and technology decisions. This ap- proach must be linked to the development of cleaner and more resource-efficient tech- nologies for a life-cycle economy and efforts
to facilitate the transfer of environmentally sound technologies (UNEP, 2000, Annual Report). National and trans-national corpo- rations can play an important role in upholding social and environmental values, as well as respecting human rights.
Voluntary commitments are important but, in general, insufficient to curb pollution of the environment and corrupt practices. Gov- ernments can play a crucial role in this re- spect. Often, it is weak government that in- directly bears ultimate responsibility for not preventing inhumane working conditions, pollution, deforestation, depletion of natural resources and other transgressions. This is so because they do not ensure that appropriate laws and regulations are in place to protect workers and the environment. However, it must be said that even countries that have good labour laws might fail to curb the abuse of human rights in the workplace if their ju- dicial systems are ineffective.
2.4. Fostering partnerships between the State and civil society
An era of globalization calls for building ro- bust partnerships between the State and civil society. Such partnerships, however, can only emerge between a intelligent, dem- ocratic State, on the one hand, and a vibrant civil society, on the other. Their nature and importance were recently highlighted by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who put them in perspective in his address to the opening ceremony of the Forum Gene- va 2000 on 25 June 2000: "I remain convinced that globalization can benefit humankind as a whole. But clearly at the moment millions of people - perhaps even the majority of the human race - are being denied those bene- fits. They are poor not because they have too much globalization, but too little or none at all. And many people are actually suffering in different ways - I would say not from globalization itself, but from the failure to man- age its adverse effects. Some have lost their jobs, others see their communities disinte- grating, some feel that their very identity is at stake. Even in the richest and most dem- ocratic countries, people wonder if the leaders they elect have any real control over events. I think these fears can be answered, but not by any one nation alone, and not by governments alone either. The State and civil society should not see each other as en- emies, but as allies. The strongest State is one that listens to civil society, and explains itself to civil society in a way that encour- ages people to work with the State, of their own free will. When I speak about civil so- ciety, I do not mean only non-governmental organizations, though they are a very im- portant part of it. I also mean universities, foundations, labour unions and - yes - pri- vate corporations" (UN, 2000, General As- sembly Twenty-fourth Special Session, Geneva).
The emergence of a vibrant and assertive civ- il society, notably in those countries where it had been virtually absent, may rightly be considered as a most welcome feature of the trends of the past twenty years. However, its effectiveness critically depends on the es- tablishment and maintenance of an enabling framework of laws, regulations and rules safe- guarding not only the independence of NGOs and other civil society organizations but also the transparency and accountabil- ity of their acts. Such conditions are predi- cated on a proactive State, a democratic cul- ture receptive to diversity and which values public service and, last but not least, an in- stitutional framework for effective inter-gov- ernmental cooperation.
Globalization also requires improved chan- nels of participation. There is a growing need for greater citizen participation and new participatory policy-making processes. In particular, the State could greatly benefit from weaving inter-social networks. It has been common practice in developing countries to see important problems, among them social problems, as an exclusive undertaking from the organizational point of view. These prob- lems would correspond to either the State, civil society or the market, but only to one of the aforementioned. In this type of logic, the weak points of each of the actors are em- phasized and the stress is placed on histor- ical and potential conflicts. This type of reasoning is "at this time the State cannot par- ticipate because ...", or "we can't rely on the NGOs because at one time they ..." etc. The social reality is so difficult and complex that it first and foremost imperatively demands responsibility from all social actors. As Wolfenshon, among others, stresses, "all must cooperate" because what will happen is in every- one's interest. However, it is also necessary to capitalize on what each party can con- tribute. Skills that might be utilized cannot be overlooked. The culture of "false competi- tion" should be replaced by one policy of "let's use the best of each and let's complement each other" (Wolfenshon, 2000).
Inter-social networks geared to solving im- portant social problems need to be built. In this context public policy should play the en- ergetic role of calling for the establishment of a network, and of being an ongoing stim- ulus for and a relevant actor in the network. But it should also actively attempt to unite as many diverse actors as possible in that net- work. Civil society can make valuable con- tributions to solving social problems. Religious communities, labour unions, universities, neighbourhood associations, and the NGOs set up to work in the social service area, and many other actors of a similar nature can con- tribute ideas and invaluable human and fi- nancial resources. The power of volunteers in the different developing countries and in small countries is very important. Concert- ed efforts to mobilize the social responsibil- ity of the business world should also be tak- en in order to directly involve it as an actor in large-scale social undertakings.
The inter-social networks are a complex web. They require diverse actors with different experience, languages, little practice in working together and mutual biases. In or- der to set up these networks and make them function, systematic and laborious action is required. The intelligent, democratic State ought to develop the needed capacities, in- cluding the ability for concentration, nego- tiation, joint planning, and creation of very flexible and open organizational designs.
In order to foster a new relationship be- tween civil servants and citizens, State in 
Kofi Annan United Nations Secretary-General
 stitutions ought to be more open, flexible in the face of change, and especially more ac- countable to the public at large. There is a great need to counteract the tendency, which is present in many countries, to a powerful and pervasive state machinery, which main- ly favours the rich and influential at the ex- pense of the poor. State institutions should be made to work for all and should not be seen, nor act as repressive or "unfriendly" to the majority of citizens. State institutions should not be "abusive" in the way they deal with citizens, but should be more open, transparent and work for and with, rather than against citizens. Therefore, greater em- phasis should be set on ethics and profes- sionalism in government, as well as on an- ti-corruption measures. Greater attention ought to be given to developing a more serv- ice-oriented spirit among civil servants, and to ensure effective and transparent mecha- nisms for citizens to channel their com- plaints concerning poor, inefficient or de- nied access to public services. Ombudsman mechanisms should be reinforced or set in place where they do not exist. It is a fact that in many developing countries, but also in the developed world, access to public services is made very difficult for those who lack per- sonal influence or money. In other words, what is a right becomes a privilege that only the few are able to "buy". For the rest of the pop- ulation getting a passport, renewing a license, or having a fair trial becomes a bureaucrat- ic "nightmare". In brief, there is a compelling need for state institutions to operate in a more democratic and accountable way in many coun- tries.
The role of social dialogue in institution- building also highlights the growing impor- tance of organized civil society. On the sub- national, national, and international levels active participation by groups of informed cit- izens, such as at the global summits during the past decade, has modified the process of decision-making, profoundly influenced out- comes and more than anything else added new meaning to "governance", a concept which, in truth, goes back to the XVII cen- tury, or earlier. Throughout the world, including developing countries and countries with
economies in transition, the number of civ- il society organizations has grown by leaps and bounds. Precisely on this account, how- ever, this old/new phenomenon is still the cause of much controversy and exaggerated claims.
One of the many fallacies born in the 1980s and 1990s was the belief that the retreat of the State could somehow be matched by cor- responding advances from both civil society and the private sector, which between them would be able to close the ensuing gap. This has not come about. "In quantitative terms, the collective contribution generated by pri- vate philanthropy remains infinitesimal compared to government programmes in most Western industrialized societies, at any rate" (O'Connell, 1996). In qualitative terms also, the lessons of experience suggest a cautious approach. A partnership with government entails responsibilities and, in the last analysis, the claim and obligation to speak and to decide for the country as a whole belongs to elected governments and them alone.
Properly exercised, supervision by the State could exert a salutary influence on NGOs/ CSOs. It would keep them on the right track. The State needs NGOs as an important out- let for outsourcing government services, at the national and sub-national levels. In our globalized economy, inter-governmental or- ganizations (IGOs) engage in similar part- nerships with international and local NGOs. Both governments and IGOs should know that there is a fine line between accountability and total control. This fine line must be observed and respected. It has not always been so.
These dangers are avoidable, but only through the establishment of legislative and regulatory frameworks which enforce ac- countability and oblige CSOs/NGOs to prove their worth and democratic credentials as well as their ability to raise a substantial part of their revenue from sources other than the gov- ernment in a transparent way. Paradoxical- ly, the virtue, utility and credibility of NGOs/CSOs, especially in an era of global- ization, are largely predicated on the pres- ence and affirmative action of a strong State. Because until they prove ability to escape the
many present risks, and until they broaden their base of financial support, civil society will remain a poor substitute for democrat- ically accountable governance and, at best, a useful adjunct to State-to-State cooperation through international organizations.
3. Creation of a strong and democratic institutional framework
3.1. Democracy, freedom and 
participation
Both in the current literature and popular discourse, "democratization" is frequently presented as a critical development and ir- resistible trend of the past quarter century. Thus, we read the following statement in the World Development Report 1999/2000: "The proportion of countries with some form of dem- ocratic government rose from 28 per cent in
1974 to 61 per cent in 1998. A majority of gov- ernments have made legally binding com- mitments to respect the civil and political rights of their citizens. Thus far, 140 countries have ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and 42 have signed the optional protocol of the Covenant, recognizing the Authority of the United Na- tions Human Rights Committee to consider claims from those alleging violations of their rights" (World Bank, 1999/2000, p. 43).
There is certainly truth in this statement. What it does not reveal, however, is the distance that exists between ritual and rhetoric, on the one hand, and reality on the other. Un- deniably, the world is host to a great diver- sity of forms of government - some more democratic than others. What is noticeable, and what the regional studies outlined in chap- ter II have underscored, is the fragility of democracy in several parts of the world, predicated as it is on a number of conditions which are not always present to the desired extent. Of these requisites, none other seem more vital than capacity for sound governance and a values system rooted in profound re- spect for freedom, equality and public serv- ice, or the pursuit of the common good.
Responding to the challenges that poverty, oppression and human insecurity have posed in many regions is part of the all-im- portant tasks of consolidating democracy and promoting human development. The emergence or restoration of pluralist democ- racies where autocratic regimes or totalitarian dictatorships had prevailed in the past may rightly be considered as one of the most pos- itive developments of the past fifteen years. The growth of an articulate and vibrant civ- il society, where none had existed before, is certainly another. Both these trends augur well for the future, and both are strength- ened by the lowering of barriers that comes with globalization.
However, these very welcome trends should not induce complacency. It must not be over- looked that, in a number of countries, the in- stitutional bases for democratic governance remain fragile. The structures to facilitate popular participation are still largely in the making and, last but not least, a culture of civic responsibility and of respect for diver- sity needs much nurturing and propitious con- ditions to grow. "To a considerable degree, the gap between democratic form and substance in the world is an institutional gap. No po- litical system in the world operates strictly according to its formal institutional pre- scriptions, but what distinguishes most of the democracies in Latin America, Asia, Africa and the postcommunist States are political institutions too weak to ensure the representation of diverse interests, constitution- al supremacy, the rule of law, and the con- straint of executive authority" (Diamond,
1999).
ment, which in turn are essential for the in- tegration of countries into the world econo- my. Of the needed institutions, the basic institutions, arguably, are:
Box III.3
Designing and/or strengthening institutions is key to democracy and economic developTHE ADMINISTRATION AND COST OF ELECTIONS PROJECT (ACE)
 An equitable, transparent and democrat- ic framework of laws and regulations to gov- ern registration, structure and operation of both political parties and CSOs. To date, in spite of the best efforts of IGOs, including the United Nations, such legislative and regulatory frameworks are either reminiscent of
What is the ACE Project?
The ACE publications provide systematic information on the range of choices available to election professionals involved in organizing elections. The publications specifically analise the differences among electoral choices and focus on the cost and administrative implications of those choices. 
Election specialists and writers around the world played a key role in producing the ACE Project. The result is over 5000 pages of information, including original texts, country studies and scanned sample materials such as ballot papers and manuals. The ACE Project has created and now supports the evolution of a unique online publication available via an Internet Website (www.aceproject.org) and a CD-ROM. Partners: The ACE Project is a joint endeavour of the United Nations, the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA), and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES).
Why is ACE needed?
Emergence of new democracies in the 1990s and continued reassessment of democratic institutions and electoral processes in countries with long established democratic tradition, highlighted the need for a unified comprehensive, simple to use and easily accessible resource of election information. 
The ACE Project Topic Areas
 Electoral Systems
 Legislative Framework
 Electoral Management
 Boundary Delimitation
 Voter Registration
 Voter Education
 Parties and Candidates
 Voting Operations
 Vote Counting
 Media and Elections
 Elections and technology
 Electoral Integrity
Examples of how ACE can be used:
As an informational tool and reference source when; 
 Re-designing the electoral process in new as well as established 
democracies
 Designing training courses for electoral officials and observers in order to 
increase their knowledge about electoral processes
 Providing information to the media about legitimate democratic electoral options 
Source: ACE, www.aceproject.org.
the preceding authoritarian regimes, or so cumbersome and slow as to make it very dif- ficult for citizens to establish and operate an association effectively.
 An efficient and effective, transparent and fair system for the organization and conduct of elections, both nationally and locally, for purposes of government or otherwise. Free and fair elections on all levels represent a ba- sic prerequisite of democratic government, but also of transparency and accountability, notably in the governance of civil society or- ganizations, both for profit and non- profit, political, philanthropic or otherwise.
Curiously, to this day, relatively little attention has been paid to the laws regulating elections, let alone to the mechanics of conducting them. It must not be overlooked that the qual- ity and vitality of democratic governance depend to a large extent on citizens' partic- ipation, and this begins at the polls, though it should not end there. Democracy means choices - effective choices - and, what is most important, it means that decision-making pow- er lies firmly with the citizens, the people. Without strategic choices at the national, sub- national or indeed international levels, and without discernible differences among political options, democracy degenerates into an emp- ty ritual, inviting public apathy which par- tisan rhetoric tries in vain to overcome. What should also be remembered is that is- sues do not disappear when they have been withdrawn from public debate, or because the body of citizens has failed to exercise their right to vote and to choose on those issues. More often than not, in such cases, the fo- cus of decision is shifted, and power in this
regard appropriated, directly or indirectly, by special interest groups.
In the diversified and highly complex soci- eties in which we live, diffusion and disper- sion of decision-making power are both in- evitable and desirable, but only up to a point. Given the considerably uneven dis- tribution of power and wealth, with staggering inequalities in these regards, this diffusion and dispersion also carries dangers which can- not be overlooked. While the orderly devo- lution of power, through decentralization or other means, keeps people in control and has the added merit of leaving the decisions to those directly concerned (e.g., the local com- munity or the end-users), appropriation of de- cision-making power, when it happens by de- fault, inevitably entails surrender of the public space to special interest groups. This need not happen. Nationally and interna- tionally, experiments with partnerships in- volving public sector and private sector agencies or NGO's, both state and non-state actors have amply demonstrated how, through performance contracting and other means, it is possible to ensure a win-win sit- uation, one that accommodates the special interest groups, but also, and above all, safe- guards accountability and the primacy of the public interest.
One of the critical challenges which con- fronts political leadership as we enter the XXI century is the pressing task of building, or overhauling, the structures that will permit such partnerships of state and non-state ac- tors, to combine respect for democratic val- ues, transparency and accountability with the pursuit of efficiency and effectiveness. In- creasingly, such structures and institutions will be required on the international level to design and to implement global policies and programmes.
3.2. Making democracy meaningful
Paradoxically, on the morrow of the fall of dic- tatorships and authoritarian regimes, the greatest challenge before us, as we enter the XXI century, may be precisely this: to make democracy meaningful to citizens at large.
In the foreseeable future, the dangers for democracy will come arguably less from dic- tators, though there may still be a few in the world at large. The massive intervention of major power-holders, either through control of the mass media and electoral campaign fi- nancing or through systematic corruption of officials, has devastating effects on the cred- ibility of democratic institutions and the le- gitimization of their outcomes. "There is in- creasing evidence that corruption under- mines development. It also hampers the ef- fectiveness with which domestic savings and external aid are used in many developing coun- tries, and this in turn threatens to undermine grassroots support for foreign assistance" (World Bank, 1997, World Development Re- port).
Democracies are not immune to the corrosive influence of unaccountable forces, which can turn democratic regimes into oligarchies of wealth or kleptocracies at worst. When this happens, a spirit of venality slowly pervades the system, as citizens lose interest, becom- ing the passive onlookers of a game played out by only a few. Democracies survive and thrive by empowering their citizens. Much of late has been made of this term, but of- ten the reality belies the current rhetoric. As commonly understood, empowerment im- plies having meaningful options, but also tak- ing part in making important decisions which affect people's lives. To make it real, it demands of all citizens and groups in civ- il society that they claim their rights and call the agents of government to account, as re- quired in a democracy. A proactive civil so- ciety is crucial to the vitality of democratic governance, whose pillars are none other than freedom, equality of opportunities and solidarity. The three pillars are indivisible, but while it may be true that freedom may have spread during the past decade, the ob- stacles (such as poverty and illiteracy) to equal opportunities have not, so far, been removed in many cases. Carried too far, poverty and inequality, whether in the East, West, North or South, can undermine the solidity of the social fabric, creating the phenomena of marginalization and social exclusion, com- pounded by alienation, that already exist
 
 around us. Ignoring such social problems is a recipe for failure.
3.3. The rule of law and public trust
The issue of what is needed most, good lead- ers or good laws, goes back to the beginnings of political discourse. Although both are es- sential and indeed complementary, few peo- ple would dispute that, under present con- ditions, given the scale and complexity of so- cial, economic and political transactions, on the global and national levels, sound legal and regulatory frameworks are sine qua non conditions for the prevalence and sustenance of a culture of trust and respect for the rule of law. 
Governments need to build effective regulatory and institutional frameworks, which include an efficient legal system that secures the rule of law; an independent judiciary that ensures reliable processes for resolving disputes; a strong parliament to counterbalance powerful executives; an efficient tax system that pro- vides the necessary resources for social pol- icy reforms and other legitimate state activities; a financial system that is modern, ade- quately supervised and transparent; and a political system that ensures widespread participation. Equitable, transparent and consistent legal systems are needed to pro- vide solid foundations and structures for so- cial institutions where initiative can thrive and collective pursuits, in both the public and business sectors, promote the general in- terest.
By contrast, nothing saps the public trust more quickly than the confusion resulting from in- applicable, vague, conflicting and forever changing legal provisions, which compound the costs of business, discourage enterprise or, worse still, afford knaves and villains windows of opportunity at public expense. Labyrinthine provisions and legislative loop- holes both serve to exacerbate the practice of rewarding the least deserving, and of de- frauding the public, thus slowly but surely, creating a climate of collective alienation, cyn- icism and greed.
The current pandemic of corruption, often tied to organized crime, is a disturbing phenom- enon of universal dimensions. Its worst manifestations have been the collapse of States, where social disintegration and in- formality prevail. In an era of globalization, such kleptocracies can serve as launching pads or havens for various illegal activities (for in- stance, money laundering). Very often, klep- tocracies condemn their own peoples to a fate of destitution and total insecurity at the margins of the global economy. However, they may also pose a threat to neighbouring countries, as recent experience in several parts of the world has demonstrated.
Since 1996, several global fora and major in- ternational and national reports have sounded the alarm, warning against the per- ils of corruption and organized crime, whose outreach has expanded with globalization. Among the earlier studies, the World De- velopment Report of 1997 on the "State in a Changing World" explored the many facets of this old/new phenomenon, its causes and impact on the effectiveness of institutions and thus on public trust (World Bank, 1997, pp.
99-101). Significantly, the study reached the conclusion that corruption cannot be effec- tively tackled in isolation from other prob- lems, of which it is often a mere symptom.
The problem can only be treated by ad- dressing its root causes, especially the flaws in the organization and management of the public service profession, and by promoting professionalism, performance, ethical val- ues and standards in public life at large.
3.4. Strengthening and modernizing national judicial systems
With the increase in complexity and type of cross-border activities, as well as with the grow- ing number of actors at the national, re- gional and global levels, there is a parallel increase in the need for regulation and en- forcement mechanisms. Sound legal frame- works, as well as an effective and inde- pendent judiciary is a crucial pre-condition for a country's success in a globalized world.
Globalization demands strong and effective judicial systems for a number of reasons. First and most importantly, a strong judiciary is a key factor in creating a stable environment for investments and entrepreneurship. It is also essential to ensure that democracies function properly through a system of checks and balances. The crucial role of the judici- ary, especially in relatively new democracies, is increasingly being recognized and the is- sue of "horizontal accountability" seems to be gaining a central relevance. O'Donnell de- scribes it as "the existence of state agencies that are legally enabled and empowered, and factually willing and capable, to take ac- tions or omissions by other agents of the State that may, in principle or presumably, be qualified as unlawful" (O'Donnell, 1997, p.
15). Without a proper system of checks and balances, the separation of powers could be jeopardized leading to a concentration of power in one of the branches of government, thus undermining the constitutional basis of a democracy. The task of the judiciary in con- temporary democracies is not only to solve conflicts among contending parties, but al- so to check governmental actions and to pro- tect minority rights. The fundamental pre- requisite is that the judiciary be independ- ent not only from the parties involved, but also from political pressure. Without a tru- ly independent judiciary there is no rule of law and, under such conditions, a demo- cratic free society is in danger.
A strong and efficient judiciary is also essential in providing a stable environment for the growth of investments and economic activi- ty. For a country to attract foreign capital and to be a desirable place for investment, it is of utmost importance that the rule of law is upheld. Potential investors will invest only if they perceive that a country is politically stable and especially if they feel that their business transactions are backed up by a well functioning legal and judicial system. The courts of justice have a very important role to play in guaranteeing that property rights are respected, that contracts are legally binding and that transactions occur in an at- mosphere of legality. Given that investors can choose where to invest, and in a globalized
world they have the whole globe to choose from, legal stability is a must not only to attract foreign investment, but also to promote the development of a strong domestic market. "There is a growing awareness that a judi- ciary able to resolve cases in a fair and time- ly manner is an important prerequisite for economic development. In many developing countries, the judiciary is not consistent in its conflict resolution, and carries a large back- log of cases, stifling private-sector growth and causing the erosion of individual and prop- erty rights" (Buscaglia and Dakalios, 1999, p. 1). "While globalization has spurred eco- nomic development, its benefits have un- evenly impacted different segments of soci- ety. The poor often lack legal rights to em- power them to take advantage of opportunities and provide them with security against ar- bitrary and inequitable treatment. Dis- criminatory laws and arbitrary enforcement of the laws deprive protection of individual and property rights, raise barriers to justice and keep the poor poor" (World Bank, 2001, p. 2). Inadequate access to justice is there- fore one of the major obstacles to development.
Also, courts of justice increasingly have to deal with cases related to transnational illegal ac- tivities. Criminal justice increasingly being involved in cases of transnational crime, corruption, trafficking in human beings and drugs, money laundering, and terrorism. This requires not only a more effective judicial system at the national level, but also greater cooperation at the international level. The Unit- ed Nations Convention against Transna- tional Organized Crime, which was adopted by the General Assembly at its Millennium meeting in 2000, is an example of interna- tional cooperation in this regard. It is the first legally binding UN instrument in the field of crime, which must be signed and ratified by 40 countries before it comes into force. States party to the Convention would be required to establish in their domestic laws four crim- inal offences: 
 participation in an organized criminal group; 
 money laundering; 
 
  corruption; and 
 obstruction of justice.
At the national level, courts of justice, especially in countries with economies in transition as well as recent democracies are called upon to decide on a growing number of cases, in- cluding cases regarding property rights and obligations. In other words, judicial systems are subject to great pressure and to a grow- ing demand for justice. This, in turn, requires modernizing the administration of justice.
The new UN instrument spells out how countries can improve cooperation on such matters as extradition, mutual legal assis- tance, transfer of proceedings and joint in- vestigations. "It contains provisions for vic- tim and witness protection, and shielding le- gal markets from infiltration by organized crim- inal groups. Parties to the treaty would al- so provide technical assistance to developing countries to help them take the necessary measures and upgrade their capacities for deal- ing with organized crime. Also adopted by the General Assembly were two optional proto- cols by which countries would undertake in- depth measures to combat smuggling of mi- grants and the buying and selling of women and children for sexual exploitation or "sweat shop" labour. A third protocol, deal- ing with the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, is under negotiation. Interlinked gangs worldwide traffic an esti- mated 4 million people every year as \0x2018human cargo'. The annual estimated earnings from this trafficking has reached US$ 5 to US$ 7 billion. The protocols on trafficking in human beings - new forms of slavery - and on smug- gling of illegal migrants are intended to beef up and internationalize efforts to stem these practices. The third protocol would commit parties to setting controls on the illicit man- ufacture and sale of firearms, which have been playing an increasing role in civilian violence, terrorism and organized crime. It is hoped that upon ratification, the Convention will emerge as the main tool of the internation- al community for fighting transnational crime" (UN, 2000, Convention against Transnational Crime, A/55/383).
With the advance of information technology courts of justice will be called upon to decide, on a growing scale, on cases related to e-com- merce activities, illegal activities on the In- ternet, and copyright issues on the Internet.
Furthermore, globalization has produced a number of changes in the way transactions are carried out and on the modalities of such transactions, and has opened up new areas, which increasingly demand greater regula- tion and enforcement. National judicial sys- tems, especially in countries with economies in transition and in developing countries, need to be strengthened both at the institutional and organizational level. In a number of de- veloping countries, the judiciary branch is the weakest branch of government.
At the institutional level, it is important to ensure that the judicial system is inde- pendent, i.e. that it is impermeable to undue political pressures, incorruptible, and fair in its decisions, and that it respects the rule of law. From an organizational point of view, the judiciary needs to be modernized. For this pur- pose, skills must be upgraded and informa- tion technology could be introduced, where the necessary infrastructure is in place, as a device that allows for quicker and more re- liable storage and retrieval of information. Judicial integrity may be strengthened in a number of ways. The Global Programme against Corruption, set up by the United Na- tions Office for Drug Control and Crime Pre- vention, has made some recommendations in this respect:
 "Data collection: There is a need for data collection and national and international exchange of information concerning the scope and variety of forms of corruption within the judiciary. There is a need to es- tablish a mechanism to assemble and record such data ... ;
 Remuneration: There is a need to improve the low salaries paid in many countries to judicial officers ... ;
 Monitor: There is a need to establish in every jurisdiction an institution, independent of
the judicature itself, to receive, investigate and determine complaints of corruption al- legedly involving judicial officers and court staff ... ;
 Judicial appointments: There is a need to institute more transparent procedures for ju- dicial appointments to combat the actuality or perception of corruption in judicial ap- pointments (including nepotism and politi- cization) ... ;
 Codes of conduct: There is a need for the adoption of judicial codes of conduct, for the inclusion of instruction of such codes in the education of new judicial officers and for in- formation to the public about the existence and provision of such codes against which the conduct of judicial officers may be meas- ured;
 Adherence: There is a need to enhance re- quirements for newly appointed judicial of- ficers to subscribe to such a judicial code of conduct and to agree, in the case of a seri- ous breach ... to resign from judicial or re- lated office;
 Delay: There is a need to ensure reason- ably rapid trials as justice delayed is justice denied ..." (UN, 2000, Office for Drug Con- trol and Crime Prevention).
3.5. Strengthening and modernizing national parliaments
Parliaments have a very important role to play in responding to the emerging chal- lenges caused by globalization and rapid change. Parliaments are the main forum for reaching agreements and concrete solutions to compelling problems such as the eradication of poverty, improvement of health and edu- cation services, public security and admin- istration of justice, as well as the fight against corruption, terrorism, drug traffick- ing and international organized crime. A well functioning parliament is also essential to ensure that adequate legislation is in place to protect the sectors of society which may be negatively affected by integration in- to the world economy. That is to say, parliaments can play a vital role in setting out leg- islation for the establishment of social safe- ty nets (e.g., unemployment benefits, re- training, relocation benefits). Legislation on such compelling social and economic problems is greatly needed in many countries world- wide.
Thus, strengthening parliament's opera- tional and organizational functions is of ut- most importance as part of a strategy of in- stitutional reforms and as condition for suc- cessful economic integration. It is also a nec- essary device to ensure that a country can effectively regulate through its own legisla- tion the increasingly complex areas, partic- ularly those related to globalization, that are in need of change. Furthermore, we should not forget that more democracy, more par- ticipation, and greater openness and trans- parency begin with a strong parliament.
The Legislative Power plays a central role in democratic regimes, especially within the division of powers framework, and represents a fundamental institution of constitutional democracies. Yet, its centrality and rele- vance depend to a great extent on how its leg- islative and representational functions are
Box III.4
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE COURTS IN AUSTRALIA
The Australian judiciary routinely uses electronic means to deliver judgments, to manage proceedings and to assist in legal research. This has offered great benefits to the legal profession and those people who come into contact with the legal system. And it has also opened up the courts to public scrutiny and allowed greater community awareness and understanding of the legal process in Australia, particularly the sentencing process in criminal matters.
The High Court took its first, tentative steps into this brave new world in the
1980s when it pioneered the use of satellite video conferencing. The Federal Court was a world leader when it set up its national video conferencing system in 1994. The Court was also the first Australian superior court to allow the recording of judgments for subsequent broadcast the videotaping of a whole trial (Yorta Yorta) for potential televising and the live broadcast of a judgment (MUA/Patricks Full Court).
The Court now regularly admits the electronic media to record judgments and broadcasts sound and vision of judgments on its Internet page. It has successfully conducted a live broadcast of a judgment on both Internet and cable television.1 The Court is now considering regular live broadcasts of judgments on the Internet.
Source: Australia, 2000, Attorney-General.
 performed. As is well known, the main prob- lems that affect parliaments in a number of developing countries are their - real or per- ceived - poor functioning, and lack of credi- bility and legitimacy. A weak Legislative Power, without credibility and legitimacy may pave the way to authoritarianism and to an unchecked Executive, leading to what O'Donnell has called "delegative democracies"; that is to say, democracies that are hollow and emptied of their true meaning once elec- tions have taken place (O'Donnell, 1994). This is especially true in presidential systems in which the mechanisms of checks and balances in place are weak, and the Executive can rule with almost unlimited power. The separation of powers, as well as the principle of checks and balances, are the fundamental basis of a constitutional democracy. As such, its vi- ability and strength depend, to a large ex- tent, on the capacity of the Legislative Pow- er to perform its functions. Strengthening the legislative body is extremely important to coun- terbalance and ensure appropriate political control over the often excessive prerogatives of the Executive. In other words, it is a pow- erful tool to reinforce democracy.
Parliaments perform a crucial role also in oth- er respects, primarily to represent all polit- ical forces of society and to act as a legitimate centre for consensus building in fundamen- tal decision-making processes. In fact, par- liaments are the principal political locus of dialogue, confrontation and mediation in a democracy. Inasmuch as parliament allows both the majority and the minority to enjoy freedom of expression, its members will be able to exercise steadily a representative and critical role. Parliaments also play a vi- tal role in guaranteeing political stability, and legal security, and in promoting economic and social development. 
In many parts of the world where a parlia- mentary culture has not yet developed, par- liaments have been rather weak vis--vis the Executive Power. It is therefore crucial to un- dertake major efforts in order to reinforce par- liaments' capacity to carry out its many func- tions in an efficient and transparent way. 
The role of the Legislative Power has become an issue of great relevance not only in young democracies but also in consolidated ones. Democracy could, indeed, be reinforced with an efficient, participatory and transparent institution, i.e. a strengthened parliament which adequately performs its functions, and becomes the forum of strategic thinking and cooperation, as well as the focal point of all sectors of the country, and the consensus center for fundamental decisions. Parlia- ments should be reinforced so as to allow all groups and interests to be articulated and rep- resented in a fair and equal manner. A par- liament with transparent procedures, that en- sures the full participation in debates and vot- ing for both the majority and minority rep- resents an essential factor in ensuring the proper functioning of a system of checks and balances. A parliament where the majority can resolve problems while the minority is empowered to express its opinions freely and vote in an environment of ongoing dia- logue is of utmost importance for political sta- bility. 
Parliaments in many regions of the world have great challenges ahead: to ensure that all sec- tors of society will be represented, that de- cisions will be taken in an open way, and that demands from civil society will be dealt with efficiently. 
3.6. Promoting effective 
decentralization
Promoting decentralization and broad par- ticipation of ordinary citizens in democrat- ic processes is being recognized as an important ingredient of contemporary democracies. Resolution 50/225/1996 of the General As- sembly of the United Nations called for "de- centralization of public institutions and services", often as a condition of "enhanced efficiency and productivity, accountability and responsiveness". More than just in- creasing efficiency, decentralization and peo- ple participation seek to bring government closer to the citizen, where it belongs. This is one feature that became a critical objec- tive in the transition process in the countries of Eastern Europe and beyond. A proactive
State is needed to provide a solid counter- weight to the dispersion of power but also of responsibility that may be the concommitants of decentralization and devolution of functions to civil society groups. Under appropriate safe- guards securing the requisite measure of transparency and accountability, such de- volution of functions is known to have pro- duced beneficial outcomes in terms of mus- tering support and mobilizing resources, both human and material, towards creative ends. However, experience demonstrates that this is only possible given a solid basis in the constitution and other relevant texts, a clear and consistent legislative framework, and financial resource allocations commen- surate to the tasks. To be sure, decentralization remains very high on the priority list of re- form of many developing countries.
4. The importance of strengthening social policies in an era of globalization
As mentioned earlier, globalization as tech- nical change not only brings opportunities, but also social costs. It is precisely in the so- cial area where the State can play a vital role and needs greater reinforcement. The un- derstanding that the State is essential in re- dressing the adjustment costs of globaliza- tion is becoming more widely accepted. In the past decades, however, more attention was given to economic imperatives than to social considerations. A number of countries and ma- jor international organizations have set great emphasis on efficiency, economic growth, and market competitiveness over- shadowing, to some extent, the intrinsic val- ues of democracy, equity, human rights and the quality of life. That is to say, too much attention was focused on markets and how they perform rather than on people. As a con- sequence, the debate concerning the devel- opment and the reform of the State has overwhelmingly focused on economic effi- ciency and technocratic solutions to political problems, whereas social matters have not been given enough consideration. Some thought that social problems could be solved by delegating a good part of them to the market. Others thought that civil society alone could find solutions to the problems. This ap- pears to be a very promising and interest- ing path, but experience shows that civil so- cieties, in many cases seriously weakened by the social problems characteristic of the de- veloping world, have significant limitations when it comes to confronting those problems.
A special study by Katzman on the topic maintains that: "It is therefore paradoxical
Box III.5
YEREVAN DECLARATION ON DECENTRALIZATION
The United Nations Conference on Decentralization held in Yerevan, Armenia, from 26 to 28 April 1999, focused on Eastern Europe and the CIS. It looked to the practical facets of policy implementation and sought to elicit lessons from experience in these countries. In light of the mixed record and oscillating fortunes of decentralization in the region as a whole, the Conference explored what, in its view, was needed for the success of reform. The Conference identified four such sets of conditions: 
 "First, the critical role that legislative bodies perform as prompters, initiators, monitors and guides of the process of decentralization; the part they play in shaping "an enabling institutional framework" and setting it in motion;
 Second, financial decentralization and creation, for local government, of an adequate resource base;
 Third, the human factor, which brings institutions to life. By common accord, human resources management and human resources development represent a critical need, but also a field of activity, which offers great potential for regional cooperation. This includes in-service training, but also personnel systems, which must be put in place so that capacity-building may yield all its potential benefits; and
 Fourth, civil society, to mobilize support for local self-government and help the body of citizens to internalize their role as clients, prompters, advocates, agenda-setters, monitors and evaluators of local government services."
The Conference unanimously adopted a Declaration which underlined the importance of the following:
 "The catalytic role of decentralization in the transition process and democratization;
 The need to pay attention to the specific circumstances of each particular country; the problem may be common, but the solutions vary widely from place to place. One-size-does-not-fit-all;
 Common to all countries is the need for a strong supportive centre with a view to decentralization. Based on the constitution and other relevant texts, a clear and consistent legislative framework should establish the foundations for the distribution of functions and competencies both between the State and local self-government and among the various levels of local self- government. Such a division of functions does not preclude a close cooperation among them."
Source: UN, 2000, ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/7.
 that while a policy takes root that aims to reduce the functions of the State in the area of protection and social security, in order to transfer them to civil society or to solidari- ty institutions created within the community, the family - as a primordial institution - shows signs of being unable to sustain even the most elemental functions" (Katzman,
1999). Accordingly, while "the 1990s began with the widespread expectation that achieving sound, market-oriented, macro- economic fundamentals was the ticket to the prosperity that had long eluded poor countries, the decade has ended with the more frustrating but also more realistic under- standing that sound macroeconomics is not a goal but just a precondition" (Naim, 2000, p. 97). 
By the end of the 1990s new trends emerged and new evidence suggested that economic and social development are strictly intertwined, and that both affect the quality of a democ- racy and the well-being of its citizens. Ever since there has been a growing awareness that economic development is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for long-term equi- table growth on which human prosperity and progress depend. Although economic growth is an essential part of development, it does not by itself lead to human develop- ment or an improvement in people's living conditions. 
It is widely recognized that an increase in GDP does not automatically translate into greater well-being for all. There may well be economic growth, but if its benefits are unequally distributed it means very little to the vast ma- jority of people in a given country. The persisting disparities in developing regions of the world indicate that inequities in income distribution have not been mitigated by economic growth.
Needless to say, a high concentration of pow- er and wealth in the hands of a few people translates into unequal access to political pow- er and critical resources, to health care and education, and to employment opportuni- ties (Griffin and Khan, 1992, p. 1). There is growing consensus around the idea that "... social and economic welfare are not separate
concepts. Without economic prosperity, no coun- try can provide for all the social needs of its citizens. But nor can any country be called truly prosperous so long as many of its citi- zens are left to fend for themselves against ignorance, hardship and disease. Nor yet can any country achieve prosperity by sub- ordinating all social concerns to the achieve- ment of a few quantitative benchmarks. What matters in the last resort is the qual- ity of life - a big part of which is the feeling that you belong freely to your society, and that it also belongs to you" (UN, 2000, General Assembly Twenty-fourth Special Session, A/55/344).
As argued by Sen, "development can be seen as a process of expanding the real freedoms that people enjoy. Development requires the removal of major sources of non-freedom: pover- ty as well as tyranny, poor economic oppor- tunities as well as systematic social depri- vation, neglect of public facilities as well as intolerance or over-activity of repressive States" (Sen, 1999/a, p. 3). Expanding per- sonal freedoms implies that people have greater opportunities to make choices in every field, and to participate in every sphere of public life. To enjoy such freedoms, people must be free from avoidable illness, free from ignorance, and have reasonably ad- equate living conditions. As emphasized in the Declaration of Human Rights, article
22: "everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to re- alization - through national effort and in- ternational cooperation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State
- of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his [or her] dignity and the free development of his [or her] personality". 
The problem which confronts many developing countries is that until now macro-economic policies, deregulation, and privatization have not been coupled with similar reforms in political and social areas. In many cases, low consideration has been given to im- proving health care, education, and public in- frastructures. This, in turn, has made it dif- ficult for many countries to elude the social costs of globalization, including the repercussions of economic and financial instabil- ity. In some developed countries, cutting back on social expenditure has also meant more insecurity in the face of change en- gendered by globalization.
There would seem to be ample space for a reassessment of the role that public policies can play in the developing world in dealing with social problems. It is not simply a case of returning to the omnipotent view of the State, but of thinking about a different state model: a State which is articulated into pro- ductive networks with civil society in all its manifestations, and with the same poor com- munities all together trying to find really valid solutions to problems. UNDP has outlined a broad plan involving lines of action that gov- ernments ought to promote and among which are the following:
 "To ... increase opportunities as a priority of economic policy.
 To eliminate biases against the poor in the macroeconomic framework.
 To invest in the capacity of the poor by re- structuring public spending and taxation.
 To make sure the poor have access to pro- ductive resources, including loans.
 To increase the productivity of small-scale agriculture.
 To promote micro-enterprises and the non- structured sector.
 To emphasize industrialization ... to increase employment opportunities" (UNDP, 1999, Hu- man Development Report).
In order to reduce inequality in developing countries, McGovern proposes implementing the following measures through alliances among governments, companies and NGOs:
 "To build up human capital through edu- cation and by ensuring that the poor have access to education. It has been shown that education is the most important asset on which
the disparity of income is based, and that salary dispersion among the skill levels has be- come quite significant.
 To make sure that clean water, health services and housing are accessible to the poor.
 To make available more financial assets and productive resources to the poor and gener- ate productive and remunerative employ- ment for them.
 To reduce inequality by progressive taxa- tion of income and other redistributive poli- cies.
 To transfer income and adopt other protective measures for society during periods of ad- justment and crises and implement pro- grammes to fight poverty and for the bene- fit of the poorest members of society" (Mc- Govern, 2000).
A State with renewed organizational lines is needed to put into practice policies with the above characteristics. The experience of the last decades has shown the need for public policies, but has also brought to light the ur- gency of updating government executory structures and of overcoming their inflexibility and inefficiency in many cases. 
States need to address the many social prob- lems that are arising as a result of global- ization. Stronger institutions and more eq- uitable social policies are greatly needed in developing countries not only because they will enable the market to flourish and will reduce the effects of global instability, but al- so because they will lead to an improvement of people's living conditions. "It is now wide- ly recognized that market-driven globaliza- tion by itself will ensure neither fairness nor social progress ... The asymmetric distribu- tion of benefits and risks arising from glob- alization warrants a global 'social contract' between developing and developed coun- tries, based on genuine solidarity and shared responsibility" (UN, 2000, Millennium Report, A/54/2000, p. 9). 
 
4.1. Reinforcing social capital
Several recent studies have reaffirmed the importance of building social capital to- gether with the need to strengthen the ca- pacity of the State for social development. Af- ter its 1990 landmark report on Poverty, the World Bank, in a document significantly en- titled "The State in a Changing World", gave prominence to the concept of social capital, which it associated with citizen involvement in local public affairs and the impact of in- vestments in education and health on eco- nomic performance (World Bank, 1997, pp.
114-118). Experts in public administration cri- tiqued the fact that all too many countries had not placed "social development at the top of the development agenda" (UN, 1997, E/1997/86, p. 32). They called on the State to reclaim its "central role in the formulation of public policies" (ibid., p. 30), also remind- ing governments that "return on invest- ments in human resources are, in some cas- es, higher than those in physical assets" and that "countries whose contribution of in- come and assets is more equal have been grow- ing more rapidly than those where distribution is unequal" (ibid.)
Considering the extent of global interde- pendence, reinforcing public trust and build- ing social capital must be viewed as essen- tial, not merely for the purposes of nation- al development, but also of global peace. Ex- perience demonstrates that building public trust requires concerted efforts to meet the challenges of poverty, inequality and social exclusion. These phenomena have not been tackled with efficiency in recent years, rep- resenting a real threat both to individual coun- tries, where they prevail, and also to global society. No day goes past without a stark re- minder of this threat. International cooper- ation among strong, proactive States is therefore urgently needed to begin address- ing this problem effectively.
To be sure, there is no more important task than building social capital in a knowledge- based society. Countries that want to bene- fit from globalization must invest in educa- tion, and in upgrading their people's skills and knowledge in order to be competitive in the global economy. Learning is the indis- pensable investment required for success in the "information age" we are entering. As ar- gued by Reich, "policy makers have failed to understand that a nation's real technologi- cal asset are the capacities of its citizens to solve complex problems of the future. It is their knowledge, their contribution to the world economy which determines a country's pros- perity" (Reich, quoted in Beck, 2000, p.137). 
It is noteworthy that developing countries which have given priority to education and human development are also those that have prospered the most economically, and have been able to integrate more rapidly in- to the global economy. "Whereas almost everyone in South Korea, Taiwan, Singa- pore, and Hong Kong received a high-school education when their countries' export drives began decades ago", in many regions of the developing world half of the popula- tion never makes it to fifth grade (Business Week, 2000, 6 Nov., pp. 72-100). Not sur- prisingly, Latin America and South Asia are hit by great poverty. Africa suffers from one of the lowest levels of education in the world and has so far not been able to reap the benefits of globalization. Accordingly, education may be said to be one of the most significant factors in determining a country's capacity to participate in the new global economy, as well as a tool for people to obtain higher lev- els of quality of life. Only if people have ad- equate levels of education, access to health care, and adequate living conditions can there be a vibrant society and economy. There can be no true development without social development. 
Developing social capital is also indispensable to create or reinforce domestic market economies. Fostering policies aimed at en- hancing the level of education and techno- logical knowledge of citizens is of paramount importance in creating a workforce that is up-to-date, prepared for change and capable of seizing the many new opportunities of a globalizing world. Combating poverty and po- larization in terms of power and wealth is extremely important. In the absence of a well- developed middle class, the entrepreneurial forces will be limited, as will the rate of con- sumption and savings, hindering economic progress. This means that "for the many emerging countries that already have the in- stitutions and income levels to attract pri- vate capital and the education levels to pros- per in the new information age, the private sector will fuel continued economic devel- opment" (Cutter, Spero and D'Andrea Tyson,
2000, p. 93). For those countries that lack cer- tain fundamental conditions, such as basic ed- ucation for all, training opportunities, adequate pension systems, health care benefits and safety nets, people-centred economic growth
- essential for prosperity - will lag behind. 
Official development assistance (ODA) could play a significant role in this respect. Funds could be directed towards critical social ar- eas and building public infrastructure. Loans from major international financial in- stitutions could also include human or social conditions. Until now, conditionality has been imposed to monetary, fiscal, exchange- rate, and trade policies. As argued by Streeten, "it has more recently been applied to environmental, political and human rights policies and international reform policies (under the "banner" of governance), al- though funds have not been added. ... Hu- man or social conditions could also be added. Indeed, it can be argued that these should have higher priority, because the effects of economic variables are not a matter of sci- entific certainty but the obligation to reduce human misery is a moral certainty" (Streeten, 1996, p. 32). Whether recipient coun- tries would see this as an infringement on their sovereignty and object to such condi- tionality is a matter for concern, but one that must be addressed.
Finally, education, especially civic educa- tion, is a fundamental pre-requisite in any country in order to enhance citizen's partic- ipation at all levels. Education and training deserve special consideration since they are invaluable instruments in building self-re- liance in the face of the economic turmoil that globalization can engender, particularly in cer- tain parts of the world. In other words, so- cieties must be ready for change, and edu- cation programmes can play a major role in responding to the challenges of globalization.
4.2. Public services for everyone: a desirable goal
Poverty is not simply related to employment or the income of a family group. A core com- ponent is the actual access to basic public serv- ices. For example, a key risk factor in pub- lic health in developing countries is the lack of access by the poor to services that should be guaranteed for the entire population, such as sanitation, electricity and potable wa- ter. The same occurs in the vital field of ed- ucation. If public policies do not actively in- tervene to facilitate universal access to grammar and highschool education, there will be significant imbalances among the differ- ent social sectors that will strengthen the re- production of the "perverse circles of in- equality". Also, without active public policies, only children from the upper and middle classes will be able to attend pre-school - to- day considered to be an imperative and vi- tal step in the educational process - while the importance of access to education will pro- gressively increase. An Uruguayan research
 
 study (Katzman, 1999) concluded that, in Mon- tevideo, in 1981, young people between 20 and
30 years old needed 9 years of schooling to maintain a family, without sinking into poverty. At present that figure has risen to
17 years of education.
The notion of public services should also in- clude the progressive idea, present in the in- dustrialized world, of the necessity of guar- anteeing the so-called caregiver services, such as day care for children, care for the eld- erly, nursing care, support for the family in general, and protection in the event of a cri- sis. In different countries some of these serv- ices are provided by women, who already have a seriously overloaded workday without recognition or remuneration, resulting in significant gender-linked inequalities.
One of the central missions of a democratic and effective State is to ensure that every- one has access to basic services of appropri- ate quality. Most importantly, States need to adopt an integrated holistic approach to de- velopment and to focus on inclusion policies
- starting with education for all, especially women and marginalized groups. Universal access to health care, and social protection for the unemployed, elderly and those with disabilities should be a priority not only in developing countries, but in any democrat- ic country as well. 
4.3. Establishment of an information system to design and monitor social policies
What are the poverty levels distributed by regions and districts in a country? What are the diverse forms of poverty? What is the of- fering of social services available in each district in comparison with the magnitude of the demand? How are the basic social variables evolving from the employment lev- els, the types of employment, all the way through to the costs of the staples of daily living. What are the social impacts of the di- verse economic policy alternatives? What economic effects can the different social poli- cies, in turn, have on production?
These and many other key questions for the ad- equate formulation of social policy are difficult to answer in many developing countries because of the lack of organic systems for generating specialized information about the social area. This leaves all social decision makers in a sit- uation where they must use information gen- erated for other purposes, as well as data that has not been updated or of doubtful quality, along with the fundamental problem of monitoring. Efficient social management requires the gen- eration of information in real time, on the ba- sis of which the results and concrete impacts are being produced. Unplanned effects often ap- pear in the social sphere, some of which may be negative and others positive. This is high- ly unpredictable ground and monitoring satisfies essential functions. 
The establishment of social information sys- tems with modern methodologies, data pro- cessing and ongoing contact with reality should be one of the axes of social institutional renewal.
4.4. Inter-organizational 
management of social programmes
Poverty and vulnerability derive from sets of mutually interacting problems. The de- termining factors of deprivation, which af- fects vast sectors of society, act by reinforc- ing each other. Thus, families in crisis because of the burden of poverty, will lead to low per- formance at school by children or cause them to drop out. This in turn will make it diffi- cult for these children, when they grow up, to obtain stable employment and raise sound families. Public policies must be adapted to the structural nature of poverty if they are to really impact it. If they act in isolated man- ner, focusing on a specific factor, the possi- bility of these policies exerting any type of influence will be severely limited. The great- est productivity and impact of social policies and programmes is found in the organizational integration of efforts. Comparative experience clearly indicates that the most successful so- cial programmes are those that have targeted this substantive combination of different types of efforts. Thus, for example, the pro- grammes with the greatest impact in reducing the grade school drop-out rate, are nev- er those programmes whose focus is strict- ly limited to "education", to acting only in the classroom. Successful programmes combine actions focusing on family groups, nutrition, and other dimensions, and the most useful preventive health programmes are those with an approach that is not exclusively medical, but rather actively incorporate ed- ucational, cultural and psycho-social variables.
In many developing countries, the government structures are designed and geared almost counter to what has been recommended. Everything is set up for isolated sector ac- tion. Much work goes into carefully tracing the boundaries among the different min- istries. The spheres of influence of the Min- istry of Health, or Education, or those deal- ing with gender, youth, families, or housing, are formally delimited with great detail. Each ministry zealously defends its jurisdiction and tries to keep the others from invading its territory. An infinity of "towers and bu- reaucratic drawbridges" are raised to prevent access by strangers. In the social area, this is contrary to the basic logic of social poli- cies. Coordination is not only desirable; it is indispensable so that serious action can be taken with respect to the multiple manifes- tations of poverty and vulnerability. If the min- istries and agencies do not integrate actions through inter-organizational formulas, there will be a deficient use of resources and very lean results. Systematic work is imperative so that the transition can be made from a cul- ture of "bureaucratic castles" to one of "or- ganizational networks".
4.5. Toward decentralizing social services
Decentralization of functions, responsibilities, and resources toward levels that are closer to the citizens appears to be the route to or- ganizational renewal of the traditional State with multiple virtues. Many of its advantages appear to lie in the social field. Action in ar- eas such as health, education, the fight against poverty, strengthening of the fami- ly, preventing delinquency, and ensuring compensation for people who are displaced
because of economic restructuring caused by greater economic openness, will be more in tune with reality if such action takes place at the local level. It will no longer be a question of long-distance decisions emanating from large urban centers, but of actions that local institutions will take on a daily basis, bearing in mind the variations in the reali- ty of each area. Decentralized social action will make it easier for "face-to-face" contact, which is very relevant in the social field. Con- ditions will also be created that are the most conducive to citizen participation in social pro- grammes, and there will be increased viability for an effective social monitoring of such programmes. The inter-organizational inte- gration mentioned earlier will be easier to implement on the more limited municipal lev- el.
However, international experience has shown that all these virtues may not be present in their entirety or even partially, if careful attention is not paid to certain risks inherent to the decentralization processes in the developing world. In many cases, there are marked asymmetries among municipal- ities. If measures are not taken in the resource- transfer processes to ensure regional balance, with a positive bias in favour of the weak- est, decentralization could worsen the pre- existing situation. Central government must guarantee equity. The delegation, for exam- ple, of taxation powers to finance healthcare or education could have very different results depending on the actual capacity of the dif- ferent types of municipalities to collect tax- es. A different risk is one derived from an- other type of asymmetry or the degree of so- cial polarization toward the interior of the regional jurisdictions and municipalities. In many cases there are small, local "oli- garchies" that from time immemorial have controlled the functioning of local society. If democratizing conditions are not achieved, it is most probable that decentralization will be "taken over" by those minorities for their own interests. Another problem is the degree of actual capacity of the municipalities to im- plement social policies. The intention of the central government and of the municipal mayors to decentralize, is insufficient. A lo 
 cal, social, institutional framework must al- so be developed. Numerous municipalities in the developing world either have no insti- tutional area specializing in social matters, or else it is part of another area. It is nec- essary to begin social "institution building" on the municipal level and to provide up-to- date training to local human resources to man- age the programmes.
In a recent study, ECLAC included warnings regarding some of the risks identified above in the case of Latin America. ECLAC stress- es a point that can also be applied to other regional realities: "Theoretically, decentral- ization offers advantages derived from a lo- cal provision of services that promotes greater responsibility and better control by users and by the respective communities, which can translate into more efficient social man- agement. In view of the disparity of income and availability of human capital in rural ar- eas of the countries of the region, this trans- fer of social responsibilities could have a se- rious impact in terms of territorial equity" (ECLAC, 1999).
Steps should be taken to advance along the road to decentralization, but it is also nec- essary to adopt policies to confront the risks in question.
4.6. Community participation: a strategic key for renewing the social institutional framework
Comparative results are conclusive. Social pro- grammes with active community participa- tion in their design, management and eval- uation have better results than programmes of a vertical bureaucratic nature. Among others, a study by the World Bank analyzed the performance, under different organiza- tional modalities, of 121 projects for supplying potable water to groups of poor farmers in
49 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin Amer- ica. Those projects with a high rate of com- munity participation also had a high return in 80 per cent of the cases, and an average return in 20 per cent of the cases; that is, none of these projects recorded a low yield. However, among the projects with a low rate of community participation, only 2.7 per cent recorded a high yield; 40 per cent recorded an average yield; and 57.3 per cent a low yield. The most successful projects of recent decades, such as those of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, the EUUCO schools in Cen- tral America and Villa El Salvador in Peru, all are eminently participatory (Narayan, 1994).
Participation contributes very specific elements to the organizational process, which influence the differences cited. Among others, the co- design of projects with the poor community allows it to incorporate its true priorities. The community's participation in managing the project also gives it a singular strength. When the community feels that it owns a proj- ect it also takes the initiative, contributes ideas, and takes an interest in each detail of the project. The community's integration into monitoring and evaluating the project gives that project a permanent "base" in reality. Those benefiting from the project will con- sistently provide feedback as to whether or not targeted goals have been reached and to what degree, as well as what modifications or corrections need to be made. Community participation ensures the transparency of the project and perhaps, above all, ownership by the community generates an increased im- portance of such ownership. The communi- ty learns and its self-esteem grows as the groundwork is laid for the sustainability of the project once external aid is withdrawn.
However, despite the noteworthy managerial advantages added to the already important positive consequences of democratization, in developing countries participation in so- cial projects is advancing in limited fashion. Government spokespersons often claim to agree with democratization and numerous public policies proclaim it, but in practice there are strong impediments to and difficulties in achieving democratization and the accumu- lated frustrations of poor communities are uncountable.
One of the most important organizational changes needed in the transformation of the State is to replace the current underhandedly
anti-participatory "bureaucratic" culture, with one that is really interested in participation and willing to promote it. This is not simply a problem of form. Change will not be achieved through decrees or regulations: it is something more profound. There is an entire organizational culture based on hier- archy and verticality, with a strong author- itarian stamp, that clashes with the call for a consultative, shared and democratic man- agement, implicit in participation. Such change is possible if the appropriate strate- gies are used. There are already diverse ex- periences in joint work between public serv- ice and the community with excellent results on a number of fronts, such as the interna- tionally recognized participatory municipal budget in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Significant ex- periences with officials themselves partici- pating in managing their own organizations are beginning to emerge. From the outset this will establish the bases for a culture that favours community participation, such as the one that is being implemented in the Cana- dian social service.
In addition to all the previously mentioned and other ancillary advantages, participation has another very relevant advantage that is connected with the preceding point: decen- tralization. The sum of decentralization plus community participation is a powerful com- bination. Active intervention by local com- munities in the decentralization processes by participating in the design of policies, man- agement and evaluation of the municipali- ty creates conditions that are more con- ducive to ensuring that the basic elements of decentralization are achieved. This ac- tive intervention prevents decentralization from being taken over by the power elites, and pro- motes and supports actions by civil servants, enriches managerial capacity, is a powerful anti-corruption measure, and contributes a highly efficient evaluation mechanism.
4.7. The focus of social management
An intelligent, democratic State should have exceptional ability in the area of social man- agement. What is social management? Is it good business management? There appear
to be managerial problems in the social area that are similar to some that appear in the regular management of any organization; how- ever, there are also other, very specific prob- lems, that merit particular attention and re- quire the use of appropriate technical crite- ria in solving them. Some problems arise from the preceding points. A socially efficient management should give preference to com- munity participation; decentralize toward regional and municipal governments; promote the establishment of inter-organizational networks toward the internal workings of the public sector and inter-social networks with other actors from society; systematically practice transparency; generate ongoing in- formation regarding social matters (as was recommended above); and, as a body, moni- tor and evaluate programmes. All this un- derscores the need for capabilities, attitudes, orientations and very specific managerial criteria, which must be well differentiated from those of the traditional hierarchical man- agement. In the latter case, participation, de- centralization and networks have a limited meaning; in social management they are the key to success.
Furthermore, to all the preceding we should add that the organizational mission of social management is singularly complex. The tar- get objectives of social policies and pro- grammes are not similar to those of other or- ganizational fields. What is sought is to en- sure that the programmes are efficient in terms of utilization of the usual target resources, but at the same time that their final impacts on poverty and related problems be those that are really expected, which implies another type of efficiency: that of a quantitative/qual- itative type. In effect, the aim is to have the programmes contribute to improving equity, a crucial topic today for the developing world. Therefore, those programmes must ad- dress multiple considerations regarding who the final beneficiaries will be. It is also hoped that the programmes will be self-sustaining. This is a very relevant point. Internal reports of the World Bank indicate that about 50 per cent of the Bank's projects do not satisfy this condition. Five or six years after the completion of the project, when the international or 
 ganization had withdrawn, the flow of ben- efits to the community was interrupted be- cause the strengths needed for the self-sus- tainability of the programmes had not been developed.
However, the dynamics of social pro- grammes in progress appear to differ markedly from what happens in other or- ganizational fields. The programmes are characterized by a high degree of volatility. Multiple actors participate in them, pa- tronage as well as economic and political in- terests come into play, and the poor com- munities have basic instabilities. All these, plus other factors, contribute to the contin- ual appearance of variations, some of which pose heretofore unforeseen obstacles while others generate opportunities from which benefit can be obtained. Describing the sit- uation, Dennis Rondinelli observes, after analyzing numerous programmes imple- mented by international organizations in developing countries: "Regardless of how comprehensive the planning of a project, or the way in which the technical analysis was carried out, rarely is there a comment that the problems encountered could not have been predicted" (Rondinelli, 1983).
States need a social managerial approach to address all these details: the specific mission of social programmes, high volatility dy- namics, orientation to participation, decen- tralization, and the establishment of networks. This would presuppose the specialized train- ing of social managers with the skills to see to such details, and a general organization- al culture that gives priority and is ready to confront them.
An in-depth reform of the State in develop- ing countries is essential for development. Re- forms should encompass a clear orientation toward basic public services for everyone; the creation of a strong and efficient institu- tional framework; the establishment of an in- formation system to design and monitor so- cial policies; safety nets; inter-organization- al links; decentralization; broad community participation; inter-social networks; trans- parency; and a social managerial approach.
What basic conditions are needed to steer re- forms in this direction and transform the State into the kind that is required to implement innovative public policies, much like those listed above, and that will make it possible to confront the extremely serious problems of exclusion that are rampant today in de- veloping countries? (UNDP, 1999, Human De- velopment Report). Following are some final comments on this problem.
An essential underlying condition for mak- ing progress in directions of this type of management is the requirement that the reform in the roles and characteristics of the State have the solid backing of society. In- sofar as the reform of the State is concerned, experience has repeatedly shown that changes introduced by just technical ra- tionality "come up short". It is possible to eas- ily prevent or reverse them. In-depth re- forms require active social and political sup- port. In this case the support can be convened, given the objectives, which are to have a gov- ernment that can actively and efficiently help to confront poverty, the gaps in health care, inequality, differential access to tech- nologies, vulnerability and other alarming so- cial phenomena such as the vertiginous in- crease in criminality. However, in many de- veloping countries, a broad debate regarding very relevant aspects of the problem must be opened up and promoted. There appears to be a consistent tendency to see social deficits as lamentable but postponable problems that will automatically be resolved by "a flow of benefits" which will occur when the economic recipes, favoured in recent decades, are adopted. From this point of view, the social is seen to be basically an ex- pense that is necessary primarily for politi- cal reasons, but which should be limited be- cause it diverts resources from the economy.
Progress has been made in recent years in this debate, but there is still a long way to go. It has been demonstrated that social problems cannot be resolved by means of a "flow". The losers continue to increase and the winners expand the gap between them- selves and others. A typical case is Latin Amer- ica. Birdsall and Londono have demonstrated that such is the weight of inequali- ty in social development that the high rate of poverty would be half of what it is if the inequality levels (likewise high) of the ear- ly 1970s had been maintained and if they had not risen as fast as they did. Therefore, the suggestion is that if the efforts that are in- dispensable for ensuring that an economy grows, and has stability, technological progress and competitiveness are not ac- companied by energetic social public policies, the social deficits will not be resolved (Bird- sall and Londono, 1997). Social policies are not stopgap measures while waiting for the "flow" to begin, but are a fundamental com- ponent for balanced development.
However, the debate to be initiated in the de- veloping world must go further. What needs to be discussed is basically that social ex- penditure is not just a cost, but also an in- vestment. To consistently earmark resources over time for the development of education, to increase the number of years of schooling and the quality of the curriculum, to improve public health rates and expand the areas where potable water and sanitation services are avail- able, is to strengthen the most valuable re- source of any economy in the XXI century: the quality of the population. In other areas, as was already mentioned, access to basic con- ditions for competitiveness is strongly linked with the average level of the labour force in a country. In recent years, diverse "hi-tech" investors selected a Latin American country for their businesses; specifically Costa Rica, small and with limited natural resources. A decisive factor in making this selection was that it is one of the few countries which has systematically invested over the decades in health and education, has a well qualified pop- ulation and a solid sanitation system.
Social policies, besides being indispensable to confront the deficits in this area are, in accordance with modern development views, a powerful lever for healthy growth and in- tegration in the world economy. As Alain Touraine points out: "Instead of compensat- ing the effects of economic logic, social poli- cies should be perceived as an indispensable condition for economic development"
(Touraine, 1997). It is necessary to promote this great debate in developing countries because it will create a firm support base among citizens for the extremely necessary social reform of the State.
Another fundamental condition for progress in this reform is to confront another type of powerful reasoning that may be found in de- veloping countries. One often hears the claim that it is impossible to do anything of importance in the social area because of the severe restriction of resources. Developing coun- tries have scant resources and are con- demned, according to this line of reasoning, to having a significant part of their popula- tion live in poverty. 
Without a doubt, the topic of resources is fun- damental. Absolutely everything possible should be done so that developing countries can grow at the highest possible rates, have economic stability, attract investments, and advance technologically. However, Sen pos- es a structural question in this regard: how can we explain that certain countries with per capita gross products lower than those of other countries, nonetheless have a bet- ter life expectancy, which is a decisive indi- cator? (Sen, 1998). The Nobel Laureate in Eco- nomics maintains that life expectancy should be considered a very important indi- cator of economic success or failure.
A condition for progressing toward the type of State required now has nothing to do with the discussion of the overall environment, but with the direction reform takes. Reform must respect the diversity of national con- ditions. The strategy should be selective and gradual. Reform styles should not be elitist, nor vertical, and it is necessary to involve pub- lic officials in the reform. The State, with its participatory attitude regarding what it wants to achieve, should be participatory not only from the inside out, but also from the outside in.
A very crucial aspect of reform is to resume the ethical discussion of the public function, which has been relegated to the sideline in purely technocratic reforms.
 
Who should public policies serve? What eth- ical dilemmas have been posed? What should the code of ethics of the civil servant encompass? The fact that the civic servant needs to feel that his or her work has the po- tential of serving the community and take pride in the work being done, should be top- ics of discussion.
What could be the stimulus for creating con- ditions, such as those mentioned above, that might favour reform? How to promote an im- portant public debate about the priorities of society, the role of the social sphere, the al- lotment of scarce resources, participatory reforms toward the outside and also inside the civil service framework, ethics and ad- ditional related topics?
It would seem that much can be expected from the ongoing strengthening of democratizing processes, with respect to which important progress has already been made in develop- ing countries. The call for genuine partici- pation has grown increasingly, and slowly but surely the fundamental conditions for democracy are improving. Civil societies are becoming stronger and their role in decen- tralized entities such as municipalities is grow- ing. There is ever closer monitoring of pub- lic actions, more vigorous demands for the efficient functioning of the justice system and of other key institutions, and repudiation of
corruption is on the rise. As Sen points out, one of the consequences of democracy is that it generates "political incentives for deci- sion makers to respond positively to the needs and demands of society" (Sen, 1999/b). The more active democracy is the greater and more effective will be the pressure of these incentives on the decision makers. Sen's ex- ample is well known.
The vast contingents of people living in poverty, the extensive sectors of the population that are being left out of the virtual world and which are therefore forming a new dis- advantaged group or the "cybernetic illiter- ates" who cannot take full advantage of glob- alization, the people affected easily by eco- nomic and natural crises, demand immedi- ate answers because they embody immense social suffering. As Pope John Paul II said in 1999: "the problem of poverty is urgent and cannot be left for tomorrow".
A more socially proactive State, supported by democratization processes, can play a very important role in the face of the countless prob- lems that afflict developing countries. The les- sons and warnings that can be gleaned, par- ticularly from world experiences in the last decade, are that the development of capabilities, in terms of institutions and high level gov- ernment skills and leadership, have rarely been important for everyone.
To be sure, globalization calls for improved arrangements for global governance. It also requires the "development of appropriate policies, at national, regional and community levels, for optimal use of the global economy in the interest of ... human welfare and de- velopment" (Helleiner, 2000, p.6). Political so- lutions to the many challenges posed by globalization need to be pursued at these three different levels of governance, possibly in syn- ergy, if we want globalization to work for all. 
The failures of the past coupled with the need to make globalization more equitable call for a people-centred approach to globalization. As expressed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, "no shift in the way we think or act can be more critical than this:
we must put people at the centre of every- thing we do" (UN, 2000, Millennium Re- port, A/54/2000). We need this vision to cope with the challenges of globalization and to tackle the social issues that undermine hu- man development and prosperity both in developed and developing countries.
Social, ethical and environmental values ought to be included in our economic calcu- lus if we want to preserve the earth for fu- ture generations and if we want globaliza- tion to bring prosperity for all. This implies rethinking the role of the State in develop- ment and in social policy. The latter, in turn, entails strengthening State institutions, rather than "shrinking" the State.
5. The case for robust 
multilateralism
In a rapidly integrating world, cooperation among nation-States is increasingly needed to confront complex world issues. Many of the problems afflicting the world today (such as poverty, environmental pollution, economic crises, international organized crime) are transnational in nature, and cannot be dealt with exclusively at the national level, nor by State to State negotiations (Meny, 1999). The Millennium Assembly stated: "If we are to capture the promise of globalization, while managing its adverse effects, we must learn to govern better, and govern together" (UN,
2000, Millennium Report, A/54/2000). Pro- tectionism is not a viable option. As inter- connections increase and decisions taken in one country have lasting effects on other parts of the world, cooperation and policy co- ordination among States is increasingly cru- cial to manage effectively global issues. 
With globalization there is a growing need for international agreements and standards in a number of relevant areas, such as the environment, labour rights and human rights, as well as the fight against organized crime. Thus, "many functions of govern- ment, in particular the supply of public goods and the pursuit of social objectives, will somehow have to be undertaken at the global level" (Helleiner, 2000, p. 5). This implies that inter-governmental institutions will play an increasingly vital role in these and other areas that were previously the do- main of individual governments. For exam- ple, there is no doubt that prevention, con- trol and repression of cross-border organized crime can be dealt with only at the interna- tional level. Only concerted action among States can effectively curb such illegal activities as trade of body organs or of children and women. Poverty, violations of human rights, social degradation, the spread of diseases such as HIV/AIDS, just to mention a few, also de- mand global responses since they have glob- al implications. 
It is increasingly evident that social policies are no longer only a matter for national con- sideration, but also for global governance. "Dif- ferent societies have different preferences for
- among other things - income distribution, welfare provision, cultural diversity, work- er protection, and structures of education. Nonetheless, societies increasingly interact and cannot function in isolation. Failures of social development resulting, for example, in involuntary mass migration cannot be con- fined within national boundaries" (Com- mission on Global Governance, 1995, p. 143). Similarly, global warming, massive defor- estation, and depletion of natural resources are phenomena which also require multilateral solutions because their negative effects are not confined to one region or State. 
In order to respond to globalization, nation- al economic governance regimes must be supplemented by regional and global economic governance regimes. The management of the global economy requires complex global governance systems. The global governance framework entails a number of basic op- tions, namely:
Creation of a world government, which would establish legal and institutional frameworks for global economic governance. This extremely controversial option is high- ly unrealistic in the foreseeable future;
Creation of international institutions,
 
 which are based on the pooling and delega- tion of national sovereignty rights in certain functional policy areas. At present, this ap- proach is encountered only in economic in- tegration processes, notably within the Eu- ropean Union;
Global economic governance without a global government. This option is based on voluntary agreements between sovereign nation-States, which create international economic regimes (global economic gover- nance regimes) for specific policy areas, such as international trade, international finance, as well as international investment and competition. These global regulatory regimes establish relevant principles, norms and rules for international transactions; and
 International coordination of national eco- nomic policies. This option is limited at pres- ent to certain policy areas and a small group of countries. In light of present realities, the development of international economic regimes seems to be the most promising op- tion in dealing with economic globalization. Such global economic systems are based on inter-governmental agreements and admin- istered by inter-governmental economic or- ganizations based on international econom- ic law.
The establishment of principles, norms and rules, which guide the actions of economic agents in international transactions (cross- border policies) is greatly needed in an in- creasingly interdependent world. Global eco- nomic governance regimes include mechanisms for supervision of policy implementation and the settlement of disputes. Despite their fragmented nature and lack of comprehen- sive and consistent global regimes, these global regulatory regimes form the back- bone of an emerging basic global economic legal framework. To be sure, the present global economic governance system consists of a loose set of functional regimes with gaps and missing links. Despite its limitations, the functional system in international trade is now the most advanced, whereas the inter- national regime related to capital flows is cur- rently the subject of debate. Comprehensive
regimes on international investments and com- petition are also still lacking. Increased ef- forts are required to build a global econom- ic governance system, which is adequate to managing a globalized economy.
The governance of the global economy is largely predicated on national economic poli- cies supplemented by regional and global eco- nomic governance regimes, for different functional policy areas such as trade and fi- nance. Arrangements at the regional level al- so attempt to respond to the pressures of eco- nomic globalization; these arrangements need to be linked with compatible global regulatory regimes. The complexity of the glob- al economy creates equally complex problems of global economic governance. The link be- tween different functional regimes (hori- zontal link) is not often well established. The same concerns arise with regard to the links between bilateral, regional and global economic governance regimes (vertical link). Global competition exerts pressure in the di- rection of increasing convergence of different national regulatory and institutional sys- tems, but significant differences remain.
To be sure, there is an institutional and reg- ulatory deficit on the global level, which calls for new governance structures; it relates to norm-setting and policy coordination. A bet- ter defined multilateral approach and the strengthening of functional regimes is nec- essary. The system of global governance, in the measure that it has emerged in a some- what ad hoc way, is characterized by in- creased complexity manifested in a web of bilateral, regional and global regimes. It has also been marked by the emergence of new issues, which are associated with the liber- alization of trade and capital flows.
Technological developments and economic liberalization have often run ahead of the need- ed adaptation of principles, norms and rules as elements of economic governance. This is particularly pronounced on the internation- al level.
Coping with international economic and fi- nancial instability is one of the many pressing challenges of our times calling for more effective partnerships among States on the one hand, and financial institutions on the other. National responses are not sufficiently adequate to deal with possible crises. In the absence of a strong international regulato- ry system coupled with strong national in- stitutions, local financial crises often de- generate into severe crises provoking mas- sive loss of employment and resources as it happened not so long ago in South-East Asia. Such crises were so intense that not on- ly did they affect the countries in which they originated, but also quickly reverberated in other parts of the world. 
In other words, "the pace of globalization of financial and other markets is currently out- stripping the capacity of governments to provide the necessary frameworks of rules and co-operative arrangements to ensure stability and prevent abuses of monopoly and other market failures" (ibid., p. 137). 
There is an urgent need to establish global rules on issues associated with deep eco- nomic integration. These issues concern in- ternational competition policies, harmo- nization of corporate taxation, standards of corporate governance and the national treat- ment of foreign investment. Overall, it may be argued that the present system of global economic governance is untidy, burdened with overlapping jurisdictions and incom- patibilities between different functional regimes.
The rules-based international trade system, administered by the World Trade Organiza- tion, has made progress in liberalizing mar- ket access and reducing both tariff and non- tariff trade barriers. The system is based on the principles of non-discrimination, and reciprocity. A detailed system of norms and rules has been established for different sec- tors. While some progress has been made, a number of issues require further considera- tion. These concern non-tariff barriers, the use of export subsidies, anti-dumping, the ex- clusion of certain sectors, such as agriculture and textiles, and a weak sanctions mecha- nism. There is also a need to make regional trade arrangements compatible with the multilateral regimes.
The linkages between international trade, labour and environmental standards must be considered in the framework of the trade regime. There is also the need for more transparency in the decision-making con- ducted in the framework of such regimes. More- over, the monetary and financial regimes need to be closely coordinated with the trade regime. Surveillance mechanisms must be ad- justed and institutional arrangements for norm-setting and controls need also to be im- proved. The existing regimes have obvious- ly not kept up with the range of hazards in- volved in international finance, including important investments, risks in raising cap- ital and volatility of short-term flows. New regulatory systems and institutions at the in- ternational level are necessary to cope with economic globalization in this policy area.
Another policy area which requires greater regulation at the international level is en- vironmental protection. Due to the delicate balance of the global ecosystem and to the spill-over effects of pollution from one part of the world to other parts, it is increasing- ly evident that protecting the environment is a matter which cannot be dealt with at the national level alone. Furthermore, "although industrial countries, including the United States, are disproportionately responsible for most of the environmental problems, de- veloping countries are also rapidly damag- ing common environmental resources. Solu- tions, therefore, require the participation of both developed and developing nations" (Cutter, Spero and D'Andrea Tyson, 2000, p.94). There is also a growing need to hold multi- national corporations and local businesses ac- countable for their actions not only regard- ing environmental pollution, but also work- ing conditions.
In summary, inter-governmental institu- tions play an increasingly vital role in what was previously the domain of individual gov- ernments. They have helped to forge wide- spread commitment to agreed-upon objectives, such as the aspirations set out by the vari 
 ous UN Global Conferences. These conferences have encouraged the development of new na- tional governmental and inter-governmental machinery. Such bodies have been instrumental in promoting the advancement of women, reg- ulating international activities, ensuring compliance with human rights standards, and coordinating the actions of the internation- al community towards progress in poverty erad- ication and sustainable development. Yet, in- ter-governmental institutions still need to be refined to reflect a more integrated global econ- omy.
6. The need for a balanced 
approach to globalization
At the beginning of the XXI century there is a compelling need to uphold a new approach to globalization, which should be predicat- ed on such values as responsibility, sus- tainability and respect for human rights. What is most required is a shift to a people- centered approach to globalization. Too much attention has been paid to producers, and too little to consumers.
The lessons of experience point to a bal- anced approach, one that neither demonizes globalization nor builds it into a force setting the course of humanity in a predetermined direction. In our age of globalization, as in the past, the destinies of people can still be mostly shaped not by impersonal forces ful- ly beyond their control, but through collec- tive efforts of groups and individuals, living and operating in democratic societies, under the rule of law.
The "Minimal State" and the assumption that the market alone can solve most of societies' problems have been proven wrong. The ab- dication of the State in crucial and strategic areas such as health, education, housing, and sanitation have not favoured poverty alleviation around the world. Therefore, there is a grow- ing need to reconsider the role of the State to foster a new awareness in society at large of such fundamental values as equity, social inclusion, fairness, and social justice. 
One thing is clear: democratic and flexible institutions are needed in order to promote an enabling environment for economic growth and to enhance the quality of life of people, making them active participants in the process of globalization. 
The challenge that we face lies in the press- ing need to refashion or refine the tools and institutions of governance and public ad- ministration, so that they apply the knowl- edge, technologies and skills available to humankind for the greater good of all and not, as may have happened in the past twen- ty years, mostly for the greater wealth of 20 per cent of the world. This is precisely a task in which inputs and process largely determine the outcome of reform and where, on that ac- count, the values of democracy and human rights must be accorded precedence over the famous triptych - economy, efficiency and ef- fectiveness - important as it is.
Two fundamental factors will determine whether nations will be able to prosper from globalization. First, how each nation-State responds to globalization at the national level and, second, how they act together to shape international rules and processes for a more open trading system, for better gov- ernance and enhanced social responsibility.
Chapter IV
Strengthening the administrative capacity of the State
1. The management of change: the State as a "learning organization"
T
time. The world was entering what later was to be recognized as virtually a perma- nent state of turbulence. The natural pace of change would so accelerate that soon
he proliferation of actors on the political scene and great diver- sification of interests and pursuits in society at large vastly adds to
the complexity of the tasks of modern gov- ernance. This has been further compound- ed by the progress of globalization and mod- ern technology, that have radically lowered or indeed eliminated some of the protective barriers which sheltered the operations of gov- ernments in the past. A world of public au- thorities dealing with limited numbers of clients and stakeholders and able to control events within their borders is swiftly giving way to a more complex world; a world in which the range of clients and stakeholders is vastly more diverse, and in which numerous factors, im- perfectly understood, loom on the receding horizons of decision-makers.
As governments pass, in most fields of activity, from a relatively homogeneous and stable en- vironment to one that is unstable, complex, heterogeneous and multi-faceted, they need to learn to cope with unpredictability, un- certainty and randomness. Another major chal- lenge to governments and managers comes from the accelerating pace and the very na- ture of change. Describing this development, Gerald Caiden observed: "What adminis- trative reformers in the early 1960s did not anticipate was that they would not be able to proceed at their own pace in their own good
everybody would be suffering from future shock
as their abilities to accommodate to change would be overtaxed" (Caiden, 1991).
By the late 1990s, the context for most gov- ernments and many organizations had been transformed so radically that their tradi- tional structures and modes of operation had slipped into obsolescence. The fused py- ramidal structures, hallmark of state bu- reaucracies, could still perform effectively con- ducting routine tasks in closeted environments, but they proved increasingly inept in inter- acting creatively with a diversified, de- manding clientele or in responding swiftly to shifting opportunities and new constraints. Likewise, the five-year plans, pillars, until quite recently of the command economies but also, mutatis mutandis, a feature of policy- making in many other countries were losing credibility as both a tool and process.
In a significant study of planning, which al- though chiefly inspired from private sector practices has relevance to government, Canadian author Mintzberg argued that, given the conditions of rapid change, plan- ning must be continuous and incremental (Mintzberg, 1994). Although it seeks to in- corporate competent policy-analysis and ex- pert advice, current strategic planning is not viewed as an essentially technocratic process. It also seeks to build on clients' ex pectations, as well as intuition and aspira- tion (vision of future States). Precisely on this account, it needs to avoid the pitfalls of bu- reaucratic closure and a top-down approach, which tend to stifle initiative and limit par- ticipation.
Success in modern government largely de- pends on widening the basis of citizen par- ticipation and galvanizing support for broad- ly-shared objectives. This, in turn, is predi- cated on building and maintaining an insti- tutional framework as open to diversity as it facilitates stakeholders' contributions to pol- icy-making and evaluation processes. This is not always easy. Not all groups of stakeholders are readily amenable to cooperation and compromise. Not all are public-spirited. Seeking to muster support and developing consensus for a given goal or vision is a most challenging task. As a process, it may prove both costly and time-consuming, even though its long-term yield may be broadly ben- eficial.
Flexible structures and processes are then increasingly favored over the more tradi- tional and bureaucratic patterns. This is so not merely on account of the nature and fre- quency of change in a highly volatile and tur- bulent global environment, but also as a re- sult of the cumulative pressures from diverse citizens' groups, which demand to be heard. Ability to include and synergize, as well as disposition to listen and respond, are al- most universally accepted as an important source of policy legitimation. Neither comes easily, as most critiques of government and organizations amply show. They call for reaf- firming a unity of direction amidst many di- verse and often conflicting purposes: reinforcing institutional memory. They also call for fos- tering a sense of continuity, consistency, sta- bility and predictability, which structures strive to inject into the fluid, uncertain conditions in which numerous countries in today's glob- al society live. "Applying democracy to ad- ministration cannot fail to consolidate the State's public image by improving function- al and communication channels. In this quest for democracy, citizens must be placed at the centre of public action. The return to
the concept of people as citizens must mark the end of the authoritarian approach to power and the bureaucratic, technocratic and feudalistic style of management. This de- velopment, which goes beyond the conven- tional form of hierarchy, calls for a new style of action and conduct in the exercise of au- thority" (Sedjari, 2000, p. 5).
Contemporary management theory high- lights the value and role of learning organ- izations in trying to reconcile these difficult dilemmas which government must face and, furthermore, equip them to manage change effectively. In relation to developing countries and countries in transition, attention should be drawn to four areas of need, all of particular moment to the steering tasks of the State:
 Management of change: The State must be in the forefront of implementing change and smoothing the path for progress. This entails proactive measures to develop enabling pol- icy frameworks, promote the use of new technologies, set up performance measure- ment and evaluation systems, overhaul ad- ministrative structures and design adequate patterns for the collection of international- ly comparable, reliable and accurate data for policy-making purposes;
 Administrative reform: In the light of cur- rent trends, bureaucratic structures no longer work effectively. Debureaucratization and decentralization must go in tandem with new approaches to management, ex- emplifying openness, adaptability, participation, flexibility, diversity and responsiveness. Many new tasks of governance require pub- lic authorities to act as mediators, advo- cates or promoters, actively seeking part- nerships with business and non-govern- mental organizations, or otherwise endeav- ouring to engage civil society in the pursuit of developmental objectives;
 Human resources development: skills con- stantly upgraded, leadership qualities de- veloped, facilitation of change and fostering of a new image for the public service that call for new career structures that emphasize mo- bility, integrity and professionalism and the
overriding claims of merit in the recruit- ment, placement and promotion of public servants;
 Information: Timely availability of ade- quate, reliable, accurate and relevant data that has become a sine qua non not only of sound policy-making but also of the meas- urement, monitoring and evaluation of pub- lic sector performance. The United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance is playing a vital role in mobilizing and disseminating such information of essential importance to governments, notably through the United Nations Public Administration Network - UNPAN (UN, 1998, E/1998/77, pp.
1-2).
In an era of rapid change and globalization, a learning organization necessarily becomes a changing organization; that is, it learns to listen and to respond to messages that come from its environment. Furthermore, in today's global village, this never-ending process can- not, as in the past, take place under the cov- er of high protective barriers. 
2. Enhancing leadership skills and strategic planning capacities
Capacity to adjust to changing circum- stances and face the emerging challenges de- mands leadership skills and strategic plan- ning capacities. Specifically, it calls for:
 Sound analytical and diagnostic capabili- ties;
 Careful scanning of the environment for pos- sible constraints or emerging opportunities;
 Ability to galvanize and mobilize support for both the goals and course of organizational change;
 Building of the structures and culture of dialogue and mutual accommodation;
 Encompassing diversity, reconciliation of differences, promotion of consensus; and
 Management of change, in both a peace- ful and effective manner.
It follows that although, under today's con- ditions of swift technological progress any change should incorporate extensive expert advice, a learning organization cannot con- sider reform in purely technocratic terms. In today's fast-moving world, a process of reform and capacity-building must also encompass clients' and partners' perspectives. It should seek to build on knowledge and expertise, but also on intuition, vision and aspirations (mission statements) because it views suc- cess as clearly predicated on:
 Inclusion, integration, participation and em- powerment of all key factors, actors and stakeholders;
 Team-building, a key element of motivation;
and
 Social or organizational peace and cohesion. For analogous reasons, change and capacity-building in a learning organization can- not any longer be approached through the tra- ditional, authoritarian and bureaucratic methods. Although they seek to inject an el- ement of continuity, consistency and pre- dictability, which all organizations and so- cieties require in order to operate effective- ly, the structures and process of change in learning organizations must also induce ac- ceptance of the following:
 A high degree of uncertainty, in an often volatile and turbulent global environment;
 Flexibility consistent with a rapid, non- lin- ear change process in an age of discontinu- ity.
Swift progress and great uncertainty add an important dimension to managing change and to capacity-building, requiring leaders and managers to plan and steer the course with people, not without them, let alone in spite of them. Learning from the mistakes and les- sons of past failures, there is need to address the question of what essential structures
 
 and core competencies all countries, but es- pecially developing countries and countries with economies in transition, need to build or reinforce in order to secure sustainable progress and growth. Although much of what follows flows from what has been said, we need to be reminded that sustainable re- form and capacity-building encompass far more than personnel training or human resources development. Both call for the reinforce- ment of institutions and their adjustment to the demands of the times in a globalizing world. 
3. Fostering capacity-building
Like the concept of "empowerment", the term "capacity-building" has gained a lot of currency in recent years. It is, to say the least, a very elusive concept: the composite of sev- eral elements. For the purposes of this Re- port, attention is drawn to three inter-related facets of this multi-dimensional issue which, aside from its importance, has acquired much topical relevance.
Capacity-building has been defined in many ways and it encompasses various dimen- sions. In organizational terms, one of the pos- sible definitions of capacity is the volume and complexity of the inputs and activities which an organization is able to handle effective- ly in any given time. Capacity-building, ac- cordingly, denotes an effort to expand the ex- isting capabilities of an organization or of the State qualitatively and quantitatively. In other words, capacity-building may be defined as the co-efficient of human resources de- velopment and institution-building. Two principal dimensions may be distinguished. One is a process involving the establish- ment, reinforcement or reform of an organi- zational framework for the conduct of human activities. The other is human resources de- velopment, which includes human capital for- mation, the enrichment and refinement of es- sential management skills and requisite technical aptitudes and support for value sys- tems conducive to the goals of cost-effective management in organizations.
The two principal dimensions are comple- mentary and mutually reinforcing. A sound institutional framework integrates and syn- ergizes organizational members towards the accomplishment of the set goals. To be sure, the best institutional framework with lim- ited human capacity is of as little use as a million dollar racing car with a timid, in- competent driver at the wheel. However, the reverse is probably even worse. Nothing is more conducive to disaffection among po- tentially promising and competent staff than a convoluted administrative structure, which frustrates the best designs and corrupts the most efficient and best intentioned per- sonnel. The recent rediscovery of the comple- mentarity of human resources development and institution-building has lent capacity-build- ing its current importance, but also, to an ex- tent, has shaped the ways and methods of seek- ing to implement it in learning organizations.
Capacity-building concerns have recently grown largely on account of:
 Increasing resource scarcity; and
 Rapid, unanticipated changes in the external environment, occasionally leading to sys- tems' breakdown, when action to adjust and modernize these systems is not initiated in a timely fashion and pursued effectively.
During the 1980s and early 1990s, accord- ingly, "downsizing" or "rightsizing" and "do- ing more with less" became the standard mot- tos of reorganization. Consistent with the crit- icism that faulted previous practices there was also a shift of focus from the centre to the periphery and from the top to the grass- roots, through a process of devolution and de- centralization. This carried in its trail em- phasis on outsourcing, reliance on NGOs and other non-state actors for public service delivery, stress on priority tasks and corre- sponding emphasis on what were designat- ed as an organization's core competencies.
Emphasis on core competencies and ways in which these competencies must be deployed and leveraged to maximum effect has often been accompanied by a process of selective
divestiture of secondary functions which are contracted out to partners in the private or "third" sectors (Reschenthaler and Thomp- son, 1998). Such focus on essentials, tied to a holistic approach and a critical review of the lessons of experience form part of the cur- rent emphasis on both "capacity-building" and the related concept of "the learning organi- zation" (ibid.).
3.1. Building cognitive capacity in the face of globalization
Though few dispute the claims of the polit- ical leadership to be the final arbiters of what the public needs, many may still look askance at the role of experts in govern- ment and many more discount or fail to un- derstand the need for policy analysts and pol- icy advisers. Developing countries and coun- tries with economies in transition in gener- al have paid a heavy price for their capaci- ty deficit in this regard. While few question the importance of expatriate expert advice, it needs to be emphasized that the value of such advice to governments is largely pred- icated on the availability of institutional memory at the national level, as well as on the quality of the information and know-how that governments command from indige- nous sources, preferably their own.
Even the best advice received from foreign experts needs to be a complement at best to that of the government's own, which it can- not replace. Nothing can effectively replace organized policy planning on the national lev- el. Accordingly, what matters more than the level of individual experts is the country's sys- temic capacity to generate ideas on major na- tional issues and questions of global concern and institutional memory, which can instill consistency and continuity in policy direction.
Many developing countries and countries with economies in transition have seen, in recent years, the rise of independent think- tanks, whose presence in advanced societies has long been taken for granted. They play a useful part in offering a complement and check to "official thought". However, they are no substitute for a corps of well-organized,
well-trained, professional policy-analysts and advisers in the service of the government. A constant flow of comprehensive, accurate and up-to-date information is also essential for the government's performance of its func- tions, including playing its part in the man- agement of international regimes. No gov- ernment can fully "outsource" all of its core functions to outsiders without de facto sur- rendering an important part of its sovereignty, credibility and prestige. What countries need most is a critical mass of expertise in gov- ernment, as well as very sound organization and a degree of autonomy in the collection of data and the conduct of research (UN, 1998, E/1998/77).
In many developing countries and countries with economies in transition, the dearth of expertise at the senior policy level is com- pounded by turnover of specialists in high de- mand, who find more lucrative outlets in pri- vate enterprise or international agencies, both governmental and non-governmental. The problem is further aggravated by basic flaws in the requisite support structures. To help address this issue and to assist the Member States in meeting the commitments which they made at global conferences or- ganized by the United Nations during the past decade, the Fourteenth Meeting of the Group of Experts, which took place in New York in 1998, made a number of recommen- dations whose intent was to reinforce the sys- tems of data-gathering and to enhance the quality of information available to govern- ments for policy-making purposes. Among these recommendations was the elaboration of:
 A framework for the collection of interna- tionally comparable data, including qualitative as well as quantitative indicators, for the pur- pose of measuring the changing role of the State as reflected by privatization, deregu- lation and decentralization;
 A framework for the exchange of infor- mation via the Internet, focusing on the pro- vision of advisory services, particularly to least developed and geographically isolated coun- tries, in order to improve accessibility to the Internet, at all levels of government; and
 
Box IV.1 
 An appropriate system of indicators, based on pertinent and timely political, social and economic data, intended to provide an ear- ly warning system against impending crises (ibid.).
The Fourteenth Meeting of the Group of Ex- perts stressed the role of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance in "fostering the exchange of information on best practices. Therefore, it strongly welcomes the establishment of the information-clearing house World Wide Web site, as the centerpiece for the performance of the role of the facilitator in the informa- tion exchange. The Web site, in particular, would be a useful tool in the management of the global network. The Meeting takes the view that it is also important for the Pro- gramme to pursue initiatives relating to the collection of data on the public sector for pol- icy-making purposes" (ibid., Recommendation
No. 32).
THE UNITED NATIONS ONLINE NETWORK IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE (UNPAN)
The Division for Public Economics and Public Administration of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations, as entrusted by the General Assembly in late 1999, developed an important programme entitled "The United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance (UNPAN)" for implementation. 
UNPAN's immediate objective is to establish an electronic platform linking the regional and national institutions devoted to public administration and finance online for information exchange, experience sharing and on-the- job training in the areas of public sector policy and management. Its long- term objective is to build the capacity of these regional and national institutions to access, process and disseminate relevant information via up- to-date information and communication technologies (ICTs) for the promotion of a more effective public administration. 
UNPAN offers (a) far-reaching access to experience in the practice of public policy development and management at the international, regional, national and local levels; (b) capacity-building and south-south cooperation in information and knowledge management; (c) demand- driven and interactive two-way provision of information and knowledge. Most significantly, UNPAN is a dynamic process, and not a static outcome, which aims at responding to the needs of its users and addresses their most critical areas of work. 
UNPAN's immediate beneficiaries are public administration-related regional and national institutions. Its ultimate clients are government agencies, the private sector, NGOs, and academic institutions. It focuses on: (a) public economic policy; (b) governance and institution building; (c) civil service and public sector reform; (d) management innovation and development; and (e) public finance. Within the above-mentioned thematic framework, emphasis will be given to emerging issues, which are of concern to most countries. It provides five major online services/products, including: information; training; technical advisory services; conferencing; and worldwide directories. 
UNPAN is executed and managed by the Division for Public Economics and Public Administration (DPEPA), UNDESA, in close partnership with a group of international and regional institutions in public administration and finance, representing all regions of the world. 
The UNPAN online network at http://www.unpan.org serves as a portal for public administration and finance, and is the only one such network in the world today.
Source: DPEPA/UNDESA, 2001. See also UN, 1998, E/1998/77.
A notable departure in this regard is the es- tablishment of the already mentioned Unit- ed Nations Online Public Administration Network (UNPAN), which has become op- erational with related centres in every ma- jor region of the world. Yet another impor- tant initiative took the form of a regional con- ference in Thessaloniki, Greece, which inter alia explored the "Making of Highly Quali- fied, Creative and Conscientious Policy Ad- visors," as part of "Enhancing Professional- ism in Public Policy Planning"1.
"In relation to building national capacity to diagnose and evaluate national needs and pri- orities, it is important to underline that each country must elaborate its own types of re- sponses institutionally and operationally, in order to maximize benefits and minimize negative consequences. Clearly, neither the United Nations nor any other intergovern- mental organization can give a one-size-fits- all solution. They can only suggest and/or pro- pose potential strategies and reform paths through methodological approaches and tools that seek to uncover what are the es- sential functions that the State needs to ful- fill, at what level and to what extent. These questions can be suitably answered not in the abstract or aggregate, but only in relation to the private sector, the national and inter- national environment inclusively" (UN,
2000, E/2000/66, p. 11).
Consonant with this approach, it should be underscored "that all governments, but spe- cially those of developing countries and countries in transition, should accord priority to strengthening capacities in public pol- icy formation and public service management" (ibid., Recommendation No. 18). Specifical- ly, institutional and managerial responses to globalization and diversification, should en- compass:
 Dedicated think-tanks for policy planning purposes;
 Learning from global experience;
 Inclusive, participatory, decentralized de- cision-making bodies;
 Strengthening of the capacity to deal with and negotiate disputes and foster a culture of dialogue; and
 Focal points in departments of govern- ment to interface with outside agencies and with the public.
It has been pointed out, but it bears re- peating that, under modern conditions, few major decisions of policy can be made or im- plemented in a political, social or economic vacuum. Important though it may be, the con- tribution of experts and "technocrats" should be complemented by inputs from people rep- resentative of civil society groups. Address- ing this very issue, a report on Public Ad- ministration and Globalization (Timsit and Bouckaert, 2000)2 made the point that es- tablishing a balance between economic effi- ciency and social equity is a major task of gov- ernment. Inter alia, it entails such measures as the enhancement of labour union strength and support for collective bargain- ing. Still, according to this report, it be- hooves the government to develop and ar- ticulate policies and strategies expressive of the common good and of the public interest, which cannot be solely the "product of trade negotiations among particular interests" (ibid. p. 37).
4. The need for performance standards for management development
One of the net effects of globalization is the progressive emergence and spread of global performance standards in management de- velopment and change. In the measure that such standards are developed, articulated and publicized through the relevant literature, they tend to reproduce a set of values, which of- ten may be prevalent in a particular culture, but are certainly not universal. This is es- pecially true of the influential literature of the past two decades. Written mostly in the English language, it records the tested prac- tices and valuable experience, as well as be- lief systems of a small range of countries, eco- nomically advanced, but still comprising on- ly a relatively small proportion of the world's population. Importing foreign standards and benchmarks, which relate to specific man- agement traditions and sets of expectations, may be a recipe for failure, unless such stan- dards and benchmarks are appropriately re- viewed, and adapted to the local culture.
Making this point, however, is not to say that standards in certain major areas may not con- verge or that the setting of standards and benchmarks should not be accorded its due weight in any management culture. There is some evidence pointing to the effects of glob- alization on a certain convergence of stan- dards, in the measure that behaviour norms and clients' expectations throughout the world are moving toward a common ground. However, one must acknowledge the findings of research in continental Western Europe, which stresses the profound, pervasive and persistent influence of culture on management behaviour and management techniques, both of which are culture-specific and not read- ily transposable from one country to anoth- er, even when they are contiguous (e.g., the Netherlands and Belgium). According to this school of thought3, cultural differences con- dition the validity of management philoso- phies and practices in various countries and should, therefore, be taken into account in the establishment of standards and the mak- ing of management policy.
 
 The formulation of performance standards like the development and articulation of policy rep- resent essential functions of the State, which cannot be surrendered or "outsourced". To be sure, under conditions of globalization, the exchange of information among govern- ments will lead them, in some cases, to align methods and practices in the quest of shared objectives. However, it is incumbent on gov- ernments to establish standard setting, per- formance indicators and the practice of benchmarking on an institutional basis, as part of their core functions.
Though stress on performance standards has been with us for some time, it has tak- en on great salience in the past two decades, in part due to the effect of the new trends in management and the emphasis they have placed on results orientation. Mindful of res- olution 50/225 of the United Nations General Assembly, which in paras. 7 and 9 called for enhanced effectiveness of public adminis- tration systems worldwide (UN, 1996, A/ RES/50/225), the Fourteenth Meeting of the Group of Experts made performance moni- toring and evaluation one of the major top- ics of its agenda. Its report (UN, 1998, E/1998/77, paras. 44-46) explores in some de- tail the issues in performance monitoring and evaluation, and underscores their impor- tance. The Fourteenth Meeting of the Group of Experts viewed this new significance in light of four perspectives:
 The changing role of government from sole provider of services to one of founder, lender, contractor, purchaser and regulator;
 The public's right to know;
 The need to measure the outcomes of poli- cies and programmes, and thus to act as cat- alyst for periodic reviews, possible recon- sideration of resource allocation and the quest for performance improvements; and
 The need to go beyond the traditional forms of accountability to ensure value for money and the cost-effective pursuit of the public interest.
In light of these perspectives and the ongo- ing pursuit of subsidiarity through decen- tralization, deconcentration, devolution of responsibility and offloading or outsourcing, one must incorporate performance indicators in the formulation of policies and pro- grammes, which serve to mobilize stake- holders' support and involvement, but also help to structure and guide the evaluation of progress and results. Seen in this light, per- formance measurement, monitoring and evaluation represent a necessary compass in the quest of complex objectives involving contributions from the several partners un- der conditions of democratic and accountable governance. 
4.1. Purposes of performance 
measures
The fundamental purpose of instituting per- formance measures in an organization is to evaluate its performance. Briefly, they may be used in accounting for past activities, managing current operations and assessing progress toward planned objectives. One of the oldest uses of performance measures was for purposes of accountability, specifically related to the budget process. Performance measures were to be incorporated in agency budget presentations in an effort to replace:
 Workload or activity levels, such as appli- cations processed, inventory levels, inspec- tions carried out, students in class;
 Outputs, such as the number of children vaccinated, miles of road built, tons of trash picked up, students graduated;
 Outcomes of products or services, such as illnesses prevented, percentage of taxes col- lected, clean air levels achieved, accident-free workplaces attained, poverty alleviated;
 Productivity, such as cases investigated per detective, applications processed per per- son, emergency calls handled per dispatcher;
 Costs, such as coverage costs to build one mile of highway, educate one child, maintain one swimming pool;
 Customer satisfaction, such as numbers of complaints received over a period of time, re- sults of surveys, use of participative process- es;
 Service quality and timeliness, such as police response times, ability to contact an agency by telephone, compliance with trans- portation timetables, breakdown rates, serv- ice availability.
Where levels are specified for any measure, these constitute "performance standards". Where reference is made to identifying and implementing best practices in order to set out a standard for comparison of results and to drive performance improvement, this is known as "benchmarking". When output is not directly measurable, proxies known as "indicators" may be used. "Performance in- centives" may be used to assess individual performance in determining remuneration. These measures are designed to assess the economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which an organization delivers its services.
Economy is concerned with the capacity of an organization to operate at the lowest pos- sible cost and may be assessed through in- put measures and comparisons through benchmarking. Efficiency is the relationship between input and outputs, i.e., using min- imum inputs to achieve a given output, or gain- ing maximum outputs for a given level of in- put. It may be measured through output, pro- ductivity and cost measures. Effectiveness de- lineates the success of programmes and fo- cuses on their results, as assessed through outcome measures. In addition, the quality of services may be assessed through process measures relating to customer satisfaction and perceptions.
While any of these measures might be used to assess an organization's performance, re- cent emphasis has been on quantitative ef- fectiveness or outcomes measurement. A re- port of the United States General Account- ing Office on Performance Budgeting has sug- gested a change of focus from "ensuring that funds are spent properly" to "managing dol- lars to produce agreed upon results" (United States General Accounting Office, February
1999, p. 3). If such a change is really taking place, it is not a trivial one. It is a move as- sociated with administrative reforms in many European countries as well as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States. Such reforms go beyond reorganiza- tion to question whether specific programme areas continue to serve a public interest; whether they should be transferred, entire- ly or in part, to the private or voluntary sec- tors; and how, if the programme continues, it might be made more efficient and afford- able. In effect, programme evaluation is tied to the evaluation of the entire role of gov- ernment.
5. The need for top-level 
managers
The progress of globalization brings out a new dimension in standard setting, and in per- formance measurement, monitoring and evaluation: the need to elaborate and to ar- ticulate a range of shared approaches, val- ues and methodologies, which ease commu- nication in international dealings and make the cooperation of diverse groups more fruit- ful and rewarding. Referring to changing what needs to be changed, a similar remark might be made about the need for a new cadre of able and responsible top managers to face the emerging challenges and handle the global agenda in an increasingly interactive and competitive global environment.
Although technology, innovative systems and processes of work organization and user- friendly methods of public service delivery are increasingly important ingredients of the managerial response to globalization, building the capacity of the human resources represents a crucial dimension of governments' response to globalization (UN, 2000, E/2000/
66, pp. 12-15). 
It is important to note that governments, in- creasingly, perform significant tasks on a supra- national level. This is true not only of enti- ties like the European Union, which repre- sents an advanced manifestation of this
 
 trend, but also of the formation and opera- tion of international regimes in many fields of activities. All depend for their effectiveness on an elaborate framework of rules, process- es and practices, which determine how pow- er is exercised and governance conducted with consistency, transparency, coherence and ac- countability, as well as on a cadre of top-lev- el managers from the governments of Mem- ber States, who can bring this framework to life and operate effectively in the new glob- al environment.
Attention ought to be focused on competen- cies needed to operate effectively on the supra-national level, and on ways of build- ing capacity on the national level. It should be pointed out that the ability to field such a cadre of top managers and leaders condi- tions a country's effectiveness as an actor in inter-governmental negotiations and global regimes. With such individuals, Member States are effectively "in the loop" and have the possibility to promote their country's in- terests. Dearth of such people, by contrast, may consign States to the margins and to the role of spectators of the progress accom- plished by others.
"Tell me and I'll forget. Show me and I'll remember. Involve me and I'll understand." Chinese proverb
In view of the pressures that globalization create, "public servants should be trained to operate on the national, sub-national and in- ternational levels and participate in leader- ship training. Governments should build a framework of public personnel structure, policies and career paths able to attract, re- tain, develop and motivate the right people and to direct their energies towards the pub- lic good" (ibid., Recommendation No. 19).
Furthermore, "the United Nations should as- sist national governments in acquiring the necessary negotiating capacities to prepare for negotiations of global economic governance regimes" (ibid., Recommendation No. 15), and it "should assist national governments in adjusting their national economic governance systems (policies and institutions) in response to globalization. This includes sup- port for policy development and implemen- tation capacities in developing and transition economies" (ibid., Recommendation, No. 16).
The Fifteenth Meeting of the Group of Experts drew attention to the weaknesses of the de- veloping countries and countries with economies in transition resulting from "the scarcity of world-wide economists and specialists with knowledge of the working of international agreements, treaties and regimes, as well as technical skills" (ibid., p. 14). Significantly, how- ever, the Meeting took the view that analo- gous shortcomings could be observed in the operation of States at the national and sub- national levels. Everywhere, it may be argued, globalization and democratization have in- creased the pace of change, complexity and ambiguity, making demands on cadres for which they are ill-prepared.
6. Competencies needed to meet the challenges of globalization
The competencies needed to meet the criti- cal challenges of contemporary governance refer to a combination of knowledge, skills, behaviours and attitudes, which often goes beyond what was required of "bureaucrats", or officials operating in traditional, closed- system work environments. No two countries need to agree on the desired profile of a sen- ior public manager or on the relative weight and indeed precise definition of the most of- ten-mentioned competencies, some of which are described in the following paragraphs.
Knowledge, a hard substantive core, is part of the competencies that senior profession- al managers need to bring into their office as a basic precondition of being able to ex- ercise effective guidance and leadership. 
A component of technical knowledge will al- ways be required. Though this may vary widely depending on a manager's assigned responsibilities, substantive knowledge is needed to grasp the issues involved in the exercise of one's duties to make intelligent choices. Traditionally, the study of law pro- vided a common core of required technical knowledge for top public managers in many of the foremost administrative cultures. Though this remains the case in several parts of the world, now law is complement- ed by the study of social sciences, especial- ly economics. Knowledge of economics is ba- sic not merely to the management of any giv- en field, but also to interacting effectively with other public managers on the sub-national, national, and international levels.
Another core component of the substantive knowledge required of an effective professional public manager is, what may be described as the management of the resources assigned to his or her care. These preeminently include:
 Human resources;
 Financial resources; and
 Information resources.
Most managers need not be specialists in fi- nance, organizational theory or information management to ensure the responsible stew- ardship and use of the above resources. Ap- preciation, however, of their true value, as well as a sound understanding of all the rel- evant issues can greatly enhance effective- ness on the job and, therefore, should form part of pre-entry and in-service preparation for the job.
As to skills, they manifest themselves in the ways in which a manager performs his or her major roles. These comprise:
 The exercise of leadership, including man- agerial skills;
 Decisional roles; and
 Informational roles.
Leadership calls for vision, ability to iden- tify and seize an opportunity, anticipate a cri- sis and cope with constraints effectively. It is exemplified in the persistent quest for excellence, innovative ideas and actions or be- haviour, which seek constructive ways to establish and secure a country's or organi- zation's competitive edge. Within the or- ganization, leadership is demonstrated through building trust, communicating vision, empowering colleagues, serving as a role model and managing performance effec- tively.
Decision-making skills include the effective use of information, data, technologies and ideas; a clear sense of direction, priorities and needs; sound planning and good timing; and client orientation, which also means re- sponsiveness to changes and developments in the organization's external environment. They call for critical judgment, sagacity and discernment, courage and intuition, but al- so uncommon capacity to cope with ambiguity, diversity, complexity and turbulence.
In essence, information as a function of man- agement, is effective communication. It calls for clarity of expression, verbal or written, sound knowledge of the language and abil- ity to tailor it, in style and tone, to match the needs and expectations of a particular audience. Culture is an important determinant of ef- fective communication. Thus, a clear appre- ciation of the culture of the target audience represents a key ingredient of success in reaching out and having an impact on it. In today's diverse societies and organizations, this is no easy task. To operate effectively on the international plane, senior managers require more than vicarious knowledge of the main international languages and cultures in which they need to operate. However, even at the national and sub-national levels, the presence of diversity and the diffusion of power that have come with democratization have added to the importance of good listening skills, effective use of the media and infor- mation technologies, and above all, the need to keep the channels of communication open at all times. One of the many effects of glob- alization has been to enhance the value of these and other related "soft skills", making it necessary to use in-service training, even more intensively than in the past, for the pur- pose of fine-tuning these valuable skills.
 
 Furthermore, as already indicated, in an in- creasingly interconnected world public ser- vants will need to master foreign languages. In order to deal with a variety of international actors and to conduct negotiations in inter- national fora, it will be crucial for the pub- lic servant of the XXI century to know more than one foreign language. Knowledge of languages should become part of public serv- ice training and lifelong learning pro- grammes.
7. Public service professionalism
Cutting across the range of skills and knowl- edge needed to build effective management in today's fast-moving world is the concept of professionalism, which, in the past few years, has made a marked re-entry into the field of management, where it had been neglected. Suddenly, since approximately 1996, con- ferences and publications on public service professionalism and the related concept of pub- lic sector ethics have become legion. Much of the current interest has focused on the fight against corruption. A concern over the decline of standards and corresponding need for in- tegrity in public life has driven the debate on the scope and significance of public serv- ice professionalism.
Professionalism in government, as in any oth- er field, is observable through competence in ways outlined above, i.e., through relevant deep knowledge and aptitudes or skills, but also through a coherent, widely-shared and profoundly-internalized values system which manifests itself in the pursuit and thor- ough application of knowledge, the use of par- ticular skills, and the exercise of control over practice. Indeed, it may be argued that professionalism consists in standards and val- ues which underpin the day-to-day practices and conduct of a group. Although these val- ues and standards must, to some extent, re- flect the changing expectations of clients of the group and recipients of its services, they al- so represent the group's own aspirations and deep sense of its mission. Hence, their worth is an important guide and motivational tool.
Historically, professionalism has played a ma- jor role in the growth and organization of ma- jor occupational groups (doctors and lawyers, for instance), as well as in provid- ing a measure of consistency, continuity and predictability in the conduct of their activi- ties. There is reason to believe that in- creasing interdependence, both at the level of government and that of civil society in the wake of globalization, has greatly enhanced the importance of consistency and pre- dictability in inter-governmental and non-gov- ernmental relations. 
It is easy to understand why kleptocracies have emerged in some cases, but more gen- erally why the prevalence of corrupt or even mercenary behaviour has come to be perceived as an obstacle and a threat not merely to democracy and development at the nation- al level, but also to the effective operation of the emerging system of global governance. What may be harder to grasp, in light of the prevailing "neo-managerial culture", is that professional ethics in any major field, be it medicine or law, teaching or architecture, sets limits to "responsiveness" to customers' de- mands, requiring of professionals that they exercise instead their best professional judgement in light of best available knowl- edge or expertise.
At the United Nations, a recent definition and statement of the "competencies for the future" has underscored integrity, professionalism and respect for diversity as core United Nations values for its staff. These include: 
(a) pride in work and mastery of subject matter; 
(b) motivation by intrinsic, professional, rather than extrinsic or personal concerns; 
(c) persistence in the face of challenges and crises; 
(d) resistance to "undue" political pressure in decision-making; 
(e) defence of the Organization's interests, even under fire; and 
(f) the legitimate use of power and authori- ty.
7.1. Transparency: a generalized demand
One of the main criticisms leveled at the State in recent decades has been the fact that cor- rupt practices often exist and such practices are not punished. This is a very widespread problem that does not exclusively affect the developing world. These practices are not sole- ly confined to social areas. Modern research into corruption points out that whenever there is a corrupt person in the public sec- tor, there is someone who does the corrupt- ing from the private sector. Corruption has to do with intra-social combinations that are often of vast scope. Some episodes of the most blatant corruption in Latin America in recent years did not occur in the public sec- tor. The embezzlement that took place in a number of large banks in the area a few years ago, which translated into a sizable loss of resources for the countries involved, was spurred by the corrupt practices of important private bankers, often aided and abetted by the ineptitude of some public regulating bod- ies. The episodes of corruption that accom- panied privatization processes in certain de- veloping countries were connected to pub- lic/private interest arrangements.
Today, worldwide, there is a generalized de- mand to put an end to corruption. Its costs for the economies of developing countries are extremely high and the moral consequences are even worse. In the social sphere, corruption in the guise of skimming resources from policies and programmes set up to help the poorest members of society, is a true ethical crime. The State must undergo a radical transformation in this area. All anti-cor- ruption strategies that could be effective should be brought into play, among which, the first should be the monumental task of educating people about corruption. Spaces must systematically be created to discuss the problem in all educational venues for civil ser- vants; clear cut codes of ethics that can be strictly enforced must be devised. It is also necessary to make all actions taken by the
State in the social area transparent to citi- zens. Information concerning social pro- grammes must be complete, ongoing and to- tally accessible. The purpose of the pro- grammes, the resources to be used, sources of financing and implementation processes must constitute information that is as ac- cessible as any other elemental administra- tive data, and this is precisely where IT and the Internet can make valuable contributions. At the same time, channels should be set up so that social control of public administra- tion can make itself felt. The entire system should also contain clear and indisputable measures for penalizing and punishing cor- ruption.
Corruption must be transformed into an ex- ceptional occurrence, morally penalized; but the risk of criminal prosecution should also exist. In summary, it should be difficult and dangerous to engage in corrupt practices, be- cause of permanent controls by the preven- tive systems in place and monitoring by the citizens themselves, as well as by the threat of punishment.
7.2. Managing diversity
Diversity takes on many forms. Globalization and progress bring in their wake the prolif- eration of preferences, sub-cultures, interest groups, religions, cults, ideologies and groups demanding recognition and protection of their identity or indeed representation in decision-making processes which impact on their status and rights. 
Repression of such groups is not a viable op- tion. It has proved counter-productive and, as experience shows, is costly economically and politically. Experience demonstrates a pressing need to strengthen the capacity of States both in accommodating and manag- ing diversity and change. It comes as no surprise that the greater the diversity, the faster the process of change and the more vi- tally important the role of the State becomes in managing this process. International co- operation and the force of global example may help in building up the State's much-need- ed capacity to serve as guarantor, time-keep 
 er, moderator and manager of a process of change involving multiple partners and stakeholders, while all along safeguarding the interests and rights of all concerned. A dy- namic market economy requires an effective State, where the instruments for strength- ening the nation-State obviously needed, for instance in some of the former Republics of the former Soviet Union, have to be bal- anced with adequate decentralized policies. This is needed partly in response to the ex- pectations of groups aspiring to administer their own cultures and traditions as part of the newly formed national entities. The greatest challenge, while moving into the new millennium, will prove to be the building of viable political institutions for the new na- tion-States of the region. Institutions should be capable of respecting the aspirations of mi- norities that are part of these nations, and of establishing a balance between what is dic- tated by economic logic and clamoured for in political expectations. The political process of the breaking up of the Soviet Union has been remarkably peaceful. However, in its af- termath, the forces of ethnicity and minor- ity and of the periphery in relation to the cen- tre demand political leadership to promote policies that are all inclusive, a commodity rare even in normal times and certainly harder to come by when the economic and social indicators are worsening.
"Those who applauded the lifting of the \0x2018Iron Curtain', which separated people between coun- tries, never expected \0x2018Glass Curtains' to de- scend separating people within countries. The challenge now is to achieve political rights in an environment of growing economic in- security. Human insecurity breeds human vi- olence, making it even more necessary for eco- nomic growth to aim at enriching human de- velopment" (UNDP, 1999, Human Develop- ment Report, p. 11). Training programmes on diversity and "conflict resolution" have mul- tiplied and spread, in several parts of the world, both in the public service and academic es- tablishments. Still, it should be noted that the scope of such departures is, in some countries, limited to three main target groups: women, minorities and people with special needs.
One cannot over-emphasize the urgency and complexity of gender mainstreaming, on the one hand, and progressive integration of hitherto underprivileged and under-repre- sented categories of citizens, on the other. This has seldom proved an easy task. Not only spe- cial measures and facilities may be required, but also language and culture have proved in some cases to be steep barriers to surmount.
One of the many effects of globalization has been to ease the movement of peoples across borders and bring them closer together. Proximity, however, has not invariably helped to combat or assuage stereotyping, let alone eliminate prejudice and discrimination. Recent events in the world have brought home to some governments a sense of the di- versity of their respective countries and the dangers of exclusion. Still, it would be an er- ror to view the current stress on diversity man- agement purely in terms of "affirmative ac- tion", equalizing opportunities or righting his- torical wrongs, important though these may be.
Accommodating diversity makes good busi- ness sense in any organization. It repre- sents a necessity primarily on account of the process of diversification present in all soci- eties and all organizations. Such growing het- erogeneity reflects more than plurality and visibility of cultures, which must be accom- modated in any one workplace. On a more basic level, heterogeneity springs from the diversity of occupational groups, the product of specialization, which rapid advances in sci- ence and technology have carried in their trail. Today, very few policies or programmes, de- cisions or operations can either be designed or implemented without the cooperation of many different specialties and sub-special- ties. Bringing them together into a cohesive group, building them into a team, is hardly an easy task. Distinct occupational groups have often different values, divergent methodologies or problem-solving tech- niques, let alone competing interests. Occa- sionally, they exhibit what others may con- sider an exaggerated sense of their own rel- ative importance. Building a balanced syn- thesis of many complementary but still dissimilar elements is a challenge which requires sensitivity to difference, perseverance, open- mindedness, negotiating skills and capacity to reconcile conflicting views and interests.
Coping with diversity represents a reasoned response, by top managers and by the State, to the challenge of globalization and the re- lated processes of differentiation and frag- mentation, which are pronounced in most ad- vanced societies, but present all over the world. In fact, it constitutes an important new di- mension of the functions of management, re- quiring new perspectives on its role, meth- ods and mission. Particularly relevant to the needs of global management, the man- agement of diversity calls for the invest- ment of time and resources in building or re- fining the structures and a culture of dialogue and accommodation. Inclusive of both peo- ple and viewpoints, these structures and this culture endeavour to manage with dif- ferences, not in spite of or against them. Man- agers look to long-term progress over short- term expediency and take a broader view of the three "Es" (economy, efficiency and ef- fectiveness). These are obviously the an- tithesis of reductionist approaches and "ma- cho-managerialism" (Timsit and Bouckaert,
2000, p. 299).
On the national as well as the internation- al levels, the structures and the culture of dialogue and peace are clearly the mark and creation of fully democratic States. They en- deavour to redress market failures and try to give a voice "to the poor and to the future", which all too often have none (UN, 1997, E/1997/86, para. 62). It has become appar- ent that persisting poverty and inequality be- tween and within nations has been accom- panied, in many cases, by a sharp deterio- ration in the prevalent conditions of life and work which "have rendered necessary a re- definition of the role of the State" precisely in this direction (Timsit and Bouckaert,
2000).
8. Organizational responses for human resources development
The need for redefinition and growing interest in diversity management worldwide bring in- to sharp relief the critical role of the State and of its public service as guardians of the common good, charged with the critical tasks of elaborating, articulating and de- fending the public interest. In pluralistic societies, let alone the global community, these tasks need to be accomplished through democratic processes of dialogue and consensus. These processes, in turn, require elaborate structures, but also special skills - already discussed at length above - and a mindset, which senior managers especially will need to develop and internalize. How to acquire this mindset and high-level skills could be the subject of debate at national, regional and interregional fora, although in the last analysis, countries may opt to formulate their own specific responses to this generic challenge.
Many regional initiatives since 1997 suggest that the revaluation of public service pro- fessionalism including ethics must be in- cluded in this response.4 A synthesis of the outcomes of these several UN-sponsored ac- tivities is provided in a document published by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs under the title "Professionalism and Ethics in the Public Service: Issues and Practices in Selected Regions" (UN, 2000, ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/5). It has been rightly argued that, in a way, there is not one sin- gle profession of government, but many. "Governments employ all kinds of persons - such as doctors, meteorologists, teachers, lawyers, public security personnel, as well as those whose field of expertise does not eas- ily fit under any single heading. Yet government professionals have certain attributes in com- mon. They work in a common institutional and legal framework, which offers its own con- straints and opportunities. They share a commitment to use their skills for the pub- lic good, in public service as against private gain, for fixed remuneration. They are sub 
 ject to public accountability for their ac- tions" (UN, 1999, ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/3, p.
80).
How governments recruit and under what con- ditions they employ their personnel are in- stitutional issues, where wide diversity of prac- tice may be observed. Obviously, there is no one-best-way, and "no-one-size-fits-all." In many parts of the world, patterns in public employment have long been bound with tenure and the concept of careers. The growth of political pluralism during the XIX and XX centuries reinforced this trend. For reasons related as much to political probity as to the proper working of the administra- tive system, civil service reforms have pro- moted the separation between political func- tions and civil service posts. The latter were progressively brought into career structures, one of whose main objectives was to buffer public servants from external political pres- sures and to safeguard their "neutrality".
To be sure, respect for this neutrality and lack of political tampering with the public serv- ice have been variously observed in different parts of the world. More recently, however, both "career" and "permanence" have come under attack from several quarters. Among the arguments put forward in favour of the abandonment of this traditional doctrine, the diversification and changing configura- tion of personnel requirements in the pub- lic sector stand out as incontrovertible. The civil service profile in most countries today bears no relation to its counterpart before the Second World War. What is more, it is con- stantly changing. With efforts on the way to curb public expenditures and calls to priva- tize or outsource large sectors of activity, sev- eral governments and public organizations have come to regard permanent contracts or "tenure" as an obstacle to change, or as an obstruction to rapid response. At times of re- source scarcity, constraints on "trimming down" redundant personnel are both found unacceptable to some and accentuate the feeling that permanent appointments provide strong disincentives to work hard and to adjustment.
Accordingly, many governments and inter- governmental organizations are currently experimenting with innovative approaches which seek to redefine the scope of the pub- lic sector, change the traditional structures of public organizations and introduce more flexible, often private-sector-inspired modal- ities for the employment of personnel in the public sector. It should be pointed out that success of such experiments in one country does not necessarily mean they would work in others. Uncritical acceptance of foreign pol- icy transfers, as we have seen, has often led to unhappy consequences. There are, nev- ertheless, important ways in which com- parison of civil service reforms in different parts of the world could prove extremely useful by shedding light on factors which con- tributed to the success of reforms. Such fac- tors are, for instance, the presence of a well- organized market for high-level skills, a de- veloped and expanding private sector, a cul- ture of respect for the rule of law and a gen- erally supportive legal and institutional framework. With the analysis of outcomes, cross-cultural comparisons should explore the factors which contributed to the success of policies and shaped these final outcomes.
After more than two decades of experiments with change, it would be very useful to pro- ceed with an objective analysis of benefits and costs and try to demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses, advantages and disadvan- tages of the policies pursued: what worked and what did not; where, how and, most im- portantly, why.
States' responses to the challenge of global- ization ought to accord priority to the en- richment of the stock of competencies avail- able to governments for purposes of man- agement and policy-making. However, the val- ue of a structured institutionalized approach should not be overlooked. Governments need to build "a framework of public personnel struc- tures, policies and career paths able to at- tract, retain, develop and motivate the right people and motivate their energies towards the public good" (UN, 2000, E/2000/66, Rec- ommendation No. 19). Furthermore, "gov- ernments should take urgent concerted
measures to reinforce the ethics infrastruc- ture of their respective countries and to in- troduce a comprehensive set of mechanisms, including merit pay and performance bench- marks, to deal with corruption and generally raise the standards of public life, national- ly and globally" (ibid., Recommendation No.
20).
The role of infrastructures and institution- al frameworks is to act as the key determi- nant of the nature and levels of the compe- tencies and values that a country wants to foster both in the public service and public life in general. Notwithstanding cultural dif- ferences, most countries would agree in in- cluding, in the latter, objectivity, equity, tol- erance, intellectual courage, integrity and, even more importantly today, commitment to democracy, and respect for human rights and for the rule of law. Although it would be risky to generalize, it may be fair to argue that countries find it hard to nurture and sus- tain such values and competencies in the pub- lic service in the absence of certain conditions, which need to be highlighted:
 An institutional framework and a profes- sional cadre for human resources manage- ment and development ensuring for the service a measure of coherence, consistency, transparency, credibility and predictability;
 A culture of respect for service to society and to the State, and for recognition of merit. 
Many developing countries and countries with economies in transition are facing se- rious problems in this regard. For example, due to the paucity of pay, which is so low in some countries and so rarely disbursed, pub- lic servants are forced to choose between service to their country and meeting their fam- ily's basic needs. Experience throughout the world corroborates the dictum that a "cheap public servant can cost the State a lot".
However increasing salary levels of public of- ficers would not yield proper results and might be counterproductive if it were not ac- companied by a commensurate rise in per- formance levels. Raising performance levels
demands concerted action. In turn, such ac- tion demands a truly professional manage- ment of public sector human resources and a holistic approach to their sustained de- velopment. The former would require build- ing a cadre of top-level professionals. The lat- ter would entail well-coordinated action through (a) pre- and in-service training; (b) mobility and rotation; (c) ending the pa- tronage system, where it exists; and (d) re- cruitment, posting and promotion strictly on the basis of merit (with allowances for af- firmative action). In this regard, it would be advisable that "the State stop being an em- ployer of last resort" (ibid., p. 14).
To give substance to this approach in concrete terms, the Meeting of the Group of Experts recommended "the proclamation of a Unit- ed Nations Public Service Day, which would celebrate the value and the virtue of service to the community on the local, national and global levels, with prizes to be awarded by the Secretary-General for contributions made to the cause of enhancing the role, pres- tige and visibility of public service" (ibid., Rec- ommendation No. 3).
It may be worth exploring, in the framework of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance, other meas- ures to enhance the prestige accorded to public service worldwide and the relative au- tonomy of the public service profession. For too long and in too many countries, public em- ployment has been viewed as instrumental to extraneous ends and human resource management subordinated to short-term considerations unrelated to the goal of sound overall performance in the public service.
Specifically, in several countries, a spoils system still prevails. Positions at all levels, though paid from public funds, are virtual- ly appropriated by the political leadership and used for electoral purposes or the exercise of patronage. The effects of "clientelism" are com- pounded, in most cases, by the tendency to use the public service as a means or as an instrument to combat or conceal unemploy- ment. The negative effects of such practices have been manifold and visible. Not only have
 
 they contributed to inflating staff costs and adding to tax burdens on citizen taxpayers, but they have also tended to "debase the civ- il service coin". A once prestigious profession, it has gradually become the butt of attacks and derision from many quarters.
Efforts to enhance the role, professionalism, performance, ethical values and standards in the public service ought to begin by ad- dressing this issue. Whatever must be done to further job creation, using the public serv- ice is not the way. Staffing, recruitment, posting, promotion, career development and remuneration practices must follow objective principles with only the prestige, perform- ance and integrity of the service in mind.
Though policies will vary from one country to another, one thing seems certain: that policies and practices of human resources man- agement and development must rest in pro- fessional hands. How to recruit, retain, de- velop and motivate professionals, at various levels, is an issue that must be addressed. A complex of activities which seeks to apply the lessons of international practice, inter- national cooperation in institution-building and human resources development conveys a powerful message. The means available, in terms of knowledge, science, technology and know-how open immense possibilities for the world as a whole. Building a public serv- ice worthy of a democracy is well within the reach of most governments. Will the deter- mination to use these possibilities prove commensurate to the challenge of the times? 
9. Technology and reform
It has become apparent that globalization has invested reform with new meaning. Once an occasional task of bureaucrats and politicians, it is fast becoming a recurrent event and a facet of the process of modernization. In- creasingly, however, two new dimensions are added. One dimension is the progressive exposure of previously veiled structures to public view and growing public scrutiny; the other may be termed the "internationaliza- tion" of administrative change. On both
fronts, major strides have been made in re- cent years. Most governments now welcome an exchange of information and some indeed accept a measure of convergence of admin- istrative practice, notably as a prerequisite of their accession to wider regional groups (e.g., the acquis communautaire, required for future membership of the European Union). 
Reflective of the effects of technological progress in accelerating the transition from a closed to an open systems approach and in promoting transparency of government op- erations, this new exposure of national ad- ministration to domestic civil society and in- ternational scrutiny is welcome on the whole. It fosters sensitivity to public expec- tations and may serve to reinforce greater re- spect for professionalism in the public serv- ice. There are nevertheless also potential down- sides. One is a certain risk that the respon- sibility for administrative action may be dangerously diffracted and that accountability may suffer, as a result. The other is the ten- dency to exaggerate the scope for meaning- ful comparisons and policy transfers.
Capacity-reinforcement must therefore be understood in broad strategic terms as a long-term endeavour, indeed a continual task of shaping, redefining and revamping institutions with the help of evolving tech- nologies and refining human competencies in this light. The potential is enormous. But how to ensure that progress driven by mod- ern technologies follows the paths of reason and serves the public interest is the challenge that public institutions at the national, sub- national and international levels must face.
9.1. Information technology: its promise and potential for reform
IT carries in it the prospect of major re- forms in the whole field of governance and public administration. These could take shape and form in any of the following ways:
 More efficient and effective public man- agement;
 More accessible and better information
for the public;
quently the only producer and manager of relevant economic and social data.
 Better delivery of services; and
 Building partnerships for interactive and participative governance.
Though in the 1960s and 1970s computers were already widely used by governments to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their operations, it is since the 1980s that infor- mation technology has been applied more mas- sively, not only on the operational, but also on the tactical or managerial and strategic levels. Innovations, in the form of Manage- ment Information Systems (MIS) and Deci- sion Support Systems (DSS), are gradually transforming the processes of governance. Thus, they have made governments in most developed countries the largest single users of IT and predominant consumers of IT prod- ucts in many developing countries.
Information systems have greatly improved effectiveness, efficiency and productivity in government. For example, an integrated net- work-based national revenue management system will collect information speedily and effectively, enable revenue officers to receive cases more quickly and also automate and modernize the tax collection process. Fur- thermore, it will empower the treasury de- partment to collect taxes more productive- ly, which is, of course, a benefit to govern- ment and the country.
A significant concomitant of computerization is the exploitation and utilization of gov- ernment data/information resources. The process of computerizing government busi- ness is de facto a process of exploitation of government information resources. It is well known that one of the primary activities of government is record-keeping. On the oper- ational level especially, government author- ities collect, process, maintain and update var- ious kinds of data on individuals, families and organizations. As a result, the government becomes the largest public information own- er and manages vast resources of data. In many developing countries, the government is freInformation is a valuable resource. Howev- er, it must be developed so that it can bet- ter serve users. The traditional means for obtaining and disseminating information were books, journals, indexes, libraries and archives. Favoured today, by contrast, are digitization and computerization of data and information in such forms as digitized documents, digitized images, audios and videos, databases, data mining and data warehousing. Thus large amounts of da- ta/information can be effectively, promptly and easily stored, reprocessed, retrieved and transmitted widely.
In this and other ways, IT facilitates gov- ernment information services. In democrat- ic societies, one of the government's princi- pal responsibilities is to report on its affairs to its citizens. The administration has the du- ty to inform individuals of their rights and obligations and to maintain good relations with them. An individual citizen's under- standing of the public service depends not on its outcomes only, but also on the way in which he or she is informed. Therefore, to make in- formation accessible and intelligible to the public is a critical component of government services to citizens and a powerful means to facilitate popular participation in the processes of government.
IT is changing the ways of public informa- tion. Electronic distribution of government documentation and increasing public access to government information are being devel- oped very quickly in many countries. Many governments have set up websites and con- nected databases and information systems to the Internet, thus enabling the public to search, locate, view and download government reports, studies, computer software, data files and databases. IT promotes the shar- ing of information resources and makes gov- ernments able to provide more and better in- formation services cost-effectively.
By improving public access to information, IT has helped to foster transparency and ac 
Box IV.2 
HOW DID THE INTERNET DEVELOP?
The Internet began as a government project, more specifically, as a project of the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defence. The Pentagon asked ARPA to design a computer network that would be secure and resist attack in the event of war. Researchers at ARPA developed the concept of packet- switching, in which data is split into tiny packets that may take different routes to arrive at a final destination, where they are re-assembled. From a military point of view, such a network is secure for two reasons. First, it is difficult for an enemy to make sense of intercepted, unassembled packets. Second, since there is more than one route to a destination, if one node is destroyed by enemy action, the packets can travel by an alternative route.
ARPANET, precursor of today's Internet, linked four research centres in 1969, and 15 by the year 1971. In 1973 ARPANET went international, with links to University College of London and the Royal Radar Establishment in Norway. The developers of ARPANET had in mind communication between machines (long distance computing and file transfers) rather than communication between persons (electronic mail and discussion groups). It turned out that, contrary to expectations, communication between people became much more popular than communication between machines. In 1971, Ray Tomlinson of ARPANET invented e-mail, and it was an instant success. Various discussion groups sprang up, where a person asks to receive all posts on a particular topic, and the volume of e-mail in ARPANET accelerated. To the dismay of the Pentagon, which was financing the network, the most popular discussion group was one on science fiction.
The first step toward extending this new tool of communication beyond the small group of ARPA subcontractors occurred in 1974, with the creation of Telnet, a public version of ARPANET. In 1979, two graduate students made use of Telnet to establish USENET "newsgroups" that exist to this day, and continue to grow. Newsgroups differ from the discussion groups of ARPA in that, instead of signing up for receipt of all posted messages, a member accesses an electronic bulletin board where the messages are temporarily stored. Various other networks, such as BITNET and CSNET, were established to provide services (especially e-mail) to university researchers with no access to ARPANET.
On January 1, 1983 ARPANET adopted Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), a date that, for many, marks the birth of the Internet. The Internet is the global interconnection of millions of otherwise independent computers and information systems. TCP/IP makes this interconnection possible. The Internet Protocol (IP) provides an address for each tiny packet of data, which can then be transmitted by any of a number of routes, using otherwise incompatible computers of different makes and models. The next higher layer of protocol, the TCP, handles the re-sending of any packets that might have been lost, and reassembles the packets at their destination. The authors of TCP/IP use the analogy of "electronic postcards" to explain how the Internet is able to transmit packets (Kahn and Cerf, 1999).
After TCP/IP, the most important development to date for the Internet was the release in 1991 of the World Wide Web (WWW), which was developed by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN (Switzerland). The WWW "browser/editor" gave anyone with a modem and a computer access to documents throughout the world. Users of the browser do not have to know this, but it functions thanks to a special protocol known as Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), and, for fast retrieval, documents can be written in Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). The first browser did not support graphics, but this changed in 1993 with the release of Mosaic (which developed into Netscape) and the WWW revolution truly began. Business and media began for the first time to take notice of the Internet, and the number of web sites mushroomed from 623 in December 1993 to 100,000 in January 1996, one million in April 1997, 3.7 million by year-end 1998 and 9.5 million by year-end 1999.
As of November 2000, an estimated 407 million persons worldwide were accessing the Internet, more than twice the
201 million of September 1999, and more than 15 times the 26 million estimated to have been online in 1995 (Nua, 2001). As impressive as such growth is, it implies that the Internet still reaches fewer than 7 percent of the world's population. Moreover, it tends to reach the wealthiest and most educated of this population, for the Internet, like earlier ICT, has spread unevenly. (It is said that half the inhabitants of our planet have never used a telephone and, more than five centuries after Gutenberg, illiteracy continues to block the access of many to both books and the Internet.) There are more users of the Internet in affluent Sweden than in the entire continent of Africa, more in Britain than in Latin America and the Caribbean. The number of unique documents on the World Wide Web, as of January 2000, is estimated at more than one billion, posted on 4.2 million unique servers, and additional documents are being posted at a rate of more than 20 million a month. Not surprisingly, English is the language of preference on the web, for 86.55% of all pages are written in this language, and an additional 2.36% in the French language (Inktomi, 2001).
Source: Willmore, 2001.
countability in government. In the past two decades, IT has also played a major role in helping to spread the concept of a more ef- ficient and responsive public sector, based on "service management". Emphasis on this concept has also led to extensive use of IT tools for measuring the effectiveness and efficiency of public services.
IT has made a start at changing the modal- ities of public service delivery. For centuries, the notion that citizens might actively par- ticipate in all public affairs and make sub- stantive inputs in policy decisions remained a distant prospect. Now government websites, e-mail and other means could turn such par- ticipation into a reality. Electronic polling, for instance, by either public or private in- stitutions, will probably take place in the very near future. If family computers are connected to a national or local information infra- structure and wired up to government web- sites, a two-way communication system will have been established. At the local commu- nity level, an Intranet may also be set up. This Intranet may be used to sample opin- ions in a quick and painless fashion. Ques- tions put on an administration's website would appear on the computer screens of all the households connected to it. Viewers could click the icon which they select on the screen, and thus a poll is taken. Each house- hold on the network could then be briefly scanned; the choices and results accumulated would appear in a matter of a few seconds.
Electronic referenda and electronic voting may also happen eventually. An on-line voter guide could provide the public with current information about elections. Consultation on national issues may take place and elections, either local or national, could be conducted through the Internet. The voting can take place wherever the voter is, provided that elec- tronic votes are properly designed. It goes with- out saying that such electronic polls, referenda and voting systems must meet political as well as technical requirements of accuracy, relia- bility and eligibility, when required.
In the public and private sectors, IT is rap- idly changing not merely work processes
and ways of doing business, but also forms and structures in organizations. For exam- ple, with the Internet and on-line databas- es, all kinds of information text, graphics, im- ages, voice or video can be accessed and handled by many individuals concurrently. Accordingly, it is possible to carry out activ- ities and workflows at different posts si- multaneously if computers and information networks are in place. Knowledge manage- ment systems, with the help of a search en- gine on the Internet can capture the knowl- edge of specialists and non-specialists for rou- tine decision-making. Delegation of author- ity to lower levels of responsibility within an organization thus becomes a distinct possi- bility. Traditional hierarchical organiza- tional structures based on pyramidal flows of information could be rendered obsolete. IT has the potential to bring about significant- ly altered organizational structures previously based on hierarchical distribution of infor- mation, diminish the value of departmental boundaries, and change the way decisions are taken and communicated.
Since the mid 1980s, accordingly, the focus of IT has shifted, from the quest for efficiency and productivity by automating routine tasks, to the achievement of effectiveness in terms of new approaches to traditional tasks and solutions to new tasks. State agencies and enterprises in many countries are cur- rently engaged in restructuring their or- ganizations in manners more appropriate to the new IT environment. In this process, they are removing layers of traditional manage- ment, compressing job categories, creating work teams, training employees in multi-level skills, simplifying business processes and streamlining administration. The outcomes of this re-engineering have demonstrated the scope for administrative reform as well as shown that, ultimately, decisions on the pace and extent of such reform depend on the quality of top management.
9.2. Delivering on promises: coping with the digital divide
The paradigm of a knowledge-based econo- my is not an impossible dream for the de 
 veloping countries. Still, moving to a knowl- edge-based economy may not be either fea- sible or meaningful for all countries, espe- cially in the short term. "It is important to note that bridging the \0x2018digital divide' is not simply an issue of building an information infrastructure, nor of buying and handing out computers and modems to everyone in a so- ciety. Indeed, moving to a knowledge-based economy and becoming integrated into the globalization process involves more than just acquiring and using IT. Specific policy choices, the ability to absorb new technolo- gies and success in creating a national \0x2018IT cul- ture' are also important variables. It should also be noted that in some developing coun- tries there are major technical problems. For example, in many rural areas of South Africa and in the rest of Africa, electricity is a scarce or even unavailable commodity" (Thornhill, 2000, p. 13).
These critical prerequisites highlight the crucial role that only States can play. The ini- tiative must come from duly empowered gov- ernments acting in cooperation with civil society. Governments need to articulate a vi- sion and a strategy based on the situation in their respective countries. They must then galvanize the needed political will, com- mit the resources and mobilize for action that will eventually lead their countries to inte- gration in the process of globalization and the emerging information-based global system. With a keen sense of priorities, governments must be aware of the advantages and pitfalls of IT. Notwithstanding the widely acknowl- edged potential of IT, evidence of its impact is still limited, particularly in developing countries. It is also instructive to note that IT-based concepts such as e-government and e-commerce, in which all internal activities as well as external relations with partners are conducted substantively through electronic means, have yet to become a widespread re- ality. The problems in achieving and meas- uring the immediate impact on productivi- ty and competitiveness are common to both the public and private sectors.
For national governments, the most impor- tant and immediate task is the formulation
and implementation of a coherent national IT strategy which clarifies priorities, maps out an action plan over the short, medium and long term, and establishes roles for both the public and private sectors. In many de- veloped countries, such a national IT strat- egy exists only implicitly because of the high level of understanding of IT and the existence of numerous specialized institutions with substantial experience in IT. However, for all countries, an explicit IT strategy is required which would serve to catalyze inducements of acquisition and diffusion of IT.
The information revolution poses significant challenges to States not only in the developing countries but also in the developed world. By way of simplification, it may be said that gov- ernments are confronted with the following challenges:
 To introduce IT in the public sector, to train civil servants, to enhance the efficien- cy of service delivery through the use of IT, and to improve effectiveness, accountabili- ty and citizen participation;
 To elaborate policies, which ensure computer training and affordable access to information technology for the disadvantaged groups in society;
 To encourage, through appropriate meas- ures, on-the-job training and re-training, as well as to promote life-long learning in the public sector;
 To elaborate policies aimed at creating safety nets for those laid off as a conse- quence of the introduction of IT in the work- place;
 To assist countries, particularly develop- ing countries, in building or improving their capacity to access, manage and exchange the information that is so critical for efficient public sectors and effective policy develop- ment.
In this sphere of activity, as in other areas, the progress of technology and globalization has served to accentuate the importance of
democratic, efficient States acting singly or in unison through inter-governmental or- ganizations. IT has also enhanced the need for highly skilled professionals in the serv- ice of the government. Ultimately, to quote an ancient dictum: "the measure of all things is Man" (i.e., men and women).
Chapter V
Looking towards the future
T
his Report embraces the opinion, put forward by the Secretary- General of the United Nations, that globalization must be properly understood as a complex phenomenon, as well as a source of opportunities which can be widely spread, but which so far have touched and benefited only a few. The chal- lenge that confronts us is to ensure that more people around the world can benefit from globalization.
1. What went wrong?
The weight of the available evidence strong- ly suggests that, in the past two decades, many developing countries and countries in tran- sition were victims of advice on policy deci- sions which, in the last analysis, not always bore relevance to their particular circumstances and needs. In contrast to the strategies pur- sued in prior years, such policy prescrip- tions de-emphasized the role of the institu- tions of government, which they portrayed in essentially negative terms, as obstacles to growth and the progress of globalization. This negative view of the State went in tan- dem with attacks against the public service and the glorification of private sector ways over the public sector.
Experience demonstrates that States with weak institutions have not been able to em- power their citizens to take part in global- ization or to fend off the implied social costs. The language of discourse and measures ad- vocated reflected the ideology which held sway in the West, during the 1980s and ear- ly 1990s. Devolution of responsibility, decentralization, deregulation and privatization
were also accorded prominence. What can we say of the outcomes? There have been reported successes, mostly in the North and West, but also stories of failures in many developing countries and countries in transition. The char- acterization of the 1980s as "the lost decade" and of the 1990s as a "mixed bag at best" gives the measure of the distance between expec- tations and outcomes.
2. Reforms must be 
home-grown and made to fit real needs
Preliminary findings embodied in this doc- ument give only a partial picture of what clear- ly is a highly complex, prismatic situation worldwide. A systematic study of past pro- grammes and policies would greatly assist the quest for more appropriate strategies and methods of reform than those already tried in the past two decades. It must be carried out, and the United Nations, first in the field and sponsor of arguably the oldest pro- gramme of technical cooperation in public ad- ministration and governance, is well positioned to put it into effect. However, the weight of available evidence, as shown in this Report, points to a convergence of views on certain salient features of past approaches and measures:
 A rather dogmatic and technocratic approach, which failed to take account of the com- plexities of particular national circum- stances and overemphasized one facet of re- form (e.g., cutback management) over all others. Now widely criticized as "reduction ist", this approach took for granted a meas- ure of convergence of managerial cultures which appears, in retrospect, as somewhat unrealistic. It correspondingly pressed for "one best way" solutions which earned it the de- scription: "one-size-fits-all". What is needed are customized approaches to meet the di- verse needs of individual countries" (UN,
2000, E/2000/66, p. 15). In fact, "an overly technocratic or purely economic growth ap- proach to institutional development divorces the institutional strategy from the socio-eco- nomic strategy and political environment which it is meant to serve." (ibid., p. 11) 
 A related criticism has faulted the rela- tionship between recipient and donor. Con- trary to officially accepted doctrine, too many programmes proved to have been sup- ply-driven. In many cases, accordingly, reforms have been externally induced. Too often, as a result, style has invaded substance and pro- grammes were concerned with "quick fixes" rather than long-term progress.
The lessons of experience strongly point to the conclusion that reforms to be successful and, accordingly, aid programmes to produce "user-friendly" results, must clearly be:
 Home-grown;
 Demand-driven; and
 Internally consistent and duly coordinat- ed on the national policy level.
It has become apparent that the design and conduct of programmes of reform require the steady involvement of competent na- tional teams, which must be in the driver's seat. Main policy decisions cannot be "out- sourced" to consultants, however good. How- ever well-intentioned and technically ac- complished, foreign advice must stay with- in the bounds of counselling and guidance. Overstepping that limit is both counter-pro- ductive and dangerously shortsighted. Car- ried too far, it undermines the confidence of peoples in their respective governments and institutions. Democracy is "hollowed-out" and accountability lost when citizens conclude
that their elected government has lost con- trol of events.
3. Making democracy meaningful: the need for a strong, strategic State
Experience demonstrates that the failure of democracies to make any meaningful changes in the social and economic conditions of their citizens, lead to public cynicism, ap- athy and alienation. What we call "the na- tion-State" which, needless to point out, is different today than half a century ago, is the best instrumentality we have at our dispos- al in order to accomplish our purposes in dem- ocratic ways.
The State is indispensable to democratic governance. It has been pointed out, however, that several of its tasks cannot be carried out, as in the past, in centripetal fashion out of the national capital. Important functions of government have been devolved on the sub- national level and, more significantly, major decisions of government are taken in the frame- work, or subject to provisions of inter-gov- ernmental regimes (e.g. World Trade Orga- nization) and supra-national bodies (e.g. Eu- ropean Union). As the Fifteenth Meeting of the Group of Experts has aptly pointed out, this situation makes major new demands on Member States of the United Nations, for which developing countries and countries in transition are often ill prepared. Indeed, it may be argued that the capacity deficit, that is to say the distance between what countries have and what it takes to make them well- functioning democracies, as well as effective players on the international scene, is one of the main causes of the crises plaguing the world.
4. The State as linking pin: a strong supportive centre
One of the principal findings and messages of this Report is that we need the State, and that the State, increasingly, will function on three levels:
 the national, or central government level;
 the sub-national level, as a result of a process of devolution of functions, to local gov- ernment structures, or even non-state actors operating within bounds established by the State and under its supervision; and
 the international level, where an entire ed- ifice set up for global governance is slowly taking shape, but clearly is underpinned by nation-States and driven by the initiatives which they deploy.
Increasingly, the State is called upon to serve as linking pin of these three levels, to harmonize and coordinate activities and processes involving diverse actors, govern- mental and non-governmental, national and international, with interests and agendas that may differ substantially. A strong support- ive centre within each nation-State represents an essential prerequisite of:
 Domestic peace, tranquillity, socio-eco- nomic development and progress on the path to decentralization, deregulation and debu- reaucratization; and 
 International cooperation in ways that bring prosperity not only to a minority, but to the great majority of the world's popula- tion.
The present Report explores the concept of an "intelligent, democratic State," which it views as the antithesis of "bureaucracy" and "big government". The stress is squarely on quality, integrity and equity rather than vol- ume or quantity. It emphasizes leadership, empowerment, example, motivation, dis- cussion, negotiation, accommodation and conciliation, rather than "slash and burn" and similar top-down command approaches. To raise performance levels in this regard, the Report calls for:
 professionalism in government; and
 capacity-building or capacity-reinforce- ment.
5. Building the essential competence for an intelligent, democratic State
There can be little doubt that giving democ- racy meaning and raising the level of com- petence in governance begin with the rein- forcement of the capacity of States to meet the needs and expectations of their citizens. Precisely on this account, a major recom- mendation of this Report is the urgent need to build up in all developing countries and countries in transition:
 Diagnostic capacity; and
 Strategic capacity for the design, the con- duct, monitoring and evaluation of pro- grammes of reform.
In this age of globalization and rapid advances of science and technology, there will always be need for foreign expertise and specialized assistance. However, what is necessary is for developing countries and governments in gen- eral to have at their disposal and under their command the necessary deep knowledge, know-how and range of skills in order to be able:
 To design, implement and evaluate effec- tive national policies; 
 To conduct the consultations and negotia- tions needed at both the international and the sub-national levels in order to elicit, ar- ticulate, promote and defend the public in- terest; and
 To help establish and consolidate peace, both nationally and internationally, and play their part as members of the global community effectively.
Here are some generic requirements, which this study has revealed:
 Professionalism in public policy planning and development;
 Professionalism in policy and programme implementation;
 
 Professionalism in human resources man- agement and development;
 Professionalism in the management of money, equipment, technology and informa- tion; and
 Professionalism in performance measure- ment, monitoring and evaluation.
 Growing sensitivity towards and respect for the citizens' needs;
 Low tolerance for laxity, corruption and crime;
 Increasing recognition of the need to ac- knowledge and to reward industry, loyalty, accomplishment and merit;
 As pointed out in a recent report of the Unit- ed Nations:
"Professionalism in government, or any oth- er field, rests on two foundations: one is a com- petence base, a special body of knowledge or a definable skill acquired through study and practice. The concept of professionalism, however, also suggests a shared values sys- tem, a code of ethical conduct that manifest themselves in the application of knowledge, the use of particular skills, and in the exer- cise of control over practice" (UN, 1999, ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E./3, p. 97).
Enhancing professionalism is also predicat- ed on two related objectives:
 First, to restore, enhance and highlight the virtue, value and dignity of service to the com- munity;
 Second, to promote and take concerted measures which are required to raise moti- vation, morale, integrity and commitment among all public servants, elected and ap- pointed, and at all levels of government.
6. Reinforcing core public service values
Reinforcing core public values should be based on a number of elements:
 Revaluation of learning, integrity and competence;
 Stress on the merit system, while paying due regard to affirmative action in favour of minorities and historically or otherwise dis- advantaged groups;
 Increasing recognition of the value of neu- trality of civil servants and of the need to se- cure a degree of autonomy of public person- nel management from extraneous pressures in order to safeguard high quality perform- ance, motivation, integrity and professionalism in the public service;
 Increasing recognition of the value of cross-cultural and international links as means towards the improvement of the pro- fessional image and performance of the pub- lic service (ibid., p. 24)
7. Assisting developing countries with institution- building
It is idle to pretend that such values can be established and fostered overnight or with- out any regard to the political, social and cul- tural environment in which a public service operates, but also and most importantly, without appropriate structures, legislative and policy frameworks designed to tap, attract, retain, develop and motivate the needed men and women using their skills produc- tively and effectively. Assisting developing coun- tries and countries with economies in tran- sition in building or refining these structures and policy frameworks represents an ur- gent priority and a strong recommendation of this Report. It cannot be overstressed that policy advice and programmatic assistance offered by either the bilateral or the multi- lateral programmes must respect the distinct legal and political traditions of different countries, which vary widely. Some countries, for example, adhere to a tenure career sys- tem, while others, by contrast, prefer more flexible staffing arrangements. One size does
not fit all. Nevertheless, experience strong- ly suggests the need to professionalize hu- man resources management and develop- ment in the public service sector. It seems rather incongruous that a large body of knowledge and accumulated experience on these subjects has yet to make its mark on civil service reform and public administra- tion, in all too many countries. It is even more regrettable that public service employment remains, in several countries, a haven of clientelism, patronage and partisanship. Not surprisingly, in such countries, the State is also regarded as the employer of last resort. We must revaluate public service as a nec- essary prerequisite to reinforcing democra- cy, the State and sustainable development. Whatever measures are needed to combat un- employment, using the public sector as refuge for the jobless is certainly not the way.
8. Building networks among public services: the United Nations can help
One of the visible outcomes of globalization is that it has expanded the range of contacts among senior civil servants and government officials from different parts of the world. Del- egates and representatives from North and South periodically meet at international con- ferences, which are convened for purposes of trade negotiations or to develop the basis of international cooperation in any of a num- ber of major policy areas. At meetings of this nature, national representatives from the developing countries suffer from many draw- backs, which cannot be readily remedied. Not only are they required to bargain from a weak- er negotiating position, but in so doing they may also compete unfavourably in terms of information, degree of specialization and time they may devote to mastering a subject. They often lack the equipment, databases, and support staff, which are not as readily available in the South and East as in the North and West. They live from hand to mouth, cop- ing with emerging crises, dealing with top priorities but, for that very reason, also tempted on occasions to leave other matters aside. Under such conditions, the broader longterm issues, including global agendas, may not receive the attention which they de- serve.
There is no easy solution to this difficult predicament of small developing countries and countries in transition. However, there are ways in which the international communi- ty could facilitate a more active and effective participation of the developing countries in international governance. One obvious modality is policy advice and briefing on emerging major issues of policy; another is assistance in coping with the deficit in di- agnostic, negotiating and related skills; a third could take the form of online networks pro- viding up-to-date and comparable data in read- ily usable form. The United Nations Online Public Administration Network (UNPAN) affords an illustration of what advanced technology can do to bring policy advice, in- formation and training within the reach of officers in the developing countries.
Globalization and rapid change trigger two antithetical although concurrent trends: convergence in some aspects, but also di- vergence and diversification in others. There exists today an infinitely greater variety of specializations, group interests, ideologies, and points of view than fifty years ago. This growing differentiation poses a challenge to managers that goes beyond the need for tol- erance of diversity. It calls for listening skills, capacity to mediate and arbitrate, finding a common ground between opposing views, turning potential conflicts into win- win situations, and sources of opportunity for the greater good of all.
9. Helping developing countries to cope with complexity and change
Helping developing countries and countries in transition confront the pressing chal- lenges of globalization must also encompass programmes designed to enhance capacity in coping with diversity, complexity and change. The need is institutional, in other words, it requires the crafting or fine-tuning
 
 of structures for consultation, mediation and policy coordination, but also manifests itself in the new required profile for senior policy advisers and senior public managers. At the national, sub-national and international lev- els, both policy advisers and senior public man- agers are increasingly faced with the de- manding tasks of reconciling differences, mediating disputes, resolving thorny con- flicts, negotiating agreements and trying to build consensus in a volatile environment where differentiation takes on a variety of forms:
 Diversity of cultures, ethnicity, language, religion or ideology;
 Diversity of political, legal and economic systems; and
 Diversity of conditions, interests and view- points.
The above are all compounded by an enor- mous range of fields of specializations that go into policy-making and policy-implemen- tation. Tackling complex issues effectively calls for substantial knowledge of economics, pol- itics, psychology and law, as well as other dis- ciplines depending on the nature of the prob- lem at hand. It calls for historical depth and comparative perspective, and uncommon sensitivity to the dynamics of human inter- action. There is a pressing need for proper responses to globalization, which can bring many opportunities to developing countries. Nevertheless, as indicated in the Report, it also has social adjustment costs which re- quire both States and other players on the international scene to strengthen their ca- pacity for long-term policy planning. They call for institutions and competencies needed to handle consultations on multi-faceted issues of considerable complexity. The interna- tional community can play a major role in this respect through policy advisory servic- es, targeted training programmes, and in- formation exchanges. Its task is really twofold:
 On the level of the States, it needs to co- operate with the developing countries and coun- tries in transition in building the capacity which makes for democratic and more effective
governance, but also will enable them to be more active players on the international scene;
 On the international level, it needs to co- operate with all the States, as well as NGOs and other non-state actors in improving, modernizing and fine-tuning the machinery for global governance. 
10. Making globalization an 
instrument of inclusion
To turn globalization into an effective in- strument of inclusion and opportunity, not fear, we should endeavour to make it work for the good of all and of the future; not just for the short-term and for the good of a few. This is no easy task, given the vast dispar- ities of power and wealth and the realities of global power politics. Still, even within these constraints, possibilities do exist; we must seize these opportunities. Mobilizing world opinion for international action on issues of global concern is our best chance. Success is predicated on democratic States shouldering their responsibilities and playing an active part in global governance. Reinforcing state capacity, as well as making the global insti- tutional framework more democratic, are necessary conditions for people to enjoy the benefits of globalization and to protect and promote the interests of vulnerable groups in society. In fact, globalization is an oppor- tunity and a challenge. Working together it can be made into a formidable tool for the progress of all humanity.
Part Two
Introduction
P
art Two of this Report is meant
to be a constant feature of all fu- ture issues. It will present data on the public sector, measurement tools and relevant statistical informa- tion. Its goal will be to provide a meaning- ful indication on how quantitatively the pub- lic sector changes along the years, and pos- sibly to make some connection between these changes and its functioning. In this in- agural issue of the Report a first methodological analysis is carried out, aimed at answering three basic questions: (a) How can the size of the public sector be measured in theory? (b) How can it be measured in fact, given the constraints of existing data? (c) What accounts for observed variation in the size of the pub- lic sector? 
The first question is extremely difficult. To measure the total impact of the State on so- ciety is a very complex task, in part because the impact of government regulations can- not be quantified in any meaningful way. Nonetheless, it is possible to measure spe- cific aspects of the size of the public sector. There are three broad approaches: produc- tion, consumption and expenditure. The pro- duction and consumption approaches rely on information from basic national accounts, whereas the expenditure approach requires knowledge of government taxation and out- lays; expenditure is the most comprehensive of the three approaches, in that it focuses on government, but includes public and pri- vate corporations to the extent that govern- ment subsidizes goods and services sold in the market.
The second question presents another set of problems dealing with actual measurement. For the production approach, output statis- tics are not generally available. Employment statistics are available for governments or less frequently for the entire pub- lic sector, but only for a limited number of countries and years. The employment figures suffer from lack of comparability in addition to their limited availability. Statistics on government consumption expenditure (but not actual final consumption) are widely avail- able. However, these also suffer from poor in- ter-country comparability, primarily because governments sometimes choose to record public spending on health and education as government consumption (transfers in kind), sometimes as subsidies (negative taxes), and sometimes as cash transfers to households. Expenditure data are available in most cas- es only for central governments, without any estimate of the value of tax expenditures, much less the value of implicit subsidies given to producers.
For the third question, despite these theo- retical ambiguities and the poor quality of available data, it is possible to provide some surprisingly robust answers. When govern- ment is measured by employment or by con- sumption expenditure, there is strong evidence of economies of scale in the provision of serv- ices, but no evidence that the size of gov- ernment is reduced by globalization. When government is measured by central govern- ment expenditure, it is globalization that de- termines its size, with no evidence of economies of scale. In sum, there are economies of scale in the provision of gov- ernment services such as defense, health and education, but a government's budget is driven by globalization, not by the land area or population of a country.
Part Two
Defining and measuring 
the size of the State
1. Conceptual framework
W
democratic tradition, a written constitution or a bill of rights. The State is able to (a) imhat does it mean to say that the public sector of one coun- try is larger than that of an- other, or that the public sector in a particular country has increased in size over time? Since the public sector is the embodiment of the State, to answer this question one must first clarify the meaning of the word "State".
In no country is it legal for individuals, act- ing in their own self-interest, to force others to do something against their will. In many countries citizens are allowed to organize busi- ness firms, trade unions or religious societies, but these institutions rely, for the most part, on the market and on persuasion to recruit members and to influence the behaviour of others. Large corporations such as General Motors (or Volkswagen or Toyota) offer au- tomobiles for sale. They persuade, or at- tempt to persuade, with advertising, but there is no way they can force consumers to purchase these products. Market transactions are voluntary, as is participation in civic and social causes. Individuals purchase goods or services only if they find the cost to be less than the satisfaction or utility they expect to derive from them. And they join a firm, church or sporting club only if it is in their interest to do so.
The State is different. It is not a voluntary organization. It is concerned not with max- imization of profit or utility, but with public policy. More importantly, it enjoys a mo- nopoly of legitimate force, limited perhaps by
pose regulations on and collect taxes from other sectors of the economy, (b) produce goods and services that it can either sell in the mar- ket or supply free of charge to individuals and the community, and (c) distribute funds through transfers. We examine each of these forms of State intervention under five head- ings: regulation, taxation, production, con- sumption and cash transfers.
1.1. The State as regulator 
The State is able to regulate economic activities in myriad ways that affect virtually every- one. There are many examples. The State es- tablishes and enforces standards regarding health, safety, hours of work, minimum wages and emission of pollutants. It issues and limits the number of licenses for taxis, restaurants, hairdressers, radio stations, and countless other businesses. It estab- lishes quotas for the import and export of spe- cific products. It requires automobile drivers to purchase liability insurance and workers to save for their old age.
It is extremely difficult to quantify the ex- tent of this regulation of economic activity. It is possible to count the number of regu- latory laws that are in effect, and some re- searchers have done so. But the number of laws may bear little relation to the extent of regulation. An alternative is to estimate the amount of economic activity that is subject to regulation; but this measures the size of the formal, as opposed to the informal, sec- tor of an economy. Such a statistic would not
 allow one to rank countries by degree of reg- ulation nor measure changes in the extent of regulation over time. Indeed, the rela- tionship between regulation and formality is not necessarily positive, for onerous regula- tions encourage growth of the informal sec- tor.
In sum, even though regulation is an important function of the State, it is virtually impos- sible to measure in any meaningful way, and thus will be ignored in the remainder of this Part.
1.2. The State as tax collector 
Without tax revenue, a State cannot survive. It can order its central bank to print mon- ey, but that is a form of taxation since the resulting inflation erodes the real value of cash balances held by the public. The State can also finance its expenditures by bor- rowing, but it is the capacity to collect tax- es in the future that gives it access to capi- tal markets today.
The amount of taxes collected is determined by expenditure requirements, at least in the long-run. But the State affects profoundly the economy and the distribution of income by the way in which it collects taxes. Groups of citizens or particular activities are favoured when they are exempted from payment of tax- es. These "tax expenditures" give the illusion that the State is smaller in terms of revenue or expenditure, and distort inter-country comparisons. To cite a simple example, gov- ernments typically allow taxpayers an income tax deduction for each dependent child. A num- ber of European countries provide in addi- tion generous monthly payments to the fam- ily of each child, with the result that gov- ernment expenditure and taxation is larger than it would be if the State relied solely on income tax deductions. Another example is subsidies given to homeowners by allowing deduction of mortgage interest payments. Oth- er things being equal, one would like to con- clude that the State is larger with this pref- erential treatment of homeowners over renters. Yet, because the mortgage interest deduction is tax expenditure rather than a
cash subsidy, it does not show up as in- creased government expenditure or taxa- tion. Other examples are the tax conces- sions granted to firms that locate in a spe- cific area, export certain products, or be- have in other ways desired by the State.
It would be informative to sum all tax ex- penditures in each country for purposes of comparison. Unfortunately such data are collected in few countries. Tax expenditure, unlike regulation, is simple to measure; nonetheless it is seldom done.
1.3. The State as producer
A third function of the State is the produc- tion of goods and services. Those destined for final consumption are either sold or distrib- uted without charge to residents. The Sys- tem of National Accounts (SNA)1 distin- guishes between these two types of produc- tion, and refers to them as market and non- market activities (see figure 1 below). Goods and services sold on the market are regard- ed as output of public corporations, not gov- ernment. They are valued at market prices, even if these prices are less than cost. Ex- amples are publicly-owned telecommunica- tions, railways, electric utilities, and postal services. Goods and services which are pro- duced by employees of the State and distributed without charge (or at prices which are not economically significant) are deemed to be the output of general government. This in- cludes the activities of government min- istries, but it also includes activities of pub- lic non-market institutions such as schools, provided they are both controlled and fi- nanced by government. "Government" in the SNA refers to activities of the central gov- ernment and all lower levels of government, such as municipalities.
An institution that is not controlled by the government, regardless of the extent of pub- lic financial support, is deemed to be private. This is true for public universities that en- joy considerable autonomy and for schools and hospitals that are wholly or partially fi- nanced by government but run by religious orders or other non-profit institutions.
Other definitions of public sector produc- tion are possible. Discussion is limited here to the SNA because it is a system that was prepared under the auspices of an Inter- Secretariat Working Group drawn from five organizations: the European Commission (Eurostat), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Econom- ic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the United Nations (DESA's Statistics Division and regional commissions) and the World Bank2. Moreover, it is a system accepted, even if not fully implemented, by the vast major- ity of countries today.
When goods and services are distributed free of charge, or are sold for low, non-mar- ket prices, national income accountants typ- ically value the output at cost rather than at market price. The value of the output of public schools, for example, is assumed to equal the sum of salaries paid, plus textbooks and other purchased materials, plus depreciation and maintenance of buildings, grounds, fur- niture and equipment. Occasionally, goods and services similar to those distributed for free are offered for sale at market prices, providing useful information that can be used to im- pute the value of the output of public or pri- vate institutions operating outside the market. But this is rare. In nearly all cases, the value of non-marketed goods and services is assumed to equal their cost of production. 
It should be straightforward to measure the size of the public sector by summing the output of the general government (which is not sold on the market) and the output of the public corporate sector (which is). To avoid double counting, this would have to be done as value-added, that is, as the value of pro- duction less the cost of intermediate inputs. Value-added comprises depreciation and the cost of capital as well as the cost of labour. 
Unfortunately, public production statistics are not generally available. What is available, for some countries and some years, are esti- mates of the number of persons employed by the central government or by the entire pub- lic sector. Estimates of government employ- ment are thought to be more reliable, or at least more comparable, than estimates of em- ployment in public corporations, largely be- cause of problems in the definition of what constitutes a public as opposed to a private corporation. 
Estimates of government employment suffer from problems of inter-country comparabil ity as well. Some countries report the total number of employees (both full-and part- time), whereas others report only the num- ber of full-time workers. Few countries fol- low the SNA recommendation of reporting full- time or equivalent employees. A more seri- ous problem is that some countries include military personnel, whereas others exclude them. Furthermore, some of these statistics include military conscripts, even though the SNA stipulates that labour that is not paid an economically significant wage be exclud- ed from national accounts. Another serious problem is the occasional inclusion of mar- ket activities in figures for government em- ployment. Italy, for example, until 1993 in- cluded postal and telecommunications em- ployees in total government employment. These individuals were excluded in 1994, but previous data were not corrected, and so Italy reported a large drop in government em- ployment in that year because of this re- classification of public employees. However, even close adherence to SNA guidelines can create problems for analysis. Austria, for example, registered a 13.5 per cent fall in gov- ernment employment in 1997, which was not the result of any contraction of government spending, but rather as a reform of the health sector, with more autonomy given to public hospitals and clinics, and their sub- sequent reclassification as private institutions.
1.4. The State as consumer
It is said that the State participates in the economy as a consumer as well as a producer. The famous accounting identity of elemen- tary macroeconomics is:
GDP = C + I + G + (X-M),
i.e., gross domestic product is the sum of pri- vate consumption plus gross investment3 plus government consumption plus net ex- ports. Private consumption is of final goods and services only. Intermediate goods, which are inputs into the production of final goods, are not counted separately since their val- ue is already included in the price of final goods. Investment includes public as well as private expenditure on new buildings, highways,
port facilities and equipment. Construction is often shown separately from expenditure on capital equipment.
There is no term in the accounting identity for corporate or business consumption. The SNA assumes that all private consumption of final goods and services is by households. Corporations consume only intermediate goods, inputs into the production process. Work- ers, managers and stockholders consume fi- nal goods and services, but corporations do not.
Why, then, is there a term for government consumption? Is it not true that all govern- ment output intended for final consumption is distributed to the public either free of charge or for a nominal fee? A case can be made that government consumption of final goods and services, like corporate consump- tion, is in all instances equal to zero. Much of the output of government, such as school- ing, health services and defence, could eas- ily be classified as final consumption of households. Government output that is not capital formation and does not benefit con- sumers directly could be classified as an in- termediate input into final production. Pub- lic highways, for example, are used to trans- port goods as well as people, and delivery is part of the cost of production. The justice sys- tem benefits parties to a business contract, who otherwise would have to hire someone as an intermediary in the event of disputes. Also, agricultural extension services are in- termediate inputs into food production.
The SNA does not take this approach. It as- sumes that all government output other than capital formation is for final consump- tion and defines actual final consumption of government to be equal to its consumption expenditure on collective services. "Although collective services benefit the community, or certain sections of the community, rather than the government, the actual consump- tion of these services cannot be distributed among individual households, or even among groups of households such as subsectors of the household sector"4. This limits gov- ernment consumption to general administration and other collective consumption goods such as defence. Since there is no pro- vision for government production of inter- mediate goods, the remainder of govern- ment output is allocated to capital formation
(investment) and private consumption.
bursements for) goods and services that are distributed without charge to individuals and to the community at large. Government consumption expenditure is often abbreviated as "government consumption", and is typically much larger than government production.
No country publishes estimates of actual fi- nal consumption of government as defined in the SNA. Published statistics refer to con- sumption expenditure, which is also defined in the SNA. The measured size of government is much larger under this approach. Gov- ernment consumption expenditure is the output of general government less sales less capital formation plus goods and services pur- chased from the private sector and transferred in kind to households or the community. Transfers "in kind" include goods and serv- ices purchased by households or non-profit institutions and reimbursed by government.
The philosophy behind the expenditure ap- proach is that consumption is private only when households are free to save or to switch the value of the expenditure to some other item of consumption5. When govern- ment provides free goods or services, such as health care or schooling or weather reports, this is classified as government consumption. An individual is free to consume or not con- sume free health care, but is not free to re- duce consumption of free health care in or- der to increase his or her savings or con- sumption of food. It makes no difference whether the institution that produces the goods or services is private or public. All that mat- ters is that government finance the specific consumption. If the consumer pays something out of pocket, such as tuition fees for education or charges for visits to a clinic or hospital, then part of the expenditure is allocated to government and part to private consumption. If the consumer pays nothing, the entire ex- penditure is allocated to government con- sumption, even if the school, hospital or clin- ic is in the private sector.
In summary, government consumption ex- penditure is equal to the sum of govern- ment production (less any fees collected) plus government purchases of (or reimData on government consumption expendi- ture are readily available from the national accounts of a large number of countries, and for this reason are popular measures of the size of government. Inter-country compara- bility of the data is unfortunately marred by two problems. First, some countries are known to understate government consump- tion by classifying transfers in kind as cash transfers to households. An example is the United States, which, in its national ac- counts, classifies reimbursements through Medicare and Medicaid as cash transfers to households rather than as government con- sumption of health services. Similar practices exist in the compilation of national accounts for expenditures on health care in Australia, Austria and Spain6. At the same time, oth- er countries with extensive systems of pri- vate medical care, such as Canada, follow- ing SNA guidelines, classify public expendi- tures on health care as government con- sumption. Similar discrepancies exist in the treatment of other social transfers in kind, such as education. The resulting statistics for government consumption are thus not fully comparable between countries.
A second and more serious problem arises from the classification of government expendi- tures as production subsidies rather than as social transfers in kind. This is a more seri- ous problem because that classification is al- lowed by the SNA. Governments are free to classify expenditures in support of inde- pendent universities and hospitals, for example, as either (a) transfers to households, which is part of government consumption, or (b) pro- duction subsidies, which are treated as neg- ative taxes. Subsidies to producers reduce the value of measured output and consumption whereas transfers to households do not. This affects significantly the comparability of es- timates of government consumption across countries and across time7.
 
 1.5. The State as provider of cash transfers and subsidies
As has been shown, consumption expenditures of government consist of goods and services supplied to individual households and to the community as a whole. Governments also pro- vide cash payments to households and pro- ducers. When the recipient is a household the payment is defined in the SNA as a current transfer payment. When the recipient is a pri- vate or public institution it is defined as a subsidy or, when tied to the acquisition of fixed assets, as a capital transfer. 
Transfer payments include payment of interest on the national debt, provision of public pen- sions for the elderly, income support for the unemployed, and other cash outlays. These expenditures do not add to government con- sumption expenditure, but they transfer purchasing power from the taxpayer and the purchaser of government bonds to des- ignated individuals and institutions. This re- distribution of income is an essential feature of the modern Welfare State.
For the purpose of measuring the size of gov- ernment, it makes little sense to look at subsidies and cash transfers separately from social transfers in kind or, for that matter, from government provision of collective con- sumption goods. A useful measure of the presence of government in an economy would thus be government consumption ex- penditure plus subsidies and cash transfers. Unfortunately, this statistic is not available at the present time, though national ac- counts are moving in this direction with satellite tables known as "income and out- lay" accounts.
One important subsidy that is never record- ed in national accounts is the implicit sub- sidy to producers provided by tariffs on im- ports. Protection allows domestic producers to raise their prices, in effect forcing consumers to subsidize their products. Governments could achieve the same result by taxing the consumption of specific goods, then return- ing the tax as a subsidy to domestic producers but not to importers. This policy, except for
administrative expenses, would replicate tariffs, but it would be recorded as explicit taxes and subsidies. With tariffs, govern- ments record only taxes collected on actual imports, not the implicit taxes paid by con- sumers who purchase protected domestic output. With very high tariffs, or import prohibitions, protection is high yet few or no taxes are collected.
What is widely available are data on actual taxes collected and expenditures made by cen- tral governments. With few exceptions these do not provide information on government con- sumption, for there is almost never an esti- mate of depreciation of buildings and equip- ment. Instead, the data include capital ex- penditures, which are often not collected separately from other expenditures. The en- tire expense of a new building, for example, is allocated to the year of its construction even though it provides services for many subse- quent years. This is an important limitation of the data. A more serious drawback, how- ever, is the fact that, with few exceptions, in- formation on taxes and expenditures of low- er levels of government is not available for developing countries. Sometimes re- searchers report total government tax rev- enue and expenditures for developed coun- tries, then central government tax revenue and expenditures for developing countries, eliminating from their sample two obvious federal states (Brazil and India). This does not seem to be appropriate, since many uni- tary States also have large local govern- ment expenditures, and thus central gov- ernment taxes and expenditures are re- ported for all countries, developed as well as developing8.
1.6. Measuring the size of the public sector
It has been shown that there are many ways to measure the size of the public sector, and that policies chosen by governments to achieve specific goals have a profound effect on these measures. This can perhaps best be illustrated with a simple example.
Suppose that the State wants to improve air quality through generalized use of catalytic converters on motor vehicles. There are a num- ber of ways to accomplish this goal. The State may simply use its power to regulate, that is, decree that each motor vehicle sold in the country be equipped with a catalytic converter. A cost is imposed on the consumer, which shows up in the national accounts as private consumption expenditure. There is no change in the size of the public sector, at least in so far as we are able to measure it.
Alternatively, the State may choose to pro- duce catalytic converters in publicly owned plants, then sell them to consumers, who are required to install them on their vehicles. This policy increases the size of the public corpo- rate sector, but it has no effect on government production or consumption.
Rather than sell the catalytic converters it produces, the State might choose to give them away (or charge an economically in- significant price) to all owners of motor ve- hicles. With this policy, the cost of produc- tion of catalytic converters is registered in national accounts as government produc- tion, and consumption of catalytic convert- ers is registered as government consumption expenditure. By either measure, the size of government increases. If instead of giving the product away, the State subsidizes pur- chasers by granting them an income tax credit, there would be no measurable effect on government production (since the cat- alytic converters are sold in the first in- stance) or consumption (for the same reason).
Now suppose that the State chooses not to produce catalytic converters, but rather to pur- chase them from the private sector and dis- tribute them free of charge to owners of ve- hicles. The result (compared to the situation prior to mandated catalytic converters) is an increase in government consumption ex- penditure, with no change in government pro- duction.
Finally, suppose that the State decides, rather than provide each owner of a motor vehicle with a transfer in kind, to subsidize
the private production of catalytic convert- ers so that their price is close to zero. Sub- sidies are not part of government consump- tion, and so government expenditure is the only measure that will capture this increase in the size of government.
In any of these scenarios, the costs to socie- ty are the same: the resources needed to pro- duce the required number of catalytic con- verters. And the benefits to society are also the same: improved air quality. But effects on measured size of the public sector vary greatly, as do effects on household budgets. With pure regulation, costs of cleaner air are borne proportionately by those contributing to pollution. With free government provi- sion of catalytic converters, costs are borne by taxpayers in general, irrespective of their contribution to air pollution.
In this particular example, countries every- where rely solely on regulation to mandate the use of catalytic converters. But policy-mak- ers by no means pursue all goals in this manner. In the above discussion, substitute "primary education" for "catalytic converters" and "households with children" for "owners of motor vehicles". All of the options are again equally plausible, yet countries around the world do not stop with regulation (requiring each child to attend school); they almost invariably offer residents free public schooling or, at the very least, provide gen- erous subsidies and tax credits for inde- pendent schools.
2. Measures of the size of 
government
Rather than focus on a single measure of the size of the public sector, this Part of the Re- port presents available data for a variety of measures: government and public sector em- ployment, government consumption expen- ditures, central government expenditure and central government tax revenue. This Part ends with a discussion of possible determi- nants of the size of the public sector and a brief conclusion. The emphasis throughout is on differences between countries and re 
 gions of the world at the beginning of the decade and in the latest available year, which is usually the year 1997.
2.1. Government and public sector employment, 1990 and 1997
Table 1 below reports data on government and public sector employment for the years
1990 and 1997 or closest to those two years that are available. The main source of in- formation is a Survey on public sector em- ployment statistics that the International Labour Organization carried out in October of 19989. This was supplemented with data from the OECD for eight countries. In all cas- es the data are comprehensive, in that they include employment at all levels of govern- ment.
To facilitate comparisons, the number of per- sons employed is shown for each country as a percentage of the total population. The ILO reports government employment as a per- centage of total employment. This is not done here because "total employment" miss- es a large percentage of workers in some coun- tries10. Calculations were also made for the total population aged 15 through 59; these are not reported because this alternative measure did not affect comparisons of regions, nor the statistical results for determinants of the size of the public sector. 
Detailed results can be seen in table 1 above, while figures 2a through 3c below provide a quick overview. Two types of diagrams are used in the figures of this and subsequent sections. The first type of diagram contains bars, one for each region of the world. The bottom of the bar is the minimum value reg- istered by countries in the region, and the top is the maximum value. In other words, the bar represents the range of observations that are observed. The solid horizontal line represents the median, or midpoint, of the distribution. One-half of all observations lie below, and one-half above the median. Un- less a distribution is very symmetrical, the median is not equal to the simple average (mean) reported in table 1 below.
The second type of diagram provides a quick overview of trends. It consists of a square with a diagonal line running from the lower left hand side to the upper right hand side cor- ner. For each country, a single point is en- tered into the box. The vertical axis meas- ures the statistic for 1997 and the horizon- tal axis the same statistic for 1990. If an ob- servation lies below the diagonal line, this means that employment is falling as a pro- portion of population. If it lies above the line, this indicates that employment is ris- ing.
Figures 2a and 2b below contain the bar di- agrams for government employment in five regions of the world; three features are strik- ing. First, government, as measured by the share of government employees in the total population, is surprisingly large in the de- veloped and transitional economies com- pared to developing countries. Second, by this measure, governments are smallest in Africa, followed by Asia and Latin America, in that order. Third, there is an impressive diversity of government sizes in all regions, especially for the transitional and developed countries, and this seems more important than any measure of central tendency such as the mean or the median.
Estimates of government employment exist for 51 countries in 1990 and 54 in 1997 (or proximate years), but only for 47 countries are there estimates for both years. Figure 2c below illustrates the trend in government em- ployment for these 47 countries. Most of the observations are close to the diagonal, an in- dication that there was little change in gov- ernment size. But two economies in transi- tion (Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan) register im- pressive reductions in the ratio of government employment to total population.
Figures 3a and 3b below show the same sta- tistics for employment in the public sector (gen- eral government plus public corporations). The public sector, as is the case with govern- ment narrowly defined, tends to be larger in developed and transitional economies com- pared to developing countries. Observations for Latin America and the Caribbean are 
surprisingly compressed (the bar has a short height). The vast majority of the 38 countries for which we have data for both years show little change in the ratio of public employ- ment to population: nearly all observations lie on or close to the diagonal line of figure
3c. Seven "outliers" show a large drop in pub- lic sector employment; all of these are tran- sition economies that experienced massive pri- vatization of State enterprises (see also fig- ure 3c below).
2.2. Government consumption, 1990 and 1997
Consumption is an alternative way to meas- ure the size of government, and government consumption is typically expressed as a share of GDP. Note that this is a measure of the size of government, not of the entire public sector. In national accounts, govern- ment consumption is the sum of all goods and services provided without charge to indi- vidual households and collectively to the community. It includes goods and services pur- chased from the private sector as well as those produced by government, so is not directly related to government employment. It is perfectly possible for a country with low gov- ernment employment to have high govern- ment consumption if government purchases large amounts of schooling, health care and other services from private institutions.
One problem affecting the comparability of these statistics between countries, as has been shown above, is the fact that national accounts sometimes disguise transfers in kind as cash transfers or subsidies that are excluded from government consumption expenditure. Another serious problem is that, at prevailing exchange rates, the cost of government consumption varies widely among countries. Services, such as schooling, nursing or general ad- ministration, are seldom traded interna- tionally, so their cost is much lower in coun- tries with low wages. Goods tend to be ex- ported and imported, so the cost and prices of goods tend to be similar regardless of the level of wages. In other words, the relative price of services is low in low-wage countries. Services weigh heavily in government consumption, so division of government con- sumption expenditure (in local prices) by GDP (also in local prices) biases downwards the estimates of the share of government con- sumption in the GDP of low-income countries. Similar biases apply to comparisons over long periods of time because productivity in services lags behind productivity in goods, caus- ing the relative price of services to in- crease11.
The International Comparison Programme (ICP) of the United Nations attempts to solve this problem by estimating the GDP of each economy not in domestic prices, but in prices of a numeraire country, the United States. These prices are known as purchas- ing power parity (PPP) prices because with them one US dollar has the same purchas- ing power everywhere in the world for a uniform basket of goods and services. It is not enough to know prices in the United States; prices in each economy must also be known in order to transform the GDP components from domestic to PPP prices. The most re- cent PPP estimates are for the year 1985 and cover 64 countries12; the ICP is currently preparing estimates for 1993 covering a larg- er set of countries.
A group of researchers noted certain regu- larities between shares of major expenditure components of GDP measured in domestic prices and shares of the same components measured in PPP prices. They used statis- tical techniques to extrapolate the PPP es- timates to years and to countries not in- cluded in the ICP. The results are known as the Penn World Tables. The latest version con- tains statistics for 152 countries, in most cas- es for the years from 1950 through 1991 or
199213.
The Statistical Appendix comprises tables B1 to B3. Table B1 reports government con- sumption as a share of GDP in 1990 (PPP prices and domestic prices) and 1997 (only domestic prices). The 1990 government con- sumption shares in domestic prices were transformed to government consumption shares in PPP prices, using estimates of price levels of GDP and price levels of gov 
ernment consumption reported in the Penn
World Table (Mark 5.6)14.
Table 2 below summarizes these data with simple averages for the complete sample and for the five main regions of interest. The second and third columns of the table refer to the same statistic: 1990 government con- sumption in domestic prices; they differ be- cause the sample of countries in the second column is constrained in order to equal the countries for which PPP price data are avail- able. In other words, the first and second columns differ only because prices differ (PPP versus domestic), not because the sam- ples differ.
In comparing the PPP ratios to those for do- mestic prices, three results deserve men- tion. 
First, government consumption as a share of GDP is much smaller measured in PPP prices than in domestic prices for developed countries, but it is much larger in PPP prices for the developing countries. This pattern is to be expected, since PPP prices are much high- er than domestic prices for services in low- income countries. For the very small sample (four countries) of economies in transition, there is little difference on average between government consumption as a share of GDP in PPP prices and the same statistic in do- mestic prices.
Second, government size, as measured by con- sumption with domestic prices, is larger in the developed than in the developing coun- tries; this is reversed with PPP prices, which show developing countries to have far larg- er governments. While there is no doubt that domestic prices understate the impor- tance of government consumption in low-in- come countries, it may well be that PPP prices create a bias in the opposite direction. Services provided by government are not sold on domestic markets, much less inter- national markets, so output is assumed to equal the sum of inputs and it is very difficult to correct for differences in quality. School- teachers and tax collectors in Ghana are paid much less than schoolteachers and tax
collectors in the United States. Is the qual- ity of their work and their productivity iden- tical? PPP estimates assume that they are, provided they have identical years of train- ing, so adjust only for differences in the amount of education that such workers bring to their jobs.
Third, by using this measure, a reduction re- sulted in the average size of government over the decade in Africa and Asia. In con- trast, there was little change in the average ratio of government consumption to GDP in the developed countries or in Latin Ameri- ca and the Caribbean. Surprisingly, the economies in transition registered an in- crease in government consumption, from an average of 16 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 17 per cent in 1997.
These same data are summarized in a dif- ferent way in figures 4a, 4b and 4c below. What is striking about these graphs is the fact that in every case a very large range (long bar) overshadows the measures of central tendency. In other words, there appears to be more vari- ation within regions than between regions, with the possible exception of the PPP esti- mates for developed countries shown in fig- ure 4a below. 
2.3. Central government 
expenditure, 1990 and 1997
A third measure of government size is cen- tral government expenditure, which in- cludes cash transfers and subsidies as well as outlays for consumption and investment. These statistics, which are almost as wide- ly used as government consumption statis- tics, have two unfortunate drawbacks. First, they record investment expenditure rather than depreciation of capital, and conse- quently all the outlay for a large highway or a new port, for example, shows up in the year of construction and not in subsequent years when it is actually in use. Second, the sta- tistics include only transfers to lower levels of government, and thus ignore self-financed expenditures of provincial and municipal governments.
 
Table 3 below reports the available data on central government expenditure for 1990 and 1997 (or proximate years) as published in the IMF annual Government Finance Statistics. The figures are expressed as a share of GDP. It should be noted, however, that ex- penditure, unlike consumption, is not a com- ponent of GDP, and so it is possible for gov- ernment expenditure to exceed GDP.
The simple averages of these statistics are reported for groups of countries also in table
3 below. The sample size is not the same in the two years, so not too much importance should be given to comparisons of 1990 with
1997. Note, however, that central government expenditures of the developed countries, which average 37 per cent of GDP, are much larger than those of the developing countries. Latin America and the Caribbean is a region with low central government expenditure, amounting on average to less than 23 per cent of GDP in 1997.
These same data are displayed in graphic form in figures 5a and 5b below. Note that the range of observed ratios is extremely large (the bars are very long) in both years. In each of the five regions there are countries with very low and countries with very high government ex- penditures. This indicates that there is a great
deal of diversity in styles of government within regions.
Table 4 below summarizes, for the entire sam- ple and for regions, the distribution of cen- tral government expenditures by type of ex- penditure and by function. The basic data are not included in this report, but are available from the IMF publication Government Finance Statistics. Looking first at type of expendi- ture, for the developed and transitional economies "subsidies and cash transfers" is by far the most important category of ex- penditure. This is not true for developing coun- tries, where wage payments exceed subsidies and cash transfers, unless one includes in- terest payments, which are a form of cash transfer.
Expenditures by function are grouped under four main headings: traditional State func- tions, modern State functions, interest pay- ments and other expenditures. Traditional expenditures are those for general adminis- tration, justice, police and defence. For the most part these are expenditures on collec- tive consumption goods. Modern State func- tions refer to transfers in kind, largely edu- cation and heath care, plus cash transfers and subsidies. Modern expenditures are thus di- rected to individual households and productive enterprises; they form the basis of the modern welfare State. Interest payments need no explanation, but it should be noted that these represent payments of nominal in- terest. For countries with high inflation, a large part of these payments might more prop- erly be classified as debt repayment rather than debt servicing15. "Other expenditures", for the most part, are cash transfers to low- er levels of government, which are ulti- mately spent on traditional State functions, on modern State functions, or on payment
of interest. 
Modern State functions account for more than two-thirds of the budget of central gov- ernments in developed countries and in countries with economies in transition, a
)
reflection of a long tradition of social ex- penditures in those countries. But modern functions are surprisingly important in the budgets of developing countries as well, and account for more than half of central gov- ernment expenditures in Africa and Asia, and nearly two-thirds of expenditures in Latin America. Developing countries allocate a large share of their budget to education com- pared to central government expenditures in developed countries, but this may reflect in part that responsibility for education is more often transferred to lower levels of govern- ment in the developed world.
Figures 5a and 5b below illustrate the range for the ratio of central government expenditures to GDP in five major groupings of countries.
 
As was the case with employment and con- sumption, there is considerable overlap be- tween the five groups. In sum, there exists considerable diversity within the developed, transitional and each of the three groups of developing countries.
Figure 4c. 1997 Ratio of Government Consumption to GDP (domestic prices, percentages)
2.4. Central government tax 
revenue, 1990 and 1997
Table 5 below reports information for groups of countries on central government tax rev- enue. It is interesting to note that informa- tion is available for more countries on tax- ation than on expenditure: over 100 countries as compared to about 80 countries respectively.
Tax revenue tends to be lower than expen- diture because governments have sources of revenue other than taxes: they charge fees for licenses and for use of public property, they collect royalties on the extraction of oil and minerals, and they borrow money. Nonethe- less, the pattern of tax revenue as a share of GDP is similar to that of expenditure: high- est in the developed and transitional economies, lowest in the developing countries.
Table 5 also reports ratios for four broad types of taxes: taxes on international trade, taxes on retail sales (including value-added taxes), taxes on wages and direct taxes on income and wealth. Over the decade, there was in- creased taxation of sales and modest de- creases in revenue from trade taxes almost everywhere, but little change in other types of taxes. Trade taxes remain quite important in the developing countries, particularly in Africa, whereas developed countries rely more on other taxes.
3. Determinants of the size of government
Regardless how one measures it, size of gov- ernment varies widely from country to coun- try. The tables of the Technical Appendix (ta- bles A1 to A9) report our effort to relate measures of the size of government to vari- ables such as income per capita, degree of glob- alization, and size of country (population and land area). Other variables, known as
"dummies" because they take values of zero and one, control for independent effects com- mon to a particular group of countries (de- veloped, transitional, African, Asian or Latin American). The statistical technique ap- plied, which is a known as ordinary least squares regression, involves fitting an equa- tion that minimizes the sum of the squared distances between each data point and the regression equation. Readers familiar with this type of analysis may want to examine the detailed results in the technical appen- dix tables. What follows is a non-technical overview of those tables. 
To summarize briefly the statistical find- ings: there is a dichotomy. There are two dis- tinct types of regression equations that have only the control variable "income per capi- ta" in common. When government size is meas- ured by employment or by consumption ex- penditure, the variables that "explain" gov- ernment size are population and land area. But, when government size is measured by central government expenditure, globaliza- tion is a significant explanatory variable, though not population or land area.
3.1. Economies of scale in 
government
In each of the regression equations for the ratio of government employment to popula- tion (table A3 of the Technical Appendix), and for the ratio of government consumption to
GDP (table A4), the population variable has a highly significant and negative coefficient, while the land area variable has an equally significant but positive coefficient. Global- ization, measured as openness to trade, is nev- er significant. This is true for the year 1990 as well as 1997, and for consumption meas- ured in PPP prices as well as in domestic prices, and thus constitutes strong evidence of economies of scale in the provision of gov- ernment services. If there are economies of scale in provision of government services, costs (and presumably expenditures) are lower in countries with large populations (holding territorial size constant) or small territories (holding population constant). In other
words, high population density facilitates provision of defence, highways, schools, med- ical care and other government services.
The regression results using the govern- ment employment/population equation for 1997 are illustrated in figure 6a below for a small country the size of Belgium and in figure 6b below for a large country the size of the United States. Income per capita is also a vari- able in the equation, and is assumed to equal the actual income of each respective country in the year 1997. Government em- ployment is not known for Belgium, but the equation depicted in figure 6a below predicts that this would amount to approximately 5.9
per cent of Belgium's population of 10.1 mil- lion persons. Reading down the curve, a country with Belgium's income per capita and land area but twice its population would re- quire less than twice the number of govern- ment employees, 4.8 per cent of the 20.2 million residents, to be precise. 
Government provided jobs for approximate- ly 7.3 per cent of the 270 million residents of the United States in 1997. The equation depicted in figure 6b below, predicts gov- ernment employment/ population ratio of only 5.7 per cent, so by this measure, gov- ernment in the United States is larger than expected. Canada, with more land and a population of only 30 million, is expected, from our regression equation, to suffer "disec- onomies" of scale and employ 10.3 per cent of its population at all levels of government. Actual government employment amounts to only 8.4 per cent of population. Thus, from the raw statistics, Canada appears to have larger government for its population than the United States. Taking into account the "dis- economies" of serving a small population dispersed over a wide area, Canada actual- ly has a rather small government compared to that of the United States. Similar con- siderations help to explain the large size of government in countries of northern Eu- rope, especially Finland, Norway and Swe- den, compared to more densely populated countries in southern Europe. But the statistics used are crude and may require some ad- justment for quality of land. It is easier to police frozen tundra or desert wasteland than to administer areas that are actually inhabited by people spread over large distances.
3.2. Income per capita 
One of the best-known stylized facts of pub- lic economics is "Wagner's Law," formulated more than a hundred years ago by Adolph Wagner, a leading German economist of his day. It asserts that there is a long-run ten- dency for government activity to grow faster than the economy16. In a cross-section of countries, the law predicts a positive rela- tionship between income per capita and all measures of government size.
The income variable is, indeed, statistically significant in most of the regression equations. But there is one problem. Its coefficient, though highly significant in each instance, is negative in the equation for government consumption in PPP prices, but positive in the equation for government consumption measured in domestic prices. The coefficient is also positive in the regression equations for government employment and central government expenditure, and so it is difficult to interpret the PPP result as a refutation of Wagner's Law. It more likely reflects a failure to adjust adequately for differences in the quality and productivity of employees in the service sector of low-income countries com- pared to their counterparts in developed countries. In other words, this finding con- stitutes evidence that the PPP estimates of government consumption in low-income countries are biased upwards.
3.3. Globalization and size of 
government
The second type of regression equation is that for central government expenditures (table A5) and tax revenue (table A6), each ex- pressed as a share of GDP. Globalization is a significant explanatory variable in all these regressions, but population and land area are not. The fit of the equation is some- what better for expenditure on modern State functions than for total expenditure. These results are consistent with the recent work of Alberto Alesina and Romain Wacziarg, who report similar findings in a cross-coun- try comparison of government consumption and expenditure17. And it is true regardless of whether one measures "globalization" as
the ratio of trade to GDP or as the presence of foreign direct investment. It was not pos- sible to distinguish between effects of trade and effects of foreign direct investment be- cause of strong collinearity: transnationals are known to be effective conduits for both exports and imports18.
The positive relationship between openness and central government expenditure and taxation is evident, though not as strongly, even without controlling for the effect of in- come per capita and regional dummies. This is shown in figures 7, 8 and 9 below for to- tal expenditure, expenditure on modern State functions and tax revenue, respec- tively (data in all cases are for the year
1997). The fit is not quite as good for taxa- tion as for expenditure because some gov- ernments are able to combine high expenditure with low taxation thanks to revenue from roy- alties on the extraction of oil and other min- erals.
Income per capita is not a significant deter- minant of tax revenue in the regressions re- ported in table A6. In regressions of components of tax revenue, it is positive and sig- nificant only for payroll taxes, not for trade taxes, sales taxes or direct taxes on income and wealth (see tables A7 and A8). Since in- come per capita is measured in PPP prices, this might reflect to some extent the poor qual- ity of the underlying statistics. It also reflects the fact that some high-income countries enjoy considerable revenue from royalties on oil and other minerals, and thus have little need to impose taxes on their population.
From a policy perspective, it is remarkable that openness, though positive and significant in the regression of total tax revenue, is not significant in the regressions of any of the components of tax revenue. The coeffi- cient of openness in fact takes a positive, though insignificant, sign in 10 of the 12 regressions for components of central government tax- es. One might have expected reduced revenue from trade taxes to be offset with revenue from sales taxes or direct taxes. There is no evi- dence of this, and thus it appears that gov- ernments with relatively open economies are better at collecting all types of tax, even taxes on trade.
In any case, revenue needs are no reason to impose discriminatory taxes on interna- tional trade. If government wants to tax the consumption of a luxury good, such as tele- vision sets or passenger automobiles, it can impose a selective consumption tax, and col- lect it at the customs house, in the case of imports, and at the factory, in the case of do- mestic production. Discriminatory taxation of imported goods encourages expansion of untaxed domestic production behind tariff walls, with a consequent loss of tax rev- enue.
3.4. Changes in the size of 
government 
The cross-section evidence on the relation- ship between openness and the size of cen- tral governments, as measured by expendi- ture and taxation, is evidence that in the long- run there is no conflict between openness and government expenditure. Open economies are not laissez-faire economies. Indeed, on average, governments of open economies spend a significantly larger portion of GDP and collect the additional taxes needed therefore.
But what about the short run? Is an in- crease in openness associated with an increase or a decrease in the size of government? One might expect a negative relation, even if the long-run relation is positive, if policy- makers who open their economies to the outside world also reduce government spending and taxation. Even if it is not re- quired, a negative correlation may result if
policy-makers believe that small govern- ment is a condition for open markets.
There is no evidence for the systematic pres- ence of a negative relation of this type in the decade of the 1990s. Of the 116 countries for which export and import data are available,
81 registered an increase in the ratio of trade to GDP. Of these 81 countries, infor- mation is available on changes in central gov- ernment expenditure for 54 countries, and information on changes in tax revenue for 60 countries. Only in a minority of countries did expenditure and taxation decrease along with trade. More precisely, 23 of the 54 coun- tries registered a decrease in government ex- penditure, 25 of the 60 countries registered a fall in total tax revenue and 24 of the lat- ter registered a decrease in revenue from di- rect taxes. The majority of the "globalizers", then, actually registered increases in ex- penditure and tax revenue.
The regression results reported in table A9 of the technical appendix below, also provide no evidence that globalizers have successfully shrunk central government budgets in the last decade. In fact, the regressions provide strong evidence that an increase in openness is associated with an increase in central government expenditure and revenue. After controlling for changes in income per capi- ta, which has a positive, independent effect on the size of government budgets, increased openness has a positive and significant ef- fect on government expenditure, total tax rev- enue, and revenue from direct taxes. These variables should be monitored, for there is no guarantee that such a relationship will continue in the future. In the last decade, how- ever, globalization and budgets of central gov- ernments increased hand in hand. The faster the pace of globalization, the larger was the increase in central government expenditure and taxation. There is no evidence so far that globalization is causing the demise of the na- tion-State. On the contrary, globalization is placing increasing demands on budgets of cen- tral governments, and governments are re- sponding to these demands.
4. Conclusion
By way of conclusion, we return to the three questions posed in the Introduction to this Part.
4.1. How can the size of the public sector be measured in theory? 
To measure the total impact of the State on society is a complex task, in part because it is difficult to quantify the impact of govern- ment regulations in any meaningful way. Nonetheless, it is possible to measure some aspects of the size of the public sector. There are three broad approaches: production, con- sumption and expenditure. The production and consumption approaches rely on infor- mation from basic national accounts, where- as the expenditure approach requires knowl- edge of government taxation and outlays.
Using the production approach, one would like to divide gross domestic product (GDP) into two parts: output of the private sector and output of the public sector. In addition, remunerated labour could be divided into pri- vate and public employment. In the System of National Accounts (SNA), the public sec- tor is the sum of general government (all lev- els) plus public corporations. Public corpo- rations, like private firms, sell goods and serv- ices at market prices, whereas government (by definition) does not, and consequently for some purposes it is better to measure only government output (or employment) rather than output (employment) of the entire pub- lic sector.
The consumption approach is more complex. It is difficult, even conceptually, to distinguish between public and private consumption. According to the SNA, public corporations pro- duce but do not consume final goods and serv- ices, and so it follows that public consump- tion must equal government consumption. In this spirit, one might conclude that house- holds consume all final goods and services, in which case it makes no more sense to speak of government consumption than to speak of business consumption. A less extreme view is to classify as government consumption those services that benefit the community but cannot be allocated to individual households. In the jargon of the SNA, collective con- sumption of these services (such as defence) make up the actual final consumption of government; all other consumption is de- fined as actual final consumption of house- holds. A broader measure defines government consumption as the sum of collective con- sumption goods plus transfers in kind (such as schooling) to households. In the SNA, this broad measure is known as government consumption expenditure. Total consump- tion in the national accounts is not affected by one's definition of government consump- tion: only its division into public and private consumption is affected.
Expenditure is the most comprehensive of the three approaches. It focuses on government, but includes public and private corporations to the extent that government subsidizes goods and services sold in the market. As a first approximation, government expendi- ture ought to record outlays of all levels of government, cash transfers as well as ex- penditure on transfers in kind and on collective consumption goods. Ideally, the measure should include also the value of tax expen- ditures (credits granted to specific taxpay- ers) as well as the value of implicit subsidies to producers engendered by trade restrictions. A drawback of the expenditure approach is that it sums capital and current expenditures. Expenditure on an asset with a long life, such as a highway, bridge or building, is record- ed in the year (or years) of construction, and is not spread over the useful life of the as- set. This can easily be corrected by replac- ing spending on capital formation with an es- timate of the current cost (including depre- ciation) of fixed assets owned by govern- ment.
4.2. How can the size of the public sector be measured in fact? 
Actual measurement presents myriad prob- lems. For the production approach, output statistics are not generally available. Em- ployment statistics, for a limited number of
countries and years, are often available for government but, less often, for the entire pub- lic sector. The employment figures suffer from lack of comparability in addition to their limited availability. Statistics on gov- ernment consumption expenditure (but not actual final consumption) are widely avail- able. These also suffer from poor inter-coun- try comparability, primarily because gov- ernments sometimes choose to record pub- lic spending on health and education as gov- ernment consumption (transfers in kind), sometimes as subsidies (negative taxes), and sometimes as cash transfers to households. Expenditure data are available in most cas- es only for central governments, without any estimate of the value of tax expenditures, much less the value of implicit subsidies given to producers.
4.3. What accounts for observed variation in the size of the public sector? 
Despite the poor quality of available data, sta- tistical tests on determinants of government size produce interesting and surprisingly robust results. When government is meas- ured by employment or by consumption ex- penditure, there is strong evidence of economies of scale in the provision of serv- ices, but no evidence that the amount of government services is reduced by the extent that a country is integrated into world mar- kets. When government is measured by cen- tral government expenditure, it is integra- tion into world markets "globalization" that determines size, with no evidence of economies of scale. Moreover, the relation- ship between globalization and government expenditure is positive, and it persists when one looks at changes in expenditure and changes in globalization over the past decade rather than their levels at the beginning or end of the decade. In sum, there are economies of scale in the provision of gov- ernment services such as defence, health and education, but a government's budget is driven by globalization, not by the land area or population of a country.
Future research would benefit greatly from improvement in both the quantity and the quality of data. First priority should to be giv- en to expenditure by all levels of government. In many countries, lower levels of government are responsible for education and health, with the result that these social expenditures are missing from central government statistics. Second priority could be given to collection of data on government employment, in terms of full-time equivalent workers and ex- cluding conscript labour in order to facilitate inter-country comparisons. Third priority could be given to the estimation of the val- ue of tax expenditures, including the value of implicit subsidies provided to producers through protective tariffs and quotas.
 




