OverviewAgeing will have a profound impact on societies and will need to occupy the increasing attention of policymakers in the twenty-first century. In the developed world, and also in many parts of the developing world, the share of older persons in the population is rising rapidly. Ageing is a reflection of the success of the process of human development, as it is the result of lower mortality (combined with reduced fertility) and longer longevity. Ageing provides new opportunities, associated with the active participation of older generations in both the economy and society at large. In those countries, primarily in the developing world, that still have a growing youth bulge, there is a window of opportunity for economic development. Population ageing also poses important challenges, especially those related to the financial viability of pension systems, the costs of health-care systems, and the full integration of older people as active agents of societal development.The wess analyses the challenges and opportunities associated with ageing populations and aims to facilitate discussions in furthering the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, adopted by consensus by the Second World Assembly on ageing on April . The Madrid Plan provides the framework to incorporate the discussion of population ageing into the international debate on development and the implementation of national policies to respond to the challenge of building societies for all ages. The Plan gives priority to ensuring that ageing is made an integral part of the international development agenda; to advancing health and well-being into old age; and to creating enabling and supportive environments for older persons.An ageing world populationThe age distribution of the worlds population is undergoing a profound transformation. As mortality and fertility have fallen, the age distribution has been shifting gradually to older ages. All regions of the world are experiencing this change.Increasing life expectancy and reduced lifetime fertility are the key factors driving the demographic transition. At the global level, life expectancy rose from years in to years in -and is expected to reach years in -. In the period from -to -, total fertility fell from . to . children per woman and it is expected to continue falling to reach . children per woman in -. In several parts of the world, and not just in the developed countries but also in many developing ones, the figure for lifetime fertility is now less than children per woman and is thus below the level required for population replacement over the long run.The demographic transition involves three stages. During the first, there is a rejuvenation of the age distribution as the proportion of children rises because of increased survival at younger ages. During the second, owing to fertility reductions, there is the beginning of a decline in the proportion of children accompanied by a rise in the proportions of adults of working age. During the third stageusually reached after lengthy periods of fertility and mortality declinethe proportions of both children and adults of working age decline and only the proportion of older persons rises.The bulge in the working-age population during the second stage of the transition is temporary (lasting, typically, about years). Yet, the time period is long enough to have significant implications for the countries concerned. In theory, this demographic bonus provides a viwess window of opportunity for accelerated economic development. However, reaping its potential benefits depends on the generation of productive employment and opportunities for investment, and ultimately on the existence of social and political conditions that can provide an environment for sustainable growth and development.During the third stage, the rapid ageing of the population may pose particular challenges for public policy, as major adjustments in a variety of spheres are required to cope with a declining labour force and an increasing demand for health care and old-age support.Accelerated population ageing in developing countriesDeveloped economies in general are in the third stage of the demographic transition and their age structure is considerably older than that of the developing countries. In countries with economies in transition, the age structure is generally younger than that of the developed countries but still significantly older than that of the developing countries.Most of the developing countries are in the second stage of the demographic transition. Yet, the majority of the worlds older persons live in developing countries and by , per cent of the population aged years or over, amounting to nearly . billion people, will reside in those countries (figure O.). Furthermore, those countries that have experienced fairly rapid fertility reductions, particularly in east_asia and the Pacific and latin_america and the Caribbean, will experience a process of population ageing that will be more rapid than that undergone in the past by todays developed countries. Most African countries, in contrast, have only recently embarked on the second stage of the demographic transition and the regions population is expected to remain relatively young well into the twenty-first century.Figure O..Size and distribution of world population aged years or over by groups of countries, , , , and Developing countries Economies in transition Developed countries estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ). () Percentages are shown inside the bars.YearOverview viiGender differences at older agesBecause women usually live longer than men, they significantly outnumber men at older ages. Consequently, the proportion of women in the older population tends to rise substantially with advancing age. In for the world as a whole, women outnumbered men by almost to at ages and over and by almost to at ages and over. However, owing in part to an anticipated reduction in the female advantage in developed countries, the difference between the number of men and women at older ages is expected to decline somewhat by in these countries. In the developing countries, in contrast, the imbalance between numbers of older men and older women will increase further because of the still widening sex differences in life expectancy.Increasing dependency ratiosOne consequence of ageing in most societies is that the number of people who work and generate an income declines relative to those who do not work and depend on incomes generated by others. Dependency ratios compare the size of some group within a population that is considered to be economically dependent (typically, children under age and older persons over age ) to another group that is considered economically active. Because of data limitations, dependency ratios are usually calculated based solely on age ranges.Between and , the total dependency ratio for the world as a whole declined from to dependants per persons of working age owing to a major reduction in child dependency. The downward trend is expected to come to a halt in the coming decade and then reverse. The total dependency ratio is projected to be in and to reach dependants per persons of working age by owing entirely to rising dependency at older ages.In developed countries, the total dependency ratio is estimated to have reached a historically low level in ; and a steadily increasing path for the total dependency ratio is projected for those countries as a group in the future because of a continually rising old-age dependency ratio (see figure O.a). The trends in dependency ratios in the countries with economies in transition are similar to those in the developed countries.For the developing countries, both the historical experience and the future prospects are quite different. Between and , their total dependency ratio was much higher than that of developed groups of countries owing mostly to a very high level of child dependency (figure O.b). Since around , however, child and total dependency ratios in the developing countries have been declining, and total dependency is expected to continue declining until , only to rise thereafter because of the projected rapid rise in old-age dependency.Population ageing is inevitableA substantial degree of population ageing is expected over the next few decades in all regions of the world. Policy interventions intended to encourage childbearing in low-fertility countries, even if effective, are unlikely to substantially alter this expectation. Also, although a large rise in the number of international migrants could alter trends in the working-age population in industrialized countries, no plausible assumptions about future international migration levels would have more than a moderate impact on the expected degree of population ageing in these countries.As the coming changes in population age structure are well understood, they can be largely anticipated. Ideally, policy responses should be put in place ahead of time to ease adaptation to these long-term demographic changes. Even if population ageing is inevitable, its consequences depend on the measures developed to address the challenges it poses.viiiwess Figure O.a.Child and old-age dependency ratios, -, developed countriesFigure O.b.Child and old-age dependency ratios, -, developing countriesEstimates ProjectionsTotalOld-ageChildEstimates ProjectionsTotalChildOld-ageYearYearNote: Child and old-age dependency ratios refer to the populations aged -and years or over, respectively, as ratios of the working-age population aged-years. The total dependency ratio is the sum of the two.However, ensuring that the growing numbers of older persons have adequate support during old age, access to decent employment should they need or wish to remain economically active, and appropriate health care is likely to prove challenging. Unless economic growth can be accelerated in a sustained manner, ageing will impose heavier demands on the working-age population (in the form of higher taxes and other contributions) in order that a stable transfer of resources to the older age groups may be maintained.Ageing and changing living environmentsThe social environment within which people grow older is rapidly changing. The size of families is decreasing, the role of extended families is diminishing, and perceptions in respect of intergenerational support and caring for older persons are rapidly changing.Changing living arrangementsOne out of , or million older people, live alone worldwide and this ratio has increased in the majority of countries over the past decade. While the average rate of change is rather modest, this trend is likely to continue and will have important social consequences, especially for older women, who are more likely to live alone (figure O.). Solitary living, which may result in increasing isolation, makes caregiving by family members more difficult to arrange; it also increases the need for additional support services so as to enable older persons to remain in their own home. Developing countries may have difficulty providing such services.In developing countries, the large majority of older persons live with their adult children. This is the case for about three quarters of those aged years or over in Asia and Africa and for two thirds of those aged years or over in latin_america. The proportion of older persons living alone is still relatively low, at less than per cent, but it is increasing in most (though not all) developing countries.Per persons aged -Per persons aged -Overview ixFigure O..Proportion of population aged years or over living alone, by region and sex, PercentageMen WomenWorld Asialatin_america Africa and the CaribbeanNorthernAmerica EuropeThe implications of these changes in family composition and living arrangements for support and care for older persons depend on the context. In countries where older people have limited access to formal mechanisms of social protection, they will need to rely on the family and the local community. However, these informal protection mechanisms have been under increasing stress recently, owing not only to such factors as the indicated demographic trends and growing participation of women in the labour force, but also to shifts in perceptions about caring for parents and older persons in general.Changes in the living arrangements of older people have important policy implications in both developing and developed countries. Developed countries need to expand the supply of formal long-term care for older persons, including institutional living, as well as to develop alternative services to allow older persons to age in their home if they so desire (see also below). Developing countries confront even bigger challenges as they still need to provide basic infrastructure (water, sanitation, etc.) and social services to older people in addition to providing increased formal long-term care and developing new forms of informal care.Participation and empowerment of older personsAs older persons continue to constitute an ever-greater proportion of the total population, they have the potential to be more influential in society. Empowerment and political participation of older people vary greatly across countries: There are countries where older people carry great social and political weight, mostly associated with the important concentration of economic resources and a tradition of political participation; in many other countries, however, older people are not organized and experience great difficulty in voicing their concerns and incorporating them in the public debate and the policy agenda.International and national non-governmental organizations have been actively promoting the organization of older persons as a mechanism through which to influence the design and implementation of policies that affect them. As literacy and continuing education, including information about human rights, constitute important elements of empowerment, efforts to organize older persons should be coupled with larger programmes encompassing these elements.Fighting neglect and abuseAlthough abusive behaviour is difficult to measure, existing reports of neglect and abuse of older persons should be reasons for concern. Elder abuse has been signalled within the family, in community contexts, and in centres for institutional care for older persons, in developed and developing countries alike. Risk factors often relate to a lack of resources for care, poor training and education of caregivers, job-related stress in institutional care facilities, existence of negative stereotypes of older persons in society, and conditions of poverty in general.Guaranteeing and protecting their human rights as defined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (General Assembly resolution A (III)) is an important means of reducing the risk of abuse of older persons and of empowering them. Complementary legislation may be needed in some countries to improve the legal framework in order to protect the rights of older persons, prevent abuse and neglect, and bolster their opportunities for participating in all aspects of social life. A better legal framework will not suffice, however. In addition, societies will need to find adequate mechanisms through which to prevent age discrimination in labour markets, ensure intergenerational solidarity through adequate old-age income security systems, and mobilize the resources needed to provide adequate health and long-term care.Policy responses to cases of neglect and abuse should ensure that persons in such situations have a window of access to reliable information and effective mechanisms for denouncing such cases. In addition, Governments should pursue the development of national training and education initiatives to promote positive images of older people and to build adequate skills among the individuals who are taking care of older persons.Ageing, labour supply and productivity growthWith population ageing, the share of the population of working age will shrink and the labour force itself grows older. This holds especially for the countries, mostly developed, with low fertility rates. In contrast, countries with relatively high fertility levels (primarily low-income economies) will continue to experience strong labour-force growth until , which may open a window of opportunity for accelerated economic growth.Growth implications of advanced population ageingPopulation ageing could become a drag on economic growth unless the decline in labour-force growth can be arrested or greater efforts are made to increase labour productivity. In most contexts, increases in labour productivity would be required to complement measures that contributed to stemming the fall in labour supply. For instance, all other things being equal, to offset the negative impact of a smaller labour force, Japan would have to ensure a labour productivity growth of . per cent per year in order to sustain a per capita income growth of per cent annuOverview xi ally during the next years. More than per cent of the required labour productivity growth would be needed to overcome the growth impact of population ageing (see figure O.). The same holds, though to a lesser degree, for other countries with ageing populations like Italy and Germany, and also for the united_states of America. However, the required productivity growth in all these cases seems within reach by historical standards.Figure O..Impact of population ageing on required annual average rate of labour-productivity growth, Germany, Italy, united_states of America and Japan, -PercentageAgeing effectOther labour supply factorsNote: The ageing effect is calculated on the basis of a counterfactual exercise: The productivity growth required to generate a certain level of GDP per capita growth in view of anticipated changes in the population age structure is compared with the productivity growth required to maintain the same level of GDP per capita growth in the absence of such changes. It is assumed that the old-age dependency ratio is kept constant at the level observed in .Germany Italyunited_statesJapanThe Survey concludes that measures stimulating productivity growth may have to carry the most weight in terms of attempting to overcome the possible negative consequences of population ageing on economic growth. Other measures directly influencing labour supply have been proposed, however, some of which appear to be more effective than others.International migration is often mentioned as a possible tool with which to ensure an adequate supply of workers in developed countries but it is not expected that any country would admit the massive numbers of migrants needed to stop population ageing. For instance, to offset the increase in the old-age dependency ratio, the European Union would require a steady net inflow of million immigrants per year in the next years, while Japan and the united_states would each have to absorb million migrants per year. All these cases would entail a manyfold increase in present levels of immigration.The outsourcing of employment to offshore locations is another possibility, but it would fail to address the challenge of mounting old-age dependency ratios. While off-shoring does alleviate labour shortages by shifting production to workers abroad, it will not reduce pressures on old-age pension systems because employment, and therefore the contributory base of such systems, would not expand.The analysis of the Survey suggests that the greatest potential for counteracting the projected changes in labour-force growth lies in raising the participation rates of women and older workers. Indeed, many countries still possess considerable scope for enacting measures xii wess aiming at increasing the participation rate of older workerstypically those aged -by bringing the effective retirement age more closely in line with the statutory retirement age.There are also a range of options with respect to removing disincentives to prolonged employment, such as altering workplace practices to better accommodate the needs of workers as they age; improving working conditions to sustain working capacity over the life course; countering age-based discrimination; and promoting positive images of older workers. Older workers will also be in a better position to extend their working lives if they are given the opportunity to engage in lifelong learning and on-the-job training initiatives.Such measures are expected to increase economic growth in ageing countries, though the impact may not be very large. The Survey analysis indicates that in the case of Germany, for instance, output per capita would increase from . to . per cent per year between and if the participation rates of those aged -increased to the same level as those in the working ages from to . The effects would be similar in other countries with advanced population ageing.More generally however, worries that ageing populations and workforces will lead to acute declines in economic growth appear largely unfounded. According to united_nations projections, if productivity improvements continue as expected into the near future, it would seem that employment-related challenges posed by population ageing are surmountable.A demographic window of opportunity?Countries with growing and still relatively young labour forces may be able to accelerate growth. However, in order to reap this demographic dividend their Governments will need to deal with a different set of issues. Rather than be concerned about impending labour shortages, they should remain focused on creating decent employment opportunities, especially for the growing numbers of young people expected to enter the workforce. Boosting employment rates in the formal economy will help to raise tax revenues and set the stage for expanding social protection schemes where they are currently underdeveloped, thereby enabling older workers to retire with financial security.Productivity growth is also important, of course, in developing economies with a labour surplus and large informal labour markets, as it will not only support an expanding older population, but also raise overall living standards and reduce poverty.Ageing, consumption and growthBy many accounts, population ageing is expected to have implications for patterns of consumption, investment and savings. Understanding whether population ageing will affect these aggregates, and if so how, is crucial to anticipating how economic growth and development may unfold in the future. Although there are some clear notions about this relationship in economic theory, in reality it is rather difficult to predict how ageing will influence future consumption and growth patterns.Changing consumption patternsA popular notion in economic theory is that consumption and savings patterns change during peoples lifetimes. One notion is that needs and tastes change over the life cycle. It has indeed been established that older people tend to spend a higher share of their incomes on housing and social services compared with younger population cohorts. Based on current consumption trends amongOverview xiii those aged years or over residing in developed countries, it is possible to anticipate that the demand for health and long-term care expenditures will likely rise, whereas housing and energy expenditures will increase as a result of more time spent at home by the retired population. Conversely, expenditures on entertainment and transportation may decline, while the share of consumption of basic goods such as food and clothing will remain relatively constant. Population ageing could thus lead to substantial changes in the composition of the demand for goods and services.A closer look at existing trends, however, suggests that the changes in consumption patterns owing to population ageing vary across countries, and that these changes occur slowly over time. Furthermore, levels of consumption are more closely related to income than to the demographic structure. This complex reality makes it difficult to predict future trends in consumption, as the degree of income growth for older persons in the coming decades is difficult to predict.Savings and ageingA second theoretical notion is illustrated by the life-cycle model of savings, which posits that, during their working years, individuals produce more than they can consume, thus generating a surplus that can be used to provide for their dependent children and/or saved to secure an income after retirement. In this view, economies with high levels of child dependency are expected to have relatively low national saving rates. In contrast, economies with large shares of working-age population can potentially grow faster both because this demographic structure generates a larger aggregate life-cycle surplus and because savings rates are expected to be higher as individuals save in anticipation of their retirement. Also, if individuals perceive that their life expectancy is increasing, they may be inclined to increase savings during their working years in order to finance a longer retirement.Again, although ageing may exert an influence, many other factors play a role in determining savings behaviour and the level of savings in the economy. These factors include the level and distribution of income in the economy, the value of assets that people hold and their distribution, perceptions about the future, tax rates, existing pensions systems, and the provisions for care of older persons in the case of chronic illness. Moreover, the life-cycle hypothesis applies to household or personal savings which will be affected by the design of pension systems, but such effects may be small relative to the impact that pension schemes may have on the savings patterns of Governments and enterprises.What is clear, though, is that an increasing share of household savings flows into pension funds and other financial investment plans for retirement. Institutional investors, which typically manage such savings, have already become the main players in financial markets. These investors manage not only large amounts of household savings from developed countries, but also, increasingly, savings from developing countries where the importance of privately managed capitalized pension systems has grown (see below). Institutional investors can play an important role in deepening financial markets and providing additional liquidity for long-term investment projects. At the same time, however, institutional investors largely operate outside of financial market regulation and supervision mechanisms that apply more generally to the banking system. If unchecked, the financial market operations of pension funds could thus be a source of financial instability. Also, as increasing financial investments are intermediated outside of the banking system, the control of monetary authorities over credit growth tends to weaken the effectiveness of monetary policies. Improved (possibly international) regulatory measures are needed to avert possible destabilizing effects on financial markets of the operations of large pension funds and to prevent the income security of older persons from being jeopardized.xiv wess Ensuring old-age income securityLiving standards often decline for people at older ages. Reduced economic opportunities and deteriorating health status frequently increase vulnerability to poverty as people age. Such conditions vary greatly, however, across contexts and groups of older persons. Livelihood strategies tend to differ accordingly. In developed economies, pensions are the main source of livelihood and protection in old age, while in developing countries few older persons have access to pensions and must therefore rely on other sources of income. In fact, per cent of the worlds population are not sufficiently protected in old age against health, disability and income risks. This would mean that in developing countries alone about million older persons currently lack adequate income security. That number would rise to . billion by , if the coverage of current mechanisms designed to provide old-age income security is not expanded. The demographic transition poses an enormous challenge with respect to ensuring the availability and sustainability of pensions and other systems providing economic security for an ever-increasing number of older persons in both developed and developing countries. The Survey concludes that the right approach would render this challenge far from insurmountable.Poverty and old ageEmpirical evidence suggests that older persons living in countries with comprehensive formal pension systems and public transfer schemes are less likely to fall into poverty than younger cohorts in the same population. In countries with limited coverage of pension systems, old-age poverty tends to parallel the national average.Of course, the probability of being poor at older ages does not depend only on the coverage of pension schemes. Generally, the degree of poverty among older persons varies with educational attainment, gender and living arrangements. Better education lowers the likelihood of falling into poverty in old age. Older women find themselves in poverty more often than do older men.In the absence of formal pension coverage, the majority of persons in developing countries face considerable income insecurity during old age. For the unprotectedoften small farmers, rural labourers and informal sector workersthe notion of retirement does not exist. Not having held formal jobs, they do not qualify for a pension; and if they have been unable to accumulate enough assets, they must continue to rely on their own work. The situation can be rather precarious for the very old (those aged years or over) who may not be as fit to work as their younger counterparts. Those, in particular, who were already poor during their prime working years are likely to remain poor in old age. Those who are above the poverty line but unable to build up precautionary savings to finance consumption in old age also face the risk of poverty as they grow old.Often, older persons may count on the support of the family and the community to survive or to complement their income needs. In this regard, older persons who are single, widowed or childless (particularly women) face an even higher risk of destitution. Reliance on family networks may not fully protect older persons against poverty, as these networks are themselves income-constrained. The challenges of providing adequate old-age income security naturally are much larger in circumstances of widespread poverty.Overview xvProviding better income security through broad and multi-layered approachesPrivately or publicly administered pension systems are the main policy instruments used to address poverty and vulnerability in old age. Ideally, they should ensure income security during old age for all and they need to provide benefits that place recipients above the socially acceptable minimum living standards.However, pension coverage is limited in most developing countries. In developed countries, well-regulated labour markets have made it possible for employment-based contributory pension schemes to cover almost the entire population. Those not entitled to contributory pensions are normally supported through non-contributory old-age support schemes.Yet, the sustainability of existing pension systems is being questioned in developing and developed countries alike. Increased longevity, faulty programme design, mismanagement, insufficient economic growth and inadequate employment-generation have undermined the financial viability of these systems in some contexts. Increasing old-age dependency rates will place further pressure on both formal and informal support systems, if economic growth (and the generation of decent jobs) cannot be accelerated and sustained.Issues of accessibility, affordability and sustainability are at the core of old-age pension system design and reform. Ultimately, the design of old-age income security systems is country-specific and needs to reflect societal choices and preferences. A multilayered approach to developing pension systems, building on existing practice in many countries, seems desirable as regards achieving affordable, financially viable and equitable systems of old-age income security.Ensuring universal access to old-age pensionsAs a matter of overarching principle, all pension systems should aim at providing, minimally, some form of basic income security to all persons in old age. This objective could be achieved by creating, or expanding where it already exists, a basic pillar providing a minimum pension benefit. Such a universal social insurance mechanism could be contribution-based or non-contribution-based, depending on the context. In countries where formal employment is dominant, a single basic pillar may be sufficient to provide income security in old age, and its financing could be based on earnings-related contributions, as is the case in most developed countries. In countries with a dominant informal sector or with both informal and formal labour-market segments, the basic social pension scheme could have two components: an essentially non-contributory scheme offering minimum benefits financed from taxation and, where feasible, with some solidarity contributions made by those who can afford to contribute; and an entirely contributory scheme.In most contexts, basic non-contributory pension schemes seem affordable, even in low-income countries. A simple numerical exercise under reasonable assumptions suggests that abolishing extreme poverty in old age by providing a basic universal pension equivalent to $ per day to all over age would cost less than per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) per annum in out of developing countries (see figure O.). The costs of a basic pension scheme for such countries, despite rapidly ageing populations, are projected to be relatively modest by .However, the affordability of such pension schemes depends as much on the political priority given to ensuring a minimum income security in old age, as on the pace of economic growth. Moreover, particularly in low-income countries, there may be competing demands on xviwess Figure O..Simulated costs for developing countries of universal social pensions designed to keep older persons out of extreme poverty, and Percentage of GDPMore than .-. .-. .-. .-. . or less scarce government resources: For example, in Cameroon, Guatemala, India, Nepal and Pakistan, the cost of a universal basic pension scheme as outlined above represents as much as per cent of total tax revenue. In Bangladesh, Burundi, Cote dIvoire and Myanmar, it is equivalent to the public-health budget. How to finance a basic pension scheme may therefore need to be determined in close coordination with the resource allocation process (including the use of development assistance) for other social programmes.Sustaining pensions systemsMuch of the debate on pension systems concentrates on the financial sustainability of alternative schemes, in particular upon the two types of financing mechanisms. One is a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) scheme, where contributions paid by the current generation of workers are disbursed as benefits to retirees. The other is a fully funded scheme under which benefits are financed by the principal and return on previously invested contributions. In the pension reform debates, the sustainability of pay-as-you-go schemes has been often questioned, as higher old-age dependency rates imply that fewer workers pay in relative to the number of beneficiaries.Reforms of contributory pension systems have taken two directions: strengthening existing systems by changing underlying parameters (parametric reforms) and radically changing system design (structural reforms).Parametric reforms have been implemented in virtually every pay-as-you-go scheme and are much more widespread than structural reforms. Countries have introduced measures on both the revenue and the expenditure sides to ensure the affordability and sustainability of such schemes. In particular, measures are increasingly being adopted to raise the effective retirement age. In the united_states, it is to increase to by and in France, the number of contribuNumber of countriesOverview xvii tion years is to increase in line with increases in life expectancy from . In addition, countries are considering removing the fiscal incentives for early retirement that are embedded in their pension systems. These measures aim at addressing the problem presented by longer years of retirement resulting from both increased longevity and a shorter working life. In most countries, delaying retirement and staying longer in the workforce can go a long way towards keeping payas-you-go systems viable.Other countries have focused on structural reform of their pension schemes. In the s and s, several countries introduced structural reforms in their systems offering a basic pension and moved from pay-as-you-go scheme with defined benefits to a fully funded definedcontribution system. The united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland, for instance, did so partially in . Chile took a more radical approach by replacing its publicly administered pay-as-you-go system with defined benefits with a mandatory privately managed fully funded scheme, and several Latin American countries have followed suit. Under a fully funded scheme, the payout at old age depends on the amount of the contributions made and the returns on the investment of those contributions. Because of the capitalization of pension contributions, it was believed that the system would stimulate national savings and, through this, overall economic growth.Although fully funded schemes have been presented as being more viable and may have led to deeper financial markets, there is no evidence that their introduction has indeed led to higher savings and growth. While fully-funded systems with individual capitalization can be financially sustainable in principle, the transformation of a pay-as-you-go system into a fullyfunded system has negative implications for public finances as the pension obligations contracted under the old system still have to be honoured, while pension contributions are being channelled to the new system. Although the large share of Treasury bonds in the portfolio of pension funds largely provides the financing for these fiscal costs, the effect is not neutral in macroeconomic terms, as the rising public sector debt may affect interest rates, increasing in turn the fiscal costs of the transition as well as having implications for private investment. Moreover, under a fully funded scheme introduced as a single-pillar pension system, economic risks are shifted entirely to the pensioners; and, inasmuch as it depends on the rates of return on pension investments, full income security during old age is not guaranteed. Equally important, these schemes are not immune to the pressures exerted by a rising share of the non-working population.In fact, many reforms have overlooked the fact that regardless of the type of financing mechanism, all schemes face a similar sustainability problem. Any pension-related asset acquired by todays working populationeither a financial asset, in the case of a fully funded system, or a promise by the public sector through a pay-as-you-go schemeconstitutes a claim on future output. Hence, under both types of scheme a redistribution of income between the retired and the active populations has to take place. With increasing old-age dependency ratios, this implies that in order to provide the same amount of old-age income security, either greater pension contributions will have to be drawn from the working population or output growth will have to increase.Overall, however, demographic dynamics do not pose an insoluble problem for oldage pension schemes. Pension systems should be tailored to specific country contexts, but built up or reformed based on broad principles, of which financial sustainability is but one. Intergenerational solidarity and adequacy of benefits with respect to providing sufficient income security for all should be other guiding principles. In fact, more recently, pension reform processes have been moving away from a narrow focus on fully funded schemes as the centrepiece of national income-security systems. Recent reforms recognize the need to have a multilayered approach, which has as its basis a social pension scheme to ensure universal coverage and to directly address problems of poverty in old age.xviiiwess Low-mortality Male countries FemaleEastern Europe Male Femalelatin_america Male FemaleEastern Male Mediterranean FemaleSouth-east_asia Male FemaleChina Male FemaleOther western Male Pacific FemaleSub-Saharan Male Africa FemaleWorld Male FemaleAdvancing health and long-term care into old ageAgeing and the epidemiological transitionPopulation ageing is accompanied by an epidemiological transition, that is to say, a shift from the predominance of infectious diseases and high maternal and child mortality to that of noncommunicable diseases, especially chronic ones. Demographic changes and the epidemiological transition are closely related. As fertility and the prevalence of infectious causes of death decline, the average age of the population increases. At the same time, the lifespan of those who have survived childhood illnesses continues to expand over time. Eventually, there will be more older persons in the population who are more susceptible to chronic diseases than younger ones. With the increase in the number of older persons, the prevalence of non-communicable diseases likely increases as well. Hence, ageing accelerates the epidemiological transition.Both transitions are well advanced in developed countries and are now also under way in developing countries. Increased longevity is a result of improved nutrition, sanitation and hygiene, knowledge of health conditions, and the rapid spread of medical knowledge and its application in health-care practices. In the developed countries, increased longevity has been accompanied by a compression of morbidity, that is to say, although people live longer, they do not spend more years in poor health. In the developing countries, the demographic and epidemiological transitions are taking place at a much faster pace than was the case in the developed countries, and at comparatively lower levels of income and with much less extensive social welfare provisions in place. This explains why a compression of morbidity has not been observed in those countries as yet. In consequence, people in developing countries, who have shorter life expectancy than those in developed ones, are more likely to spend a greater fraction of their life in poor health (see figure O.).Figure O..Life expectancy at age : years in good and in poor health, by region and sex, Years of life expectation at age Overview xixAgeing is in most cases not the major factor that is driving up health costsPopulation ageing poses challenges to national health-care systems. For developed countries, there are concerns about rising health costs and maintaining adequate levels and quality of health and long-term care for an ageing population. The challenge for many developing countries is larger, as they may face a double health-cost burden. On the one hand, those countries still have to resolve many basic health issues affecting important parts of their populations, including lack of access to safe drinking water and sanitation, malnutrition, limited access to reproductive health education and health services and lack of coverage by immunization programmes. On the other hand, rapid population ageing and the related increase in the demand for health-care services put additional pressure on available health resources.The challenge of adapting existing health and long-term care systems to ongoing demographic and epidemiological changes is large, but certainly not insurmountable. The analysis in the present report shows that population ageing contributes to rising health-care costs, but that in most contexts it does not appear to be the most important cost-driver.Health costs are difficult to project over long periods of time. One common approach (the actuarial method) measures the impact of demographic change on the basis of existing trends in health costs. In contrast, the epidemiological method also accounts for expected changes in disease patterns. It is applied less frequently because of data limitations. Despite the differences in approach, both methods conclude that in most cases ageing by itself does not appear to be the main driver of increased health costs: The demographic impact on health spending over the next years or so would account for no more than a few percentage points of GDP.This having been said, the same studies invariably show that health-care expenditures are likely to continue increasing as a share of GDP. Other factors turn out to be more important in driving up the cost of health care, such as changes in health-seeking behaviour by individuals, rising wage costs of medical personnel, inefficiencies in the delivery of health services, introduction of new medical technologies, and increases in the price of pharmaceuticals and health insurance policies.Challenges to health and long-term care systemsPopulation ageing is most likely to affect health-care systems in two other ways. First, the increase in the total number of cases of chronic illness and the larger number of persons with disabilities will require new skills from health-care professionals and workers. This poses an enormous challenge for developing countries with rapidly ageing populations. At present, per capita health expenditures on older persons tend to be relatively low in developing countries (certainly compared with developed countries) and typically not very different from average spending on other age groups of their societies (which is not the case in developed countries). This state of affairs partly reflects the shortage of nursing, palliative care and more intensive medical treatments which are typically widely available for older persons in developed countries.Second, there arises the concern over how to provide long-term care for those whose health conditions are irreversible. The challenge is to find solutions that preserve the dignity and independence of those who need care by allowing them to stay in a familiar environment. The traditional family structure and the role of womenusually the main providers of informal care to older personsare changing and the number of children per family is declining in most parts of the world. It will thus become increasingly difficult for many developing countries to maintain the current forms of informal long-term care arrangements.xx wess Adapting health policiesPopulation ageing will definitely influence health-care expenditures, but need not consume unsustainably large shares of national income in the future. The composition of health-care spending may need to undergo substantial changes with increasing importance being given to medical and long-term care services. In addition, however, policymakers in developed and developing countries alike should consider focused interventions in preventive health care and education, such as discouraging smoking and excessive alcohol intake and encouraging physical exercise to reduce obesity. These measures could help to reduce the risks of developing chronic illnesses such as cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases later in life. Another priority should be rehabilitative treatment of chronic illness. The rising health-care costs associated with population ageing can be contained by such interventions, as they help to delay the progression towards disease and disability.Adequacy of health-care personnelOne of the pressing issues in developing and developed countries alike is that of the availability of qualified medical personnel. In developing countries, especially low-income ones, shortages of qualified health workers are already noticeable and will worsen as the double disease burden becomes more pressing; these countries will also require more professional health workers for chronic diseases. In developed countries as well, there is a growing demand for specialized personnel in hospitals and long-term care facilities associated with a growing older population.This has already led to a substantial brain drain of skilled medical staff from the developing countries. For example, many nurses trained in the Caribbean have left that region for Canada, the united_states and the united_kingdom and, as a result, an average vacancy rate of . per cent has been observed in eight of the Caribbean countries for which data are available. Addressing the needs of countries with a double health burden will require policies designed to increase the resources available for the training of medical personnel and incentives devised to attract more workers to professions in health and long-term care, in line with the demands created by population ageing.Increased need for home-based long-term careIn developed countries, long-term care needs mainly result from population ageing. Greater emphasis is now being put on home-based care service as part of a continuum of different types and levels of care, as called for by the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. Home-based health care is being encouraged through the provision of several financial incentives and various health-care and welfare services.In developing countries, in contrast, population ageing is but one of the factors creating increased needs for long-term care. The declining importance of the extended family in many developing countries is making it more and more difficult for this form of informal care to be relied upon exclusively. The speed of this change varies from country to country, but many Governments will need to consider policies facilitating the creation of more formal long-term care arrangements as an extension of the existing familyor community-based care for older persons.Overview xxiMoving ForwardThe Survey discusses the challenges posed by rapid population ageing and by changes in living arrangements with respect to promoting economic growth, ensuring income security for all at older ages, and advancing health and well-being into old age. The Survey emphasizes that these challenges are large but that they can be overcome through well-focused policies and without excessive strain on available resources. A basic principle for such policies is the full recognition of the potential contributions to society that older persons can make.Although the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing provides a framework for incorporating the discussion of population ageing into the international debate on development and the implementation of national policies to promote the development of societies for all ages, it is still necessary for Governments and the international community to redouble efforts to mainstream ageing into the international development agenda.In countries lacking basic pension systems, poverty among older persons tends to be higher than among other age groups and hence policies aiming at improving old-age income security should feature poverty reduction strategies. Employment policies should pay more attention to improving the working conditions and job opportunities of older workers, so as not only to improve opportunities for the full participation of older persons in society but also to foster the sustainability of pension systems. Health policies will have to address more explicitly the double burden many developing countries are shouldering: these countries are still facing the challenge of reaching the Millennium Development Goals of reducing maternal and child mortality while at the same time readjusting their health-care systems to meet the needs of a growing older population.Abuse of older persons and age-based discrimination are problems experienced in many countries. Action is required to redress these negative trends and promote the empowerment of older persons which is essential to ensuring their full participation in society as affirmed by the Madrid Plan of Action.Mainstreaming ageing into the global development agenda is crucial to the realization of the objectives identified in the Madrid Plan of Action. Creating, as envisaged, a society for all ages requires not only a strong global partnership to advance the commitments endorsed in that agenda, but also a stronger national partnership among all levels of government, civil society, the private sector and organizations for older persons aimed at translating the Plan of Action into practical action.Jose Antonio Ocampo Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs May IntroductionChapter IIntroductionAgeing will be a dominant theme in the twenty-first century. Population ageing is probably one of the major achievements of modern societies. Major improvements in nutrition, sanitation, medicine, health care, education, knowledge and economic well-being in general have made it possible for people to live longer. Fertility and mortality rates have decreased. These factors are driving up the shares of older people in the total population in the developed world and, even more rapidly, in many developing countries.In , about per cent of the population in the developed countries was aged years or over. The proportion is projected to rise to per cent in . In the developing countries, only per cent of the population was aged years or over in but this share is expected to reach nearly per cent by , which means that the number of older persons in the developing countries will almost quadruple between and . The increase will be much larger than in the developed countries and in the economies in transition and it is expected that by about per cent of older persons (nearly . billion people) will live in what are now developing countries.Population ageing poses important challenges, especially ones related to the financial viability of pension systems, the provision of adequate health and long-term care, and the full integration of older people as active agents of societal development. Ageing will also provide new opportunities, associated with the active participation of older generations in the economy and society at large. In countries with a still growing and younger workforce, primarily those in the developing world, there may be a window of opportunity for accelerated economic development. The wess analyses these challenges and opportunities.How old is old?In demographic analysis, age is typically taken as the dividing line between older and younger cohorts of the population. On the other hand, many people, especially in the developed countries, think of as the cut-off point because it is at this age that many people become eligible for full pension and social security benefits for older persons; but such a cut-off point does not apply everywhere else. Old age, then, cannot be defined exactly because the concept does not have the same meaning in all societies. Nor, with the steady expansion of life expectancy, does it correspond to a specific time span.Often people are considered old, not just because they are thought to be nearing the end of their expected lifespan, but also because they undergo certain changes in their social roles and activities. Older persons may become grandparents, may work less or may stop working, or they may undertake different activities; and they also tend to be more prone to disease and disabilities than other adults. However, all of these changes evolve over time and are perceived differently across societies.The average lifespan of human beings, for instance, continues to increase. Around , life expectancy ranged from to years in the industrialized countries of the time and was beginning to increase in other areas as well. One century later, life expectancy stands at about years for the world as a whole and it is expected to increase to years by . In developed countries, life expectancy averages years and will increase to about by ; in developingPopulation ageing provides opportunities and poses challenges to ageing societiesThe concept of old age changes with increases in life expectancyAdequate policy responses must be context-specific countries, it is expected to increase from to years between and . It has also been observed, in developed countries at least, that though they live longer, people do not appear to spend more years in poor health over age .Some industrialized countries, taking note of the enlarged lifespan of their population, have changed the retirement age in an effort to reduce the demographic pressure on pension and social security systems. In the united_states of America, for example, the age at which a person becomes eligible for full social security benefits will increase gradually until it reaches in . France has made the number of years during which one must contribute to pension schemes dependent on changes in life expectancy. But aside from considerations of the effect of lifespan on the viability of pension systems, there is the fact that longer and healthier lives offer older people the opportunity to rejuvenate and increase their contribution to society.Other countries may not have reached this stage as yet, however. In Africa, for instance, life expectancy averages years, and in several countries in the region the figure is even lower. Moreover, most developing countries do not have well-developed pension systems. Thus, the assumption that people can retire at a certain age with a reasonable pension cannot be applied to large proportions of older people who continue working most of their life. Also, the fact that the number of years spent in poor health over age tends to be higher in many developing countries relative to developed countries, limits the contributions that older people can make.All of these observations suggest that a more fluid concept of older persons is neededone that would change over time (for instance, with life expectancy) and vary across social contexts. Understanding the specific conditions of older people in each country and their contribution to society is essential to identifying appropriate responses to ageing as an inevitable trend.The Madrid International Plan of Action on AgeingThe complex challenges posed by population ageing are fully recognized in the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing (united_nations, a) adopted by consensus by the Second World Assembly on Ageing on April . The Madrid Plan of Action aims to ensure that persons everywhere are able to age with security and dignity and to continue to participate in their societies as citizens with full rights (para. ). At the same time, it clearly recognizes that the specific contributions and concerns of older persons must be placed within the context of the advancement of the objectives of the international development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals.Ageing as a process of physiologic deterioration that gradually impairs the capacity of people to function socially constitutes a continuum that requires multiple development responses. The Madrid Plan of Action provides the framework for incorporating the discussion of population ageing into the international debate on development and the implementation of national policies designed to respond to the challenge of building societies for all ages. The specific objectives of protecting the rights of older people and promoting their active participation in society, as defined by the Madrid Plan of Action, are based on the principle of equity in the distribution of benefits from growth and development. The three sets of priority directions identified by the Plan of Actionolder persons and development; advancing health and well-being into old age; and ensuring enabling and supportive environments for older personsencompass in detail the specific issues that concern the well-being of older people and the specific actions that would be required to meet their development needs, their health needs and their need to enjoy full participation in society.The Madrid Plan of Action provides the framework for responding to the challenges of population ageingIntroductionDevelopment in an ageing worldThe wess analyses the challenges and opportunities associated with ageing populations and aims to facilitate discussions in furthering the Madrid Plan of Action. Chapter II considers the major trends and factors underlying the demographic transition across major regions of the world and examines increased life expectancy and reduced fertility rates as key factors driving the rapid process of population ageing that unfolded during the twentieth century and is continuing into the present century. In most developing countries, this process is taking place at an accelerated speed.Population ageing is perceived as a process that is largely inevitable. Policy interventions intended to encourage childbearing in low-fertility countries are not expected to modify the process of population ageing to any substantial degree. Increases in the number of international migrants might alter the trend towards increases in the numbers of older persons in relation to the working-age population in developed countries. However, as demonstrated by the chapter, only very largeand unachievablelevels of migration could prevent old-age dependency ratios from rising. Changes in the population structure, then, may be inevitable, but they are also well understood and can therefore be anticipated.Chapter III discusses how, with population ageing and the modernization of societies (including urbanization), the social environment within which people grow older is changing as well. Family sizes are declining and perceptions of intergenerational support and caring are changing. The fact that older persons increasingly live alone is putting increased pressures on formal systems of long-term care and income support for older persons, and informal mechanisms (largely based on family support) have come under stress as well. Moreover, the many negative stereotypes of older persons depict them, for example, as imposing cost-related burdens on health and pension systems and as being inevitably unproductive. These factors increase the risk of elder neglect and abuse. The chapter analyses these challenges in different contexts and suggests ways of dealing with them and of empowering older persons so as to increase their participation in society.Population ageing could, as analysed in Chapter IV, become a drag on economic growth unless anticipated declines in the labour force can be arrested or labour productivity increased. As mentioned, international migration is not regarded as a principal remedy, as it is believed that no country would admit the massive numbers of migrants required to stop old-age dependency ratios from rising in low-fertility countries. In those countries, measures providing incentives for increased labour participation of female and older workers may have greater potential. This in turn raises questions how to improve labour-market conditions so as to give greater opportunities to both female and older workers, and in this regard how to counter sexor age-based discrimination in hiring practices and adapt training programmes to the needs of older workers. It is increased labour productivity growth that may in fact be needed the most if existing welfare levels are to be sustained and negative growth effects from shrinking labour forces averted.In countries with still growing and relatively young labour forces, there may be a window of opportunity for enhanced growth. However, as analysed in the wess (united_nations, a), reaping this demographic dividend may not be easy, especially if there are other structural impediments to economic growth in developing countries.Population ageing could also affect economic growth through changes in consumption and savings patterns. It is often expected that economies with high levels of child or old-age dependency will have a relatively low national saving rate, while economies with large shares of working-age population will have a high savings rate. This might then reduce the availability of global investment finance, since the countries with more advanced population ageing generatePopulation ageing is inevitableChanges in family structure pose new challenges with respect to ensuring the well-being of older personsIncreased labour productivity is required to offset the impact of ageing on economic growthConsumption and savings behaviour may be affected by ageingwess A basic old-age social pension scheme can be affordable even in lowincome countries the bulk of world savings. However, as argued in chapter IV, it is very difficult to predict such developments, because many non-demographic factors have a more important influence on consumption and savings behaviour.It can be said with greater certainty that population ageing will strain systems of old-age income security. As examined in chapter V, reduced labour participation and deteriorating health conditions increase the vulnerability to poverty at older ages. This holds, in particular, for developing countries where most older persons are not insured against health risks or do not have access to formal systems of old-age income protection. A universal social insurance mechanism providing a minimum pension benefit could overcome the risk of poverty at old age. This proposal may seem like an ambitious goal for many of the developing countries with very little social security coverage to begin with. The analysis of the chapter suggests, however, that basic social pension schemes are quite affordable, even in most low-income countries and also after taking into account further population ageing in the next half-century.Old-age income security systems must comprise multiple layers, the importance of each depending on the needs of different segments of society. Recent reforms of pension systems in both developed and developing countries have mainly aimed at making or keeping those systems financially sustainable. In several instances, such a focus has not served other important objectives of enhancing coverage and ensuring a minimum degree of income protection for all at old age.Population ageing will increase the demand for health and long-term care. Changing disease patterns are requiring adaptation within health-care systems. As analysed in chapter VI, the extension of life expectancy around the world is being accompanied by an epidemiological transition encompassing a shift from a predominance of infectious diseases and high maternal and child mortality to that of non-communicable diseases, especially chronic illnesses. This is posing challenges to health-care systems. For developed countries, the main concerns are with maintaining adequate levels and quality of care for an ageing population against a background of overall rising health-care costs. The challenge for developing countries is much larger, as many already face a double health-cost burden: there may still be a high prevalence of communicable diseases among significant parts of the population, while rapid population ageing is already putting increased pressure on scarce health-care resources.Rising health costs should be expected in developed and developing countries alike. The chapter questions, however, whether population ageing is the main driver of increased health costs. In almost all countries, irrespective of their progress in the demographic transition, health costs as a proportion of output have risen over time. Other factors, such as prices of pharmaceuticals, the rising costs of health-care personnel with ever-higher qualifications, new treatment methods and, in general, public pressure for better quality health care, may be more important. If such cost-push factors can be contained, coping with the increased demand on health services owing to an ageing population should well be affordable in what are, in any event, countries where levels of income can be expected to increase over time.The provision of long-term care raises a different set of issues. In some developed countries, such care tends to be provided within the framework of a universal health system that is funded by increased taxation. In other countries, greater reliance is placed on the family and on individuals making provision for such care out of their own income. Yet, rapid changes in social norms, internal migration, greater female labour participation and the breakdown of the traditional extended family system are making the provision of such care especially difficult for many countries. This has given rise to the formulation of policies facilitating long-term care arrangements that offer a home-like environment for older persons as an extension of existing familyor community-based support.Population ageing will increase the demand for health and long-term careAgeing is not the main driver of anticipated rising health costs, howeverIntroductionMoving forwardThe Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing provides a framework for addressing all of these challenges and opportunities for ageing populations. However, meeting the comprehensive development objectives defined by the Madrid Plan of Action will require stronger partnerships. It is necessary for Governments and the international community to redouble efforts to mainstream ageing into the international development agenda. Stronger international partnership is required to advance the commitments endorsed by the global development agenda with respect to pursuing the goals of economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development. At the national level, the development of societies for all ages requires stronger national partnership among all levels of government, civil society, the private sector and organizations of older persons aimed at translating the Madrid Plan of Action into practical action.Strong partnerships at national and international levels are required for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of ActionAn ageing world populationChapter IIAn ageing world populationChanging population age distributionsThe age distribution of the worlds population is undergoing a profound and unprecedented transformation. As mortality and fertility have fallen, attaining in many parts of the world levels never before seen in human history, the age distribution has been shifting gradually to older ages in a process known as population ageing. The shift towards older ages is reflected in rising median ages of populations, increasing proportions of older persons and decreasing proportions of children. All regions of the world are experiencing this change, and those most advanced in the process are already facing the challenge of providing for the needs of a growing population of older persons.Ageing societies can benefit from declining proportions of children and youth in the population, which imply that the relative weight of young persons in the non-productive ages decreases. Nevertheless, as the age distribution shifts upward, societies must reorient themselves to ensure that persons of all ages, including growing numbers of older persons, have the means or the support needed to maintain a decent standard of living. The present chapter describes the demographic foundations of population ageing and sets the stage for a discussion of its socioeconomic implications.Underlying causes of changing age distributionsThe historical increase of life expectancy is one of humanitys major achievements. Early in the history of humankind, the average length of life had ranged probably between and years, reflecting the heavy toll of mortality across the life course and especially among infants and children. By , life expectancy ranged from to years in the industrialized countries of the time and was beginning to increase in other areas as well. One century later, life expectancy stood at about years for the world as a whole and had surpassed years in a few advanced countries. Thus, most of the historical increase in human life expectancy occurred during the twentieth century.Increasing life expectancy and the major reductions in the risks of death that it reflects constitute one of the key components of the demographic transition. The other major component of this process of demographic change is the historical reduction in the birth rate or in total fertility, that is to say, the average number of children born per woman. From historical levels of about to children per woman, fertility fell dramatically during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to reach an estimated . children per woman worldwide in -. By that time, total fertility had fallen below children per woman in several regions of the world, including in many developing countries. Although such changes have been less dramatic in some areas, fertility levels in all regions of the world are lower now than they were a half-century ago.Population age distributions have been shifting to older ages in all regions of the worldThe twentieth century was marked by dramatic reductions in fertility and mortality levels in virtually all countries of the worldTable II..Table II. provides a broad summary of historical trends in two summary measures of mortality and fertility (life expectancy at birth and total fertility), including estimated levels through and projections until . Life expectancy for the world as a whole rose from years in -to years in -and is expected to continue rising to reach years in -. During these same time intervals, total fertility fell from . to . children per woman and is expected to continue falling to reach . children per woman in -.Life expectancy at birth and total fertility rate for selected countries and groups of countries, -, -and -Life expectancy (years)Total fertility rate (children per woman)aWorldDeveloped countriesEuropeJapanunited_statesCanada, Australia, New ZealandEconomies in transitionCommonwealth of Independent StatesSouth-eastern EuropeDeveloping countrieslatin_america and the Caribbeaneast_asia and the PacificSouth AsiaWestern AsiaAfricaNote:() Life expectancy at birth is the number of years a child born in the given period would live if the age-specific mortality rates of the period were to remain constant over his or her lifetime; the total fertility rate is the number of children that would be born per woman, assuming no female mortality at childbearing ages and the age-specific fertility rates of the specified region and reference period.() Thetableshowsestimates(until)andmedium-variantprojections(after).A major consequence of this transition from high fertility and high mortality to low fertility and low mortality has been the enormous growth of world population during the last few centuries, since for most countries the reduction in the death rate preceded the reduction in the birth rate by several decades, creating a sustained period in which the annual number of births greatly exceeded the annual number of deaths. Another major consequence of the demographic transition has been a gradual shift in the age distribution of the worlds population from younger to older ages.An ageing world populationHistorical stages of changing age distributionsOver the long term, sustained reductions in mortality and fertility lead to older population age distributions, whereas in the short term they produce increases in the proportion of children and youth. As noted already, the demographic transition usually starts with a reduction of mortality, which results in longer survival, especially of children. As a consequence, population growth accelerates and the proportion of children in the population increases, leading to an initial rejuvenation of the populations age structure.Partly in response to these early changes in mortality, fertility begins to decrease as parents realize that they can have fewer children and still ensure the survival of the number they desire. Other factors contribute as well to a reduction in childbearing, including changes in productive activities as economies become more industrialized, the broadening of opportunities for women outside the home and the increasing availability of effective methods of birth control. Sustained reductions in fertility slow down population growth and eventually produce a smaller proportion of children in the population. Thus, whereas the initial reduction in mortality leads to a younger population (through increased survival of children), the fertility decline that typically follows triggers a long-term process of population ageing.As time elapses, sustained fertility decline leads to decreasing proportions not only of children but also of young people and eventually of adults of working age. This process is reinforced by continued increases in longevity, which generally have the effect of accelerating the growth of the older population.Thus, in terms of the effects of the demographic transition on population age structures, one can distinguish three distinct stages. During the first stage, there is a rejuvenation of the age distribution as the proportion of children increases because of increased survival at younger ages. During the second, as a result of fertility reductions, there is the beginning of a decline in the proportion of children accompanied by a rise in the proportion of adults of working age. During the third stage, usually reached after lengthy periods of fertility and mortality decline, the proportions of both children and adults of working age decline and only the proportion of older persons rises.Although the bulge in the working ages during the second stage of this transition is temporary (lasting, typically, about years), the time period is long enough to have significant implications for economic growth and for many other dimensions of societies. This common feature of the demographic transition has been variously referred to as the demographic dividend, the demographic bonus and the demographic window of opportunity, with each term alluding to the possibilities offered for raising the rate of economic growth per capita and thus improving the standard of living for the population involved (see chap. IV).During this phase of the demographic transition, a decline in the proportion (and often the absolute number) of dependent children in the population reduces the costs of providing for educational and other needs associated with this age group, resulting in an increase in the resources available for economically productive investment which, potentially, would contribute to the growth of the national economy. In theory, this demographic bonus provides a window of opportunity for accelerated economic development. However, reaping its potential benefits depends on the availability of productive employment and opportunities for investment and, ultimately, on the existence of social and political conditions that can provide an environment for sustainable growth and development. The experience of many developing countries in cashing in on the demographic bonus has been less fortunate, as evidenced by the large number of growth collapses in the last two decades of the twentieth century (see united_nations, a).Early reductions in mortality among children and youth lead to a younger population, whereas the subsequent decline in fertility triggers a long-term process of population ageingReaping the potential benefits of the demographic bonus depends on the availability of productive employment and opportunities for investmentwess At present, the proportion of older persons in the population is generally much higher in developed countries......but the worlds population of older persons will increasingly be concentrated in the developing countriesThe rapid ageing of the population that occurs during the third stage of this transition poses particular challenges for public policy, as it requires major adjustments in a variety of spheres, particularly health care and old-age support (see chaps. V and VI). Such adjustments inevitably raise questions of intergenerational equity in meeting the needs of persons at different stages of life and of the roles of the State, private investment and the family in providing support for dependent populations. Different approaches to solving such problems are likely to affect the distribution of wealth and the distribution and types of opportunities and burdens in relation to age, gender and other social categories.Regional differences in population ageingCurrently, the age structure of the developed countries is in general considerably older than that of the developing countries. In countries with economies in transition, the age structure is generally younger than that of the developed countries but still significantly older than that of the developing countries. It is expected that all groups of countries will undergo substantial ageing of their populations in the coming decades (table II.).According to united_nations estimates, per cent of the population in the developed countries was aged years or over in . This proportion is projected to rise to per cent in and per cent in . In countries with economies in transition, the average proportion of the population aged years or over is projected to increase from per cent in to per cent in and per cent in . In the developing countries, the proportion of the population aged years or over was estimated at only per cent in but is expected to reach per cent by and nearly per cent by . Thus, the number of older persons in the developing countries will likely more than double between and . This increase is much larger than in the developed countries and in the economies in transition, where the number of older persons will grow by about per cent and per cent respectively during the same period.Figure II. illustrates the variation in the ageing process of the different groups of countries by using population pyramids, which depict the distribution of a population of each sex by age. Thus, the figure shows the population distribution estimated for and and projected for for the world, the developed countries, the economies in transition and the developing countries.Those three broad groups of countries are at different stages of the demographic transition, and their differences in the timing of historical demographic change are reflected in the variability of their current population age distributions. Developed economies are in general well into the third stage of the transition and their populations, which are already considerably older, are expected to age rapidly in the foreseeable future. In , for example, just per cent of Europes population was under age , whereas per cent was aged years or over (annex table A.). By , the proportion of the population aged years or over in Europe is projected to be per cent.The ageing process is particularly intense in Japan, where the population is expected to be by far the worlds oldest at mid-century. The proportion of persons aged years or over in Japan was per cent in and is projected to reach per cent in . The united_states of America, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are expected to experience a somewhat slower ageing process, as their fertility levels have not fallen as low as those of Europe or Japan. In the united_states, the proportion of the population aged years or over is projected to rise from per cent in to per cent in ; in Canada, Australia and New Zealand combined, that proportion is expected to increase from to per cent over the same period.An ageing world populationMost of the developing countries find themselves in the second stage of the demographic transition. However, because they have experienced, on average, fairly rapid fertility reductions, particularly in the regions of east_asia and the Pacific and latin_america and the Caribbean, their populations are expected to age more rapidly than those of Europe and other developed countries in the past. In east_asia and the Pacific, the share of the population aged years or over is projected to grow from per cent in to per cent in , whereas in latin_america and the Caribbean, the corresponding share is expected to rise from to per cent over the same period.In Western Asia and South Asia, the ageing process will likely be slower. In the former, the proportion of the population aged years or over is projected to increase from per cent in to per cent in ; in the latter, that proportion is projected to increase from to per cent over the same period. Africa, in contrast, has only recently embarked on the second stage of the demographic transition and still has a very young population. In , per cent of Africas population was under age , whereas only per cent was aged years or over. Because Africa has been heavily affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, its transition to low mortality has been interrupted. Furthermore, it is unclear whether or not the incipient fertility reductions experienced by countries in the region will continue over the short term. Even assuming that the fertility decline proceeds at a moderate pace, the African population is expected to remain relatively young well into the twenty-first century.In general, the speed of population ageing will be faster in the developing countries than it has been in the developed countries. A commonly used indicator of the pace of population ageing is the timespan required for the population aged years or over to increase from to per cent and then from to per cent. Figure II. uses this indicator to illustrate the pace of ageing for selected countries in the developing and developed regions of the world. In many developed countries, ageing has proceeded historically at a moderate pace. In France, forFigure II..Time period required for the proportion of the population aged years or over to increase from to per cent and from to per cent, selected countriesUnlike other developing regions, Africa is expected to retain a relatively youthful population well into the twenty-first centuryPopulation ageing will occur more rapidly in the developing countries in future decades than it did in the developed countries in the pastProportion aged years or over:Period required for increase from to per cent.Period required for increase fromDeveloped countriesDeveloping countriesJapan Poland Canada united_states Hungary Australia united_kingdom Italy Sweden FranceIndia Indonesia Tunisia Brazil China Republic of Korea ArgentinaYearwess Developing countries Economies in transition Developed countries example, it took over a century for the share of the population aged years or over to increase from to per cent, and it is projected that another years will be required for the share to reach per cent. Japan, in contrast, is expected to experience this shift (from a to a per cent share of the population aged years or over) during a span of just years. The pace of ageing is projected to be even faster in some developing countries including China, the Republic of Korea and Tunisia, all of which have experienced very rapid reductions in fertility.Although populations are generally older in the developed regions, the majority of the worlds older persons live in developing countries (figure II.). In , per cent of the worlds population aged years or over lived in developing countries. By , per cent of the worlds older population, amounting to nearly . billion people, will reside in these countries.Figure II..Size and distribution of world population aged years or over by groups of countries, , , , and estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ). () Percentages are shown inside the bars.The most rapid population increase is occurring among the oldest age groupsYearAgeing within the older population itselfA notable aspect of the global ageing process is the progressive demographic ageing of the older population itself. In most countries, the population aged years or over is growing more rapidly than other segments of the older population. The world population aged years or over is expected to nearly triple between and , whereas the population aged years or over is projected to increase by a factor of . over the same time period (table II.). In both of these older-age categories, the proportional increase will be even greater in the developing regions, where the population aged years or over is expected to almost quadruple and the population aged years or over is projected to increase by a factor of ..The share of the worlds population aged years or over is expected to rise from . per cent in to . per cent in . During the same period, the corresponding share is projected to increase from . to . per cent in the developed countries, from . to . perAn ageing world population Table II..Population aged years or over for selected countries and groups of countries, , and Number of persons aged years or over (thousands)Number of persons aged years or over as a proportion of the total population (percentage)Number of persons aged years or over as a proportion of the population aged years or over (percentage)WorldDeveloped countriesEuropeJapanunited_statesCanada, Australia, New ZealandEconomies in transitionCommonwealth of Independent StatesSouth-eastern EuropeDeveloping countrieslatin_america and the Caribbeaneast_asia and the PacificSouth AsiaWestern AsiaAfricaNote: The table shows estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ).cent in the economies in transition and from . to . per cent in the developing countries. Important variation will remain at mid-century across countries and regions in terms of the share of the total population represented by the oldest age groups. For example, whereas in Japan it is projected that persons aged years or over will make up more than per cent of the total population in , in Africa they are expected to constitute only about per cent of the total population.Is population ageing inevitable?Concern over rapid population ageing has generated an intense policy debate, particularly in developed countries, where the historical transition towards older populations is more advanced. An important question is whether this fundamental demographic shift could be altered significantly through policy interventions, or whether population ageing is essentially inevitable (suggesting that policy responses should focus on adaptation rather than on mitigation). To address this issue, it is helpful to examine in more detail the implications of past and future demographic trends for historical changes in the population age distribution, and also to consider the potential impact of policy interventions in matters of childbearing and international migration.wess Much of the population ageing expected in future decades will occur as a result of past changes in fertility, mortality and migrationHistorical reductions in fertility and mortalityThe age distribution of a population results primarily from its past experience of fertility and mortality and to a lesser extent from its migration history. Although increases in life expectancy play a role as well, the historical reduction in fertility levels has been the main force contributing to the gradual upward shift in population age distributions for both developed and developing countries.Much of the expected future ageing of the worlds populations will occur as a result of their current demographic profiles, reflecting earlier changes in fertility and mortality levels plus the cumulative effects of past migration. Although future trends in these three components of population change will help to determine age distributions at mid-century, a powerful momentum for population ageing has already been created by past demographic trends. That is to say, most populations would continue to experience a substantial upward shift in their age distributions even if age-specific rates of fertility, mortality and migration remained constant at todays levels.Future trends according to alternative projection scenariosFuture effects of different paths of fertility change on the size and age distribution of the worlds populations can be assessed by comparing the high-, mediumand low-fertility variants of the united_nations population projections, which are believed to encompass the likely future range of fertility change between now and . For each country or area, the low and high variants assume that from to the average level of fertility will be, respectively, half a child below and half a child above the level assumed for the medium variant.These seemingly small changes in the underlying assumptions are associated with rather large differences in the projected size of the world population in , which would range from . billion under the low variant to . billion under the high variant (table II.). Assumptions regarding future fertility levels also have major implications for the expected pace of world population growth. Under the high variant, world population in would be increasing by more than million persons annually, a substantially higher annual increment than at present; under the low variant, however, world population would be declining slowly by that time.In contrast, uncertainty about future fertility levels is relatively less important with regard to expected changes in population age distributions. For the world as a whole, the low variant implies a population in which the proportion of persons aged years or over would be per cent in ; according to the high variant, the proportion of older persons in the same year would be per cent. Although these two outcomes differ substantially, both scenarios imply a significant increase compared with the situation in , when only per cent of persons were aged years or over. Thus, even if the world experiences relatively high levels of fertility and continued rapid population growth, substantial population ageing during the first half of the twenty-first century appears to be inevitable (see annex table A.).The same outcome applies to different groups of countries. Even with relatively high fertility levels in future decades, the proportion of the population aged years or over in would be per cent in the developed countries and per cent in the economies in transition; these values are considerably higher than the corresponding estimates of per cent and per cent for . In the case of the developing countries, the high-fertility variant implies a population in which the projected share of older persons in ( per cent) would be more than double the estimate for ( per cent); in the low-fertility variant, the projected share ( per cent) would be triple the estimate for .An ageing world population Table II..Age distribution estimated for and according to different projection variants for , for the world and groups of countriesPercentageAge groupestimateLowMediumHighWorldTotalNumber ()Developed countriesTotalNumber ()Economies in transitionTotalNumber ()Developing countriesTotalNumber ()Potential impact of fertility policiesBecause of the close relationship between fertility trends and changes in the population age distribution, it is worth considering whether policies intended to promote childbearing could be effective as a means of slowing the process of population ageing. Although it appears that such policies can succeed in slowing fertility declines under specific circumstances, it has proved difficult for Governments to change the behaviour of individuals in the direction of increasing their fertility (united_nations, b). Nevertheless, there is a lack of conclusive evidence about the impact of past interventions aimed at increasing fertility levels, as it has been difficult to disentangle the effects of specific policy initiatives from the effects of broader social, political and economic conditions (Demeny, ; RAND, ).For similar reasons, designing successful interventions has proved to be extremely challenging, since policies intended to raise fertility can have different effects depending on thewess No single policy intervention seems to have been effective in reversing low fertility political, economic and social contexts within which they are implemented. Another factor that has hampered the implementation of policies intended to reverse fertility declines is linked to the long-term nature of their outcomes. It takes at least one generation before these policies ultimately increase the number of new entrants to the labour force. As a result of this long-term horizon, policymakers generally have few incentives to advocate such policies, which tend to lack popular appeal and therefore do not attract political champions (RAND, ).No single policy intervention seems to have been effective in reversing low fertility. Instead, Governments have used, with modest success, a mix of policies and programmes aimed at directly or indirectly increasing fertility. In France, for instance, generous childcare subsidies have been instituted to reconcile family life with work, and families have been rewarded for having at least three children. In Sweden, several parental policies, including flexible work schedules, quality childcare and extensive parental leave on reasonable economic terms, have allowed many women to raise children while remaining in the workforce (RAND, ). It appears that such measures may have had a small positive impact on fertility levels in the countries where they were implemented most aggressively. However, it is important to remember that even a sharp upturn in fertility would not yield a significant impact on the age structure before at least to years, owing to the momentum generated by past demographic trends (united_nations, b).Potential impact of migrationAlthough international migration has no direct effect on the size or characteristics of the global population as a whole, it could have an impact on the age distribution of certain national or regional populations, since migrants are disproportionately concentrated in the young adult ages and sometimes have higher fertility levels than native-born populations. In todays world, the developed countries are in general net receivers of international migrants, whereas the developing countries are net senders. The medium variant of the united_nations population projections assumes that the general direction of these flows will remain the same over the next few decades, and it thus reflects the expected rejuvenating effect of international migration on the population of the developed countries.To assess the size of this effect, another set of projections assuming that there will be no international migration has been calculated. A comparison of the two sets of projections to for the developed countries shows a difference of million persons in the size of the population at the end of the projection period (table II.). Furthermore, the projected number of international migrants during -in the medium variant has the effect of reducing the proportion of the population aged years or over by . percentage points in , while simultaneously increasing the proportions of children and persons of working age by . and . percentage points, respectively. Thus, international migration is expected to slow the ageing process only slightly in the developed countries. This conclusion is consistent with that of other studies, which have found that the impact of international migration on population size and age structure in developed countries is typically rather small (united_nations, ; ; b).In particular, a united_nations study on so-called replacement migration (united_nations, ) focused on the possible effects of international migration on the population size and age structure of a range of countries with fertility patterns below the replacement level, including France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the russian_federation, the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland and the united_states. An identical exercise was performed for Europe and for the European Union (EU), treating them as if they were each a single country from onward. The time period covered was -, and the calculations were basedInternational migration is expected to slow the ageing process only slightly in the developed countriesAn ageing world populationTable II..Age structure of the population projected for the developed countries in according to the medium and zero migration variantsPercentageAge group (years)Projection variantsA. MediumB. Zero migrationDifference (A-B)-.TotalNumber ()on the Revision of united_nations population estimates and projections (united_nations, ).The study considered a number of scenarios with regard to the migration streams that would be needed in order for particular population objectives or outcomes to be achieved. The scenarios focused on three different outcome variables: (a) the size of the total population; (b) the size of the working-age population (aged -); and (c) the ratio of the population aged years or over to the working-age population. In each case, the analysts calculated the level of international migration required to maintain the given outcome variable at the highest level (for the size of the total or working-age population) or the lowest level (for the old-age dependency ratio) that would be attained, hypothetically, in the absence of international migration after .In performing the required calculations, it was assumed that the fertility rate in all countries and regions would move (upward, in most cases) towards target levels of . or . children per woman and, once those levels were reached, that it would remain constant until , the end of the projection period. For simplicity, the age and sex structure of the migrants was assumed to be the same for all countries and was based on historical patterns observed for the united_states, Canada and Australia (traditionally, the most important countries of immigration). In addition, the projection methodology assumed that the fertility and mortality levels of immigrants would converge immediately to those of the receiving populations.Results of the study (table II.) indicate that, in order for international migration to offset the projected decline in overall population size for countries such as Italy and Japan, and for Europe as a whole (scenario I), the levels of net migration gains would need to be much higher than in the recent past. For instance, to offset the projected population decline in Europe, the average annual net inflow of international migrants would need to be about twice as high during -(about . million) as that during -(approximately ,, not shown in table). The levels needed to offset the projected decline in the working-age population (scenario II) would be larger still, amounting, in the case of Europe, to an average net inflow of . million migrants per year during -.However, even these higher levels of immigration would not bring population ageing to a halt. Indeed, much larger flows of immigrants into this same set of countries would be required in order to halt the expected increase in the ratio of persons aged years or over to the population of working age (scenario III). The necessary level would range from an average annual net inflow between and of . million persons for the united_kingdom and . million for France, to more than million each for Japan and the united_states.Extremely large flows of immigrants would be required in order to halt the expected increase of the old-age dependency ratio in developed countriesTable II..Net number of migrants required during -to achieve different population scenarios, selected countries and regionsCountry or regionMedium variantScenarioI. Constant total populationII. Constant age group -III. Constant ratio +/-yearsA. Total number (thousands)FranceGermanyItalyJapanrussian_federationunited_kingdomunited_statesEuropeEuropean UnionB. Average annual number (thousands)FranceGermanyItalyJapanrussian_federationunited_kingdomunited_statesEuropeEuropean UnionWhether these larger numbers of international migrants are within the realm of options open to Governments would depend to a great extent on the social, economic and political circumstances of each country or region. Such scenarios serve chiefly to underscore the point that the ongoing transformation in population age structures has a powerful momentum and that it is impractical to suppose that any policy with regard to international migration will have a major impact on the age structure of most developed countries.Trends in working and dependent age groupsDependency ratios: definition and interpretationThe potential effects of ageing for social and economic development are often assessed using so-called dependency ratios. These ratios compare the size of some group within a population that is considered to be economically dependent to that of another group that is considered economically active. Since precise determinations of the number of persons who are producers (and thus, economically active) and those who are exclusively consumers (inactive) are typically not available, dependency ratios are usually calculated based solely on age ranges.An ageing world populationIt is generally assumed that children under age fall into the dependent category and that older persons are more likely to be at a stage of life where they are mainly consumers. Because years has traditionally been regarded as the threshold for old-age dependency, age group or over is used here to calculate dependency ratios. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the direction of the trends would be largely the same if the dependency ratios were computed using the population aged -as the denominator and a definition of older persons as those aged years or over. Yet, total and old-age dependency ratios are higher if age is used as a threshold (see annex table A.).Three types of ratio will be considered: (a) the child dependency ratio, which relates the number of persons aged -to those aged -; (b) the old-age dependency ratio, which relates the number of persons aged years or over to those aged -; and (c) the total dependency ratio, which is the sum of the child and old-age dependency ratios. All dependency ratios are expressed in terms of the number of dependants (children or older persons or both) per persons aged -.Obviously, this formulation of the notion of dependency oversimplifies the reality of peoples lives. In most populations, economic activity does not cease at age , and persons aged -are not all economically active. Although persons aged years or over often require economic support from others, older persons in many societies are also providers of support to their adult children (Morgan, Schuster and Butler, ; Saad, ). Furthermore, not all persons aged -provide direct or indirect support to children or older persons (Taeuber, ). In particular, as the period of training for a productive life increases in the course of economic development, most adolescents and young adults remain longer in school and out of the labour force, effectively extending the period of child dependency well beyond age .These observations suggest that trends in the dependency ratios considered here are merely indicative of the constraints that a society may face as its population ages and unprecedented changes occur in the size of key age groups. Estimation of the likely economic impact of such trends would require more appropriate measures based on information about the number of workers and consumers in a population as a function of age.Global trends in age-related dependencyFigure II. shows the values of the three dependency ratios from to for the world, the developed and developing countries and the countries with economies in transition. The total dependency ratio for the world as a whole had increased from dependants per persons aged -in , to in . This increase in total dependency was due mostly to an increase in the number of children relative to the working-age population, as reflected in the rise of the child dependency ratio. Between and , the total dependency ratio declined from to dependants per persons of working age, driven by a major reduction in child dependency.This decline is expected to come to a halt in the coming decade and then to reverse itself, so that the total dependency ratio is projected to be in and to reach by . This projected increase in the total dependency ratio is due entirely to rising dependency at older ages, since the child dependency ratio is expected to maintain its decreasing trend.Worldwide, the ratio between the dependant and the working-age populations has decreased since but is expected to increase in the futureEven if the world population as a whole were to experience the relatively higher levels of fertility implied by the high-variant projection (see sect. entitled Is population ageing inevitable? above for an explanation of different projection scenarios), the child dependency ratio would still decline between and , implying that the increase in the total dependency ratio will be due entirely to the increase in the old-age dependency ratio (see annex table A.). Moreover, for all groups of countries, the old-age dependency ratio in resulting from the high-variant projection would be substantially higher than that estimated in .Figure II..Trends in three types of dependency ratio for the world and groups of countries, -WorldDeveloped countriesEstimates ProjectionsTotalChildOld-ageEstimates ProjectionsTotalChildOld-ageYear Economies in transitionYear Developing countriesEstimates ProjectionsTotalChildOld-ageEstimates ProjectionsTotalChildOld-ageYearYearNote:() Thegraphsshowestimates(until)andmedium-variantprojections(after).() The total dependency ratio is defined as the ratio of the sum of the population aged -and the population aged years or over to the population aged -. The child dependency ratio is the ratio of the population aged -to that aged -. The old-age dependency ratio is the ratio of the population aged years or over to that aged -.The total dependency ratio for developed countries as a whole reached a historic low point in Regional differences in age-related dependencyIn developed countries, the total dependency ratio was roughly constant between and , at a level of about or dependants per persons aged -, but had then declined to by . It is expected that the level observed in will be a historic low point, since a steadily increasing path for the total dependency ratio is projected for these regions in the future, caused by a continually rising old-age dependency ratio. Indeed, by the old-age dependency ratio for the developed countries is expected to attain a value of , which is close to the total dependency ratio estimated for . Adding the dependent children is expected toPer persons aged -Per persons aged -Per persons aged -Per persons aged -An ageing world population produce a total dependency ratio of in , a level that is per cent higher than the average value of this same ratio for the developed countries between and .The trends in dependency ratios in the countries with economies in transition are similar to those in the developed countries. After having changed little from dependants per persons aged -in to dependants in , and then declining to a historic low point of dependants in , the total dependency ratio is projected to increase to in and then to in . As in the case of the developed countries, the expected increase in the dependency ratio in the economies in transition is due exclusively to a steady rise in the old-age dependency ratio.For the developing countries, both the historical experience and the future prospects are quite different. First, their total dependency ratio in , which stood at dependants per persons aged -, was quite high in comparison with that of the developed countries or the countries with economies currently in transition, owing mostly to a very high level of child dependency in the developing countries ( per persons aged -). Between and , as the proportion of children in the population of the developing countries increased further owing to reduced mortality, the child and the total dependency ratios soared to and , respectively. However, a subsequent reduction in the proportion of children due to reduced fertility, coupled with a rising proportion of persons aged -, led to major reductions in the child and total dependency ratios after .By , the total dependency ratio in the developing countries stood at and is projected to continue declining until it reaches in . Beyond that point, a slowly increasing trend is expected. Increases after should be slow, since the rapid rise expected in the old-age dependency ratio is likely to be counterbalanced by continued reductions in child dependency. By , the developing regions as a whole are expected to have a total dependency ratio of , a value that is slightly lower than in . However, the composition of this ratio will be quite different in the future, since older persons are expected to account for per cent of the total dependency burden in , up from an estimated per cent in and per cent in .In all groups of developing countries considered here, the total dependency ratio (which was already high in ) increased to a very high level between and . This was especially true in Africa and Western Asia, where in the total dependency ratio reached more than dependants per persons aged -(annex figure A.). In that same year, the total dependency ratio was in latin_america and the Caribbean and about in South Asia and in east_asia and the Pacific. In all developing regions except Africa, the total dependency ratio dropped markedly between and . This reduction was particularly important in east_asia and the Pacific where, owing to a substantial decline of its child component, a total dependency ratio of dependants per persons aged -in became comparable with that observed in the developed countries and the economies in transition. In South Asia and Western Asia, the total dependency ratio dropped to the lower s in , and in latin_america and the Caribbean to the mid-s. In Africa, in contrast, the total dependency ratio in was still very high, at dependants per persons aged -.In future decades, Africa is expected to experience a steady decline in the total dependency ratio, with its value projected to reach by . For latin_america and the Caribbean, in contrast, the total dependency ratio is expected to stop declining around and then start increasing to a level of by . This increase will be caused primarily by the rising weight of the older population. By , the old-age dependency ratio for Latin American and the Caribbean is expected to be roughly equal to the child dependency ratio. In South Asia and Western Asia, the total dependency ratio is expected to decline further to about by and then to remain stable for the next years.The expected increase of the total dependency ratio in the economies in transition will be driven exclusively by a steady rise in the old-age dependency ratioIn future decades, a profound shift is expected in the relative size of dependant age groups in the developing countries, as the population of children stops increasing while the population of older persons continues to growThe total dependency ratio is still very high in Africa but is expected to undergo a steady decline in the futurewess Japan is a special case among developed countriesThe future prospects for the total dependency ratio in east_asia and the Pacific are similar to those in the economies in transition, with a slow increase between and , and a more rapid increase between and . The old-age dependency ratio in this region is expected to surpass the child dependency ratio by around .Among the developed countries, Japan stands out as a special case, with a relatively high total dependency ratio in . Between and , however, that ratio had decreased sharply from to dependants per persons aged -, mainly because of a substantial decline in the child dependency ratio. The old-age dependency ratio in Japan surpassed the child dependency ratio between and (annex figure A.). Thus, in the older population accounted for almost per cent of the total dependency ratio, which stood at dependants per persons aged -. By , the old-age dependency ratio in Japan is expected to attain a remarkable level (by far the worlds highest) of more than persons aged years or over per persons aged -, whereas the total dependency ratio is projected to reach almost one dependant per member of the working-age population.Europe also experienced a crossover of the child and the old-age dependency ratios (occurring between and ). However, the difference between these two ratios remains significantly lower than in the case of Japan. This recent crossover presages a sharp rise in the future total dependency ratio, which is projected to increase in parallel with the old-age ratio. By , Europes total dependency ratio is expected to be , a very high value similar to that of most developing countries in the s, but in this case determined mainly by a high proportion of older persons rather than of children.The historical paths followed by the total dependency ratio are similar in South-eastern Europe and CIS. In both groups of countries, the total dependency ratio decreased between and but is expected to start increasing within the next decade, reaching by a level of in South-eastern Europe and in CIS. In both groups, as in most of the developed countries, the expected increase in the total dependency ratio will be driven mainly by the rising weight of the older population. The share of older persons in the total dependency ratio is expected to surpass that of children by around in South-eastern Europe and by around in CIS. By , persons aged years or over are projected to constitute per cent of the total dependency ratio in CIS, and per cent in South-eastern Europe.Ageing within the working-age populationThe labour force is itself ageing. For the world as a whole, the proportion of those aged years or over within the population aged -remained stable in recent decades, at about per cent between and (figure II.). The weight of this age group is projected to grow rapidly in the future, rising to . per cent in .In the developed countries, the proportions of the youngest (aged -) and the oldest (aged -) segments of the working-age population were of nearly equal size in . However, starting in the oldest segment of the labour force is projected to become larger than the youngest component. By , those aged years or over are expected to make up almost one third (. per cent) of the working-age population in the developed countries.In the countries with economies in transition, the crossover between the youngest and oldest segments of the working-age population is expected to take place between and . The share of the oldest segment of the workforce in the economies in transition is projected to reach its highest point, . per cent, in and then to decline slightly to . per cent in .Almost one third of the working-age population in the developed countries is expected to be aged years or over by An ageing world population Figure II..Distribution of the working-age population by age group for the world and groups of countries, -WorldDeveloped countriesEstimates ProjectionsAges -Ages -Ages -Estimates ProjectionsAges -Ages -Ages -Year Developing countriesYear Economies in transitionEstimates ProjectionsAges -Ages -Ages -Estimates ProjectionsAges -Ages -Ages -YearNote: The graphs show estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ).In the developing regions, although the size of the oldest and youngest segments of the workforce started to converge in the s, the youngest segment is projected to remain still dominant by the middle of this century. However, important differences exist within the developing countries. In Africa, for example, the workforce will remain quite young through , whereas in east_asia and the Pacific the size of the oldest segment is expected to surpass that of the youngest segment before (annex figure A.).YearPercentage PercentagePercentage Percentagewess Women constitute well over half of the worlds older population and their share of the total increases with ageGender differences at older agesNumbers of men and womenBecause women usually live longer than men, they significantly outnumber men at older ages. While there were males per females in the world population in , among those aged years or over the ratio was men to women (table II.).Not only are women more likely than men to survive to age , but having once reached that age they can expect to live longer than similarly aged men. Consequently, the proportion of women in the older population tends to rise substantially with advancing age. InTable II..Sex ratio of the population in selected age groups for the world and groups of countries, , and Age groupSex ratio (males per females)WorldTotalDeveloped countriesTotalEconomies in transitionTotalDeveloping countriesTotalNote: The table shows estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ).An ageing world population, for the world as a whole, women outnumbered men by almost to at ages and over, and by almost to at ages and over.Sex ratios at older ages vary greatly among countries. Female advantage in survivorship has been larger historically in developed countries and countries with economies in transition than in developing countries. As a result, male-to-female sex ratios at older ages tend to be lower on average in the developed countries and the economies in transition than in the developing countries. At present, those low sex ratios in the developed countries and in the economies in transition result from both large sex differences in life expectancy and the long-term effects of the massive loss of young men during the Second World War.The sex ratio at older ages is particularly low in the economies in transition where, in , there were men per women among persons aged years or over and just men per women among those aged years or over. In contrast, in the developing countries older women outnumber older men by smaller margins because sex differences in life expectancy are generally smaller in these areas of the world. Thus, in the developing countries today there are men per women aged years or over, and men per women aged years or over. Sex ratios at older ages in the developed countries are in-between those found in the economies in transition and those observed in the developing countries.However, owing in part to an anticipated reduction in the female advantage in life expectancy in the developed countries and the economies in transition, the sex ratio of the population aged years or over in those regions is projected to increase between and , passing from to males per females in the developed countries and from to in the economies in transition. Likewise, future increases are expected in the sex ratio for those aged years or over in both the developed countries and the economies in transition.In contrast, sex differences in life expectancy are expected to widen in the developing countries between and . As a result, sex ratios at older ages are expected to decline, thus exacerbating the imbalance in the numbers of older men and older women in developing countries as a whole. Nevertheless, sex ratios at older ages in the developing countries are not expected to attain the extremely low levels observed in the economies in transition and in the developed countries in .Gender gap in life expectancy at birth and at older agesMortality levels have dropped markedly since . Between -and -, the world population gained almost years of life expectancy at birth, but these gains were not shared equally by men and women (table II.). In most countries, reductions in mortality have been greater for females than for males, thus reinforcing the female advantage in survival to old age. At the world level, the female advantage in life expectancy at birth has increased from . to . years since -and is expected to increase slightly to . years by -. However, in recent decades the gap in life expectancy at birth between the sexes has stabilized or even narrowed somewhat in the developed countries.The female advantage in life expectancy at birth has been particularly large in the countries with economies in transition, where increasing levels of adult male mortality have contributed to increasing the difference between female and male life expectancy at birth, which rose from . years in -to . years in -. Currently, male life expectancy at birth in the economies in transition is lower than in the developing countries, whereas female life expectancy is six years higher in the economies in transition than in the developing countries.Reductions in mortality have been greater for females than for males in most countriesTable II..Life expectancy at birth and at ages , and , by sex for the world and groups of countries, -Both sexesFemaleMaleDifferenceBoth sexesFemaleMaleDifferenceBoth sexesFemaleMaleDifferenceWorldLife expectancy at birth (years)Developed countriesEconomies in transitionDeveloping countriesWorldLife expectancy at age (years)Developed countriesEconomies in transitionDeveloping countriesWorldLife expectancy at age (years)Developed countriesEconomies in transitionDeveloping countriesWorldLife expectancy at age (years)Developed countriesEconomies in transitionDeveloping countries-.Note: The table shows estimates (until ) and medium-variant projections (after ).Women have gained ground relative to men not only in terms of life expectancy at birth but also in terms of survivorship at older ages. Between -and -, the female advantage in life expectancy increased from . to . years at age , and from . to . years at age . These trends have been similar in different regions of the world and have helped to maintain the low sex ratios among the older population observed worldwide.ConclusionsBy the beginning of the twenty-first century, most of the worlds countries either were experiencing or had already experienced a demographic transition from high to low levels of fertility and mortality. Developed countries have already reached the third stage of the transition, when population ageing is pervasive and rapid. The majority of developing countries and the world population as a whole are in the second stage, when a favourable age distribution gives rise to a potential demographic bonus. There remain, however, some countries that are only at the start of the transition to low fertility and a very few where fertility decline has not yet started.An ageing world populationThe changes set in motion by the demographic transition lead to an ongoing transformation of the population age structure, which brings both challenges and opportunities for development. In the early stages of the transition, countries face the challenge of educating large and growing numbers of children and young adults. Later, during the second stage of the transition, an increase in the population of working age creates a favourable age structure and opens up a demographic window of opportunity for economic development. However, in order to benefit from the opportunities created by this demographic bonus, countries need to foster productive investment and job creation.Equally important is the need to start planning for the time when the demographic bonus ends and population ageing accelerates. In the developed economies, rapid population ageing is already demanding societal and economic adaptations to a new reality. Again, however, there are opportunities as well as challenges, since older people in developed countries remain in good health for longer than ever before and therefore have the potential to continue being productive.Although the highest proportions of older persons are found in developed countries, this age group is growing considerably more rapidly in developing countries. As a consequence, the older population worldwide will be increasingly concentrated in the developing countries. Already today, when developing countries have a relatively youthful population, they account for per cent of the global population aged years or over. Within years, developing countries will be the home of per cent of the worlds older persons.Ensuring that these growing numbers of older persons have adequate support during old age, access to decent employment should they need or wish to remain economically active, and appropriate health care is likely to prove challenging, as analysed in chapter VI. Policy responses to population ageing should also take into account the fact that women greatly outnumber men at older ages in most countries, especially among the very old.The worldwide increase in the old-age dependency ratio reflects a situation in which an increasing number of beneficiaries of publicly funded health and pension programmes (mainly those aged years or over) are being supported in many countries by a relatively smaller number of potential contributors (those in the economically active ages between and years). As discussed in chapters IV and V, unless economic growth can be accelerated in a sustained manner, this trend will continue to impose heavier demands on the working-age population (in the form of higher taxes and other contributions) in order to maintain a stable flow of benefits to the older age groups. The increasing burden of old-age support is offset only partially by the decreasing size of the population at younger ages.Population ageing in future decades is largely inevitable for countries at all levels of development. Although age distributions in the future will be determined in part by ongoing changes in fertility, mortality and international migration, there is also a powerful momentum for population ageing that has been created by past demographic trends. A substantial degree of population ageing is expected over the next few decades in all regions of the world under a variety of plausible scenarios about future fertility levels, and it seems unlikely that policy interventions intended to encourage childbearing in low-fertility countries could substantially alter this expectation. Similarly, although a large rise in the number of international migrants could alter trends in respect of the working-age population, no plausible assumption about international migration levels would have more than a moderate impact on the expected degree of population ageing that will be experienced in future decades by countries all over the world.In short, the coming changes in population age structure are well understood and thus can be largely anticipated. Ideally, policy responses should be put in place ahead of time to ease adaptation to these long-term demographic changes. Even if population ageing is inevitable, its consequences depend on the measures developed to address the challenges it poses. The subsequent chapters of this report will discuss those challenges.The changes in population age structure set in motion by the demographic transition bring both challenges and opportunities for developmentPolicy responses should be put in place ahead of time to ease adaptation to the inevitable long-term ageing of populationsOlder persons in a changing societyChapter IIIOlder persons inIntroductionThe social environment within which people grow older is rapidly changing. The size of families is decreasing, the role of extended families is diminishing, and perceptions of intergenerational support and caring for older persons are rapidly changing.The implications of these changes in family composition and living arrangements for support and care for older persons depend on the context. In developing countries where older people have limited access to formal mechanisms of social protection, they will need to rely on the family and the local community. However, these informal protection mechanisms have been under increasing stress recently, owing to the process of population ageing itself but also, in some contexts, to a growing participation of women in the labour force and to changing perceptions about caring for parents and older persons in general. Developed countries may need to expand the supply of formal long-term care for older persons, including institutional living, as well as to develop alternative services to allow older persons to age in their homes if they so desire.The Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing (united_nations, a) gives major attention to ensuring enabling and supportive environments as a key area of policy and programme action for the well-being of older people. This agenda is concerned not only with the importance of ensuring sustainable systems of formal and informal care, but also with the adequacy of living arrangements and housing; and the possibility for older persons to participate in the political, social, economic and cultural life of society. The growing number of older persons and the changes in living arrangements also increase the risk of abuse and neglect; indeed, abuse of older persons and age-based discrimination are problems signalled in many countries. To redress these negative trends, specific actions are needed. These should be embeddedas argued in the present chapterinto a broader perspective which more fully recognizes and better harnesses the contributions older persons can make to societies. Such measures should ensure greater economic participation and establish adequate mechanisms to guarantee the protection of their human rights and their political empowerment.This chapter analyses three areas that require better policy responses: the conditions of housing and living arrangements for older persons; their empowerment and political participation; and the legal framework and social awareness that ensure the protection of their human rights. A related concern is how to facilitate greater labour participation of older persons, which is addressed in chapter IV.Changing living arrangements and housing needsTrends of declining fertility and mortality rates, as described in chapter II, help to explain profound changes in the size and composition of the nuclear family associated to the decreasing importance of extended families in many parts of the world. Rapid migration from rural to urban areas, mainly as a result of industrialization processes, has been a contributing factor to the decreasing importance of the extended family. More recently, large flows of international miThe Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing provides the framework for harnessing the contributions of older persons to societyProfound changes in the size and composition of the nuclear family are taking place in many parts of the worldwess Smaller families and solitary living affect the welfare of older persons grants have further contributed to this trend. In addition, increasing educational attainment has been found to have an impact on fertility levels and on the composition of the family: families become more nuclear when the level of schooling rises (Oppong, ; Bongaarts and Zimmer, ; united_nations, b; chap. III).Other cultural and social factors, such as delayed marriage and an increase in singleness and divorce rates, also influence the size and structure of families. These reflect important changes in values and lifestyles in countries around the world. Age at first marriage has increased in all regions of the world during the last years (united_nations, ) and divorce rates increased significantly in most countries (see figure III.).The emancipation of women, including their more active participation in labour markets and increased control over reproductive behaviour through modern contraceptives, has been an important factor in the lowering of fertility rates. In developed countries, childlessness has become a widespread phenomenon. In the western part of Germany, for instance, one third of all men and women born after are expected to remain childless (Dorbritz and Schwarz, ).All these factors have generated rapid changes in the size and structure of families. Household size has fallen to an average of . persons in east_asia, . in South-east_asia, . in the Caribbean, . in Northern Africa and . in developed countries (united_nations, ). There has also been a shift from extended to nuclear families, including an increase in one-person households. These changes have important consequences for the welfare and living arrangements of older people.Figure III..Changes in divorce rates, selected countries, , and Number of divorces per marriagesEgypt MexicoVenezuela(Bolivarian Republic of )Republic Japan of KoreaAustria FranceNetherlands. .. .. .Older persons in a changing societyLiving arrangements and housing needsThe majority of older persons in all countries continue to live in their own homes and communities, a phenomenon that is sometimes referred to as ageing in place. In the developing world, the large majority of older persons continue to live in multigenerational households, most of them with their children and grandchildren, and some also with other adults. Only per cent of older people live with a spouse and a very small proportion ( per cent) live alone (figure III.). In the developed world, by contrast, the largest proportion of older people live with a spouse in a single-generation household ( per cent) and another per cent live alone. Older persons in developed countries are more likely to live in non-familial residential settings, but overall only a small proportion of older people in all countries live in centres of institutional care.Figure III..Living arrangements of older personsa in developed and developing regionsNonetheless, the large majority of older persons in the developing world continue to live in multigenerational householdsDeveloped regionsDeveloping regionsWith other relatives or non-relativesAlone With children/grandchildrenWith spouse onlyAlthough living arrangements for older persons vary greatly both among and within countries, in most countries there is a slow but increasing tendency towards solitary living. In developed countries, the proportion of older people living alone in varied from per cent in Spain to close to per cent in Denmark. In developing countries, that proportion was much smaller (united_nations, b, table II.). One out of seven or million older people live alone worldwide. This ratio has increased in the majority of regions and countries over the past decades (figure III.). While the average rate of change is rather modest, the trend is likely to continue and will have important social consequences, especially for women, who are more likely to live alone as, in general, they outlive their spouses. Solitary living may result in increasing isolation and makes caregiving by family members more difficult to arrange. It also increases households.Increased solitary living in the developed world enhances the need for additional supportwess Figure III..Proportion of older personsa living alone at two time points, by sex, averages for major areasPercentageMalesFemaless-s s-sNote: Based on the population in households. The first time point refers to the latest year in the s or s for which data were available. The second time point refers to the latest year in the s or s for which data were available.The rapid urbanization in the developing countries is also affecting the wellbeing of older persons the need to provide additional support services to enable older people to remain in their own homes (united_nations, b).Living arrangements for older persons in the developing worldIn the developing countries, the large majority of seniors live with their adult children. In Africa and Asia, on average, about three quarters of those aged years or over are living with their adult children. In latin_america and the Caribbean, the corresponding proportion is about two thirds (figure III.). The proportion of older persons living alone in developing countries is less than per cent. This share is declining in some countries, but in most of them it is slowly increasing. The exception is Ghana where the proportion of older people living alone has shown a remarkable increase, almost doubling, from to per cent in the period -(united_nations, b, table II.).Solitary living in developing countries is particularly problematic because of the generally limited social support programmes for older persons (united_nations, b). In addition, lack of funds and human resources restricts the availability of institutional care in developing countries, as discussed at greater length in chapter VI. In latin_america and the Caribbean region, for instance, only to per cent of older persons live in institutional care facilities (Pelaez, ).Growing urbanization of the population has been a major dimension of modernization in the developing world. Most developing countries have been experiencing a combination of population ageing and urbanization in a relatively short period of time. It is projected that by , the number of persons aged years or over in the developing countries will be nearly four times greater than it is today, and that the share of older persons residing in urban areas will riseAfrica Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanNorthern AmericaEuropeAfricalatin_america and theAsia CaribbeanNorthernAmerica Europe. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .Older persons in a changing society Figure III..Living arrangements of older personsa in Africa, Asia and latin_america and the CaribbeanAfrica% %Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanWith spouse onlyAlone With children/grandchildrenWith other relatives or non-relativesNote: Based on the population in households. a Aged years or over.from about million in to over million by (united_nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), ). The generally wide income disparities between rural and urban areas and the significant migration of younger members of the family to the city increase the probability that older persons in the countryside will become socially and economically vulnerable.Older persons who relocate from rural to urban areas tend to face different problems. In addition to economic difficulties and a lack of steady income (see chap. V), they often experience a loss of social networks and a lack of supporting infrastructure in cities. Without adequate transportation and opportunities to incorporate themselves in the urban environment, there is greater risk of their being isolated and marginalized, especially when frailty and/or disability restrict their mobility.Living arrangements for older persons in the developed worldIn developed countries, more than two thirds of older persons live either alone or with a spouse (see figure III. above). One third live with children/grandchildren or other persons. Although there is a lack of comprehensive statistics on the number of people living in institutional care centres, such as nursing homes and assisted living facilities, the available information does suggest that only a small share of the older population of developed countries live in facilities forwess In developed countries, alternative programmes to help older people remain in their own homes are emerging long-term care. Such care is typically reserved for frail older persons who have difficulty managing on their own, are disabled and/or are in need of specialized medical services. Institutionalized care was on the increase for several decades in Europe and Northern America, but the escalating cost of providing this type of long-term care combined with the preference of many older people for remaining in their own homes has slowed the growth of nursing homes and assisted living facilities in recent years. Instead, there has been a shift towards more homeand communitybased systems of care which have enabled older persons to stay at home. The staggering cost differential is a major consideration. In South Carolina, united_states of America, for example, a range of services that enable older persons to remain in their homes, including home-delivered meals, personal care, and adult day services, can be provided for about $ dollars per year. In contrast, the cost of maintaining someone in a nursing home ranges from $, to $, per year. Estimates of future public-health costs presented in chapter VI may be much higher if population ageing requires the expansion of institutionalized care.Alternative living and care arrangements for older people in developed countries are growing in importance. The ageing in place movement has had some influence on this trend by promoting policies and programmes designed to help older people remain in their own home largely through the support of community-based ambulant care. The variety of services available to older persons in their own homes include personal care, meals, housekeeping, home maintenance, care management, and treatment for health problems. Services in the community include day care, congregate meals, and social centres. Through their availability, these and other programmes enable a growing proportion of seniors to delay or even avoid institutional care.Sweden is an example of a country committed to providing extensive health and social services to older persons to enable them to live in their own homes. Services provided include personal care and assistance with basic tasks such as cleaning, shopping and meal preparation. These home-help services provided by the municipality are available to all Swedes aged years or over. In , per cent of older people received some form of home-based services (Sweden, Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, ).The Hammond community-care service, in Australia, is another example of an ageing-in-place programme that supports older people with dementia in their own homes. This care package includes support ranging from personal care and home help to medical assistance (Hammond Care Group, ). In the united_states, different types of planned retirement communities have emerged. These include naturally occurring retirement communities (NORCs) and continuing care retirement communities (CCRC) which feature different types of living arrangements that provide supportive services to community residents. The naturally occurring retirement communities, which have evolved over time as the residents of a community have grown older, provide a range of coordinated health care, social services and educational/recreational activities in neighbourhoods. In New York City, where the NORC movement began, local government and philanthropic organizations provided start-up funding (Vladeck, ).Older persons in a changing societyHousing conditions and assistive technologyIn developing countries, housing conditions for older people tend to vary significantly depending on their level of income. Tables III. and III. contain statistics on the conditions of housing in Latin American countries. For the most part, older persons are less likely to be tenants, as well as less likely to live in poor areas (that is to say, in shanty towns). Only in Haiti is the proportion of older people who reside in poor areas significantly larger than that of the adult population aged -. In many Latin American countries, older persons are more likely than those in other age groups to live in dwellings constructed using low-quality materials. Such is the case for Bolivia, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.Older persons tend to have less access to the supply of drinking water in the home in countries like Bolivia, Paraguay and Chile, but are in a better position in Nicaragua, Colombia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Older people are also more likely to live in dwellings without hygienic restrooms in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras and the Dominican Republic. In respect of sewerage deprivation, the elderly are in a worse situation in Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras and Mexico.Interviews of older persons in Egypt, as contained in a report of the united_nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) (), revealed poor living conditions for older persons. Systematic evidence comparing the living conditions of older adults with those of other age groups is lacking, but older persons who were interviewed in different neighbourhoods of Cairo were living in overcrowded housing, lacked proper ventilation, and had poor sanitary conditionsTable III..Conditions of housing in latin_america by age groupOlder persons are still deprived of adequate housing and access to water and sanitation in many developing countriesPercentage that are housing ownersPercentage with dwellings in poor areasPercentage with dwellings of low-quality materialsAll (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)All (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)All (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)BoliviaBrazilChileColombiaCosta RicaDominican RepublicEcuador................El SalvadorGuatemala........HaitiHondurasMexico........NicaraguaParaguayPeruUruguay........Venezuela(Bolivarian Republic of )Table III..Access to provision of basic housing services in latin_america by age groupPercentageWaterHygienic restroomsSewerageAll (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)All (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)All (i)+ (ii)-(iii)-(iv)BoliviaBrazilChileColombiaCosta RicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEl SalvadorGuatemalaHaiti........HondurasMexicoNicaraguaParaguayPeruUruguayVenezuela(Bolivarian Republic of )with inadequate water and waste disposal networks. There were deficiencies in the system of garbage collection and disposal. Most dwellings did have indoor piped water and private baths; however, one third of those interviewed reported having to use group latrines, and a few had only outdoor showers.The welfare of older people and their ability to continue their pattern of independent living in their own homes can be supported not only by the provision of basic services within the household but also by changes in housing design and assistive technology. Assistive technology, which is a generic term that includes assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices, promotes the greater independence of older persons and people with disabilities by enabling them to perform tasks that they formerly were unable to accomplish or had great difficulty accomplishing.Important considerations in the provision of housing for older people include accessibility and safety. In Japan, the Construction Ministry has recommended design guidelines for housing to help prepare for a rapidly ageing society (Novelli, ). In other countries, more emphasis is being placed on remodelling houses to better meet the needs of older people. A coalition of service providers in Maryland (united_states) started a programme known as Howard County Rebuilding Together, which provides home modification support (Horizon Foundation, ). Seniors can obtain, as part of a larger ageing-in-place initiative, an assessment of their home, and repairs and remodelling can be provided, if necessary, to make the building safer and more accessible.Older persons in a changing societyThere has been a development of assistive technology in both academia and industry in recent years. The relevance of modern information and communication technologies (ICT) and of smart home technologies for living arrangements has increased in the past few years (Meyer and Mollenkopf, ). These projects have focused, for the most part, on developing assistive technologies to enhance older persons functional abilities and adaptive technologies to increase access to information and communication. Such technologies include eldercare robots, elder-centred websites, communication devices and intelligent devices to assist with walking and eating (Hirsch and others, ). In Italy, the National Programme for Housing recently funded initiatives that included neighbourhood agreements whereby some city councils would promote housing renovation plans supported by new technology (Novelli, ).The introduction of programmes to assist housing design and assistive technology in meeting the special needs of older people is still limited to a few cities, mainly in developed countries. In , the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), with support from the Government of Japan, initiated a programme to promote barrier-free environments in the developing countries of Asia and the Pacific. Specifically, ESCAP issued guidelines for architects, urban planners and engineers on designing barrier-free physical environments and it is supporting pilot projects in Bangkok, Beijing and New Delhi. These three cities have become demonstration sites in the developing world for the promotion of barrier-free environments for persons with disabilities and older persons. China, India and Thailand have produced their own technical guidelines on facilitating better housing design. The introduction of these innovations is very recent and it is still not clear whether this kind of technology can be provided at an affordable cost to a growing population of older people in developing countries.Implications for care and intergenerational supportThe changes in family structures have had a significant effect on patterns of intergenerational provision of care and reciprocity. Co-residence of older and younger family members used to be the central component of lifelong reciprocity arrangements in which adult children provided care for their aged parents in exchange for parental support at earlier stages of their lives. However, changing family structures combined with population ageing have presented formidable challenges to the provision of care across generations. This phenomenon, while evident in all countries, is particularly so in the few developing countries that have experienced demographic ageing in addition to modernization in a comparatively short period of time. Obstacles to family support have increased while formal support systems remain limited (Cowgill, ; united_nations, b).As the proportion of women in the formal labour market increases, adult daughters, who constitute the largest group of personal caregivers for older persons, are more often balancing work and caregiving responsibilities. Stepfamilies resulting from divorce and remarriage create complicated intergenerational relationships. In this context, the developed world is experiencing a growth in the number of older people with fewer adult children available to provide care.The precise implications of these changes in family composition for living arrangements and support mechanisms depend on the context. In countries where most older people do not have access to formal mechanisms of social security, older persons rely on informal support mechanisms such as the family and the community; but these informal protection mechanisms have been under increasing stress recently, owing largely to the acceleration of demographicAssistive technology and better housing design promote greater independence of older persons but it can be costlyChanging family structures and ageing of the population have resulted in formidable challenges to the provision of care across generationswess Migration leads to a reduction in the support that older persons receive from their children transitions, higher economic risks for families, and shifts in paradigms of filial support and reciprocity (Aboderin, ; Gomes da Conceicao and Montes de Oca Zavala, ). Economic insecurity has put pressure on young and able family members to increase their participation in wage-earning activities outside the home including through migration (to domestic and international destinations). Employment opportunities situated away from the current residence of younger workers may have negative implications for the instrumental support that older persons traditionally received from children; that is to say, support in the form of preparing meals, and doing laundry, housework, shopping and so on.At present, not all countries or areas are undergoing major social change. A study by Hermalin () did not find significant shifts in living arrangements of older persons in the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand. At least two thirds of the cases studied still live with their children. In Thailand, an increase in the proportion of children living nearby seems to have compensated for a modest reduction in co-residence. Major changes, however, are likely to occur in the future. Surveys of women aged -in Taiwan Province of China indicate that the proportion of those expecting to co-reside with a married son during their old age had declined from per cent in to per cent in . Likewise, in focus group discussions, adult children in Thailand foresaw that as older persons, the care they received from their children would probably be less than the support they were currently providing to their parents.Changes in the living arrangements of older people have considerable policy implications in both developing and developed countries. Many developing countries are still facing the challenge of providing basic infrastructure and social services to older people in a context where the lack of adequate formal public and private support programmes increases the vulnerability of older adults. Thus, the expansion of basic services and infrastructure will have to be completed along with the introduction of new forms of informal and more formal care provision. In developed countries, institutional care is more readily available, but larger investment will probably have to be directed towards expanding the number of long-term care facilities required to accommodate the increasing demand for those services expected in the near future (see chap. VI). An additional challenge in the context of a rapidly ageing population in developed countries is the provision of alternative, that is to say, non-institutionalized, support services to allow seniors to remain in their own homes as long as possible.At this point, it remains unclear what shape the social and institutional arrangements for providing care for older persons will take in the future. Meeting the needs of older persons and ensuring respect for their human rights will require the implementation of a variety of programmes and living arrangements offering a continuum of care, with complementary roles being played by the family, the community and the public sector.Social, cultural and family contributions of older personsOlder persons have traditionally been active contributors to the social and cultural development of their societies. Certain cultures, most especially the indigenous communities, have long recognized the valuable contributions that their elders make in perpetuating and enriching the social and cultural dimensions of their societies. Ancient cultural norms, beliefs and customs are often kept alive through an informal system of intergenerational transmission, adapted to the local culture and environment. Traditional knowledge is typically passed on orally, and takes theThe family, the community, and the public sector should play complementary roles in providing a continuum of care to older personsOlder persons in a changing society form of stories, songs, artistic impressions, cultural events, rituals, languages and agricultural practices (united_nations, c). When written accounts are scarce, older persons are often the only source of the information needed to maintain the historical record of local communities. For example, the tragic events that took place in Cambodia in the last half-century have been captured in an oral history project that recounts the experiences of older Cambodians during those turbulent times (united_nations, a; HelpAge International, ).Other societies have been less receptive to, and respectful of, the contributions of their oldest members. Older persons in Eastern and Central Europe, for example, are often viewed as contributing to the difficulties the region currently confronts, as they are associated with the old political regimes (HelpAge International, ). In a few countries, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova and Romania, civil society organizations are helping to counter negative perceptions of older people by creating social clubs offering them opportunities to engage in the volunteer activities of groups for mutual support and assistance to marginalized people.Grandparenting: contribution to intergenerational cohesion in the familyAs the population ages, more attention should be paid to strengthening solidarity between generations, as called for in the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. Often, younger and older generations are at odds, with each group competing for government resources and policy attention. Greater effort should be made to highlight the synergies and interdependence of, rather than the differences between, the generations.With the changes in family structures, the notion of grandparenting has taken on new dimensions. Older persons play an important role within the family in most countries. When both parents are active in the labour market or when they migrate, older persons (mainly women) act as primary caregivers for children and other family members. The U.S. Census Bureau () reports that per cent of preschoolers are primarily cared for by their grandparents while their parents are working, and in children lives in households headed by grandparents. Hermalin () indicates that the current levels of childcare provided by grandparents to co-resident and non-co-resident grandchildren are significant sources of support (both material and otherwise) in the Philippines, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand. Among poor multigenerational families, older persons often make an important contribution to family income through part-time employment. In Brazil and South Africa, for instance, earnings from the pensions and work of older persons are important sources of income for those households (LloydSherlock, b; see also chap. V).In countries with a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, especially those in sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia and the Caribbean, the role of older women as primary caregivers for children is gaining in importance. In sub-Saharan Africa, per cent of households are headed by a person over age and two thirds of these have at least one child under age . Many other factors, including violence, incarceration and substance abuse, that are responsible for parental absence from the home, also leave the older generation with major responsibilities for childcare.Greater involvement of grandparents in childcare and other family responsibilities results in important contributions to the well-being of extended families. Care should be taken, though, that this involvement is not detrimental to the welfare of older adults themselves. Drawing grandparents into assuming greater family responsibilities at the expense of their own health may generate an additional burden for older persons. When older persons must care for children in the absence of younger adultsin what are frequently referred to as skipped-generaOlder adults often contribute to the income of the extended family and provide care for family membersIn parts of the developing world, older women are increasingly becoming the primary caregivers for childrenIn high-income countries, older people carry important economic weight and wield significant political influenceIn developing countries, poverty, poor health and absence of influence become accentuated as a person ages tion householdsan additional burden may be imposed on them, in terms of claims on their income, with a consequent deterioration of their living conditions. A close assessment of each particular situation would contribute to the design of sensible policy responses to the challenge of promoting intergenerational cohesion and protecting the welfare of older people.Participation of older persons in societyAs older persons constitute an ever-increasing proportion of the total population, they have the potential to become more influential politically, economically and socially. Fulfilling this potential would be in line with the objectives of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, which are to ensure that people can age with security and dignity and continue to participate fully in their societies as citizens with full rights. Older persons should be afforded the possibility of becoming more actively engaged in the development process so that their skills, experiences, wisdom and knowledge can be put to use in society for the benefit of all.In most countries, the position of older persons in society and the opportunities available to them for remaining active participants in the life of the community are often associated with their economic and political power. A growing cohort of older persons, particularly those in high-income developed countries, carry substantial weight in the economy and often hold a significant share of wealth. As there is usually a close correlation between economic and political power, older persons who are seen as exercising considerable power in the marketplace will likely translate this power into significant political power and participation. In Germany, for example, those over age own half of the nations wealth and have the spending capacity of billion euros per year (European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, a; world_bank, a). Many businesses are responding to the growth of this consumer market by designing products and services especially targeted at older age groups. The emergence of new markets is expanding the job growth potential of the silver economy through the creation of new products, services, economic cooperation and networks geared towards older persons.At the other end of the spectrum, the factors that contribute to a persons vulnerability, namely, poverty, poor health, lack of education, disabilities and absence of influence, become accentuated as a person ages. These factors combine to limit and constrain older persons ability to participate fully in their communities. For example, low educational levels and illiteracy are major barriers to social and political participation. In , per cent of persons aged years or over in Malta and per cent of those in the same age group in Portugal were illiterate. While these illiteracy rates may be atypical in most developed countries, they do indicate that illiteracy remains a concern for older persons even in high-income countries (united_nations, b).Although illiteracy rates have been declining over the past years in all regions of the world, they remain generally high in developing countries. Illiteracy rates among those aged years or over in the developing countries dropped from to per cent in the period from to , and they are expected to continue to fall, reaching per cent by . Yet, major imbalances in literacy achievement across countries remain. Illiteracy rates still exceed per cent in some of the least developed countries in Africa, while they have fallen to below per cent for older persons in countries like Argentina, Tajikistan and Uruguay.However, as most of the declines in illiteracy have taken place among males, there has been a consequent increase in the literacy gender gap. In , there was a percentage point difference in literacy rates between women and men over age . By , this difference had increased to percentage points. In the Economic and Social Commission for WesternOlder persons in a changing societyAsia (ESCWA) region, for example, the illiteracy rate is high among older women because they were not exposed to educational opportunities at a time when tradition was more in control of their lives, leading to their seclusion, hence denying them the right to education (El-Safty, , p. ).These figures on illiteracy underscore the difficulties that older segments of the population, particularly in developing countries, confront in respect of accessing and processing information that is directly relevant to them. Illiterate older persons are frequently unaware of their rights and the benefits to which they are entitled, including social security benefits. A survey in Thailand, for example, indicated that only per cent of those aged years or over were aware of the availability of social security for older persons, and that as few as per cent actually received those benefits (Cheng, Chan and Phillips, ). Education and literacy are important elements of the process of empowering older persons and expanding their opportunities to continue to contribute to society and to its development. Participation in social, economic, cultural, sporting, recreational and volunteer activities also contributes to increasing and sustaining the well-being of older persons and of the population at large.In recent years, most developing countries have made substantial progress in expanding the coverage of primary education and reducing the gender gap in educational attainment. It is therefore to be expected that this negative effect of lack of education on empowerment will be substantially reduced over the next years as the current generation of children is transformed into the older generation.Political participationThe voices of older persons can best be heard through their active political participation at the individual level (through voting in elections), at the group level (through participation in organizations of older persons) and at the government level (through the formation of advisory bodies of older persons). Demographic changes, by themselves, have captured the attention of policymakers with respect to issues that concern older people; at the same time, greater political involvement of older people has been an important factor in drawing attention to their needs.Voting powerOlder individuals have a greater propensity for exercising their democratic right to vote in many countries than those in other age groups. In Kazakhstan, for instance, older persons constitute an active electorate, with per cent of those aged years or over having voted in recent elections, compared with just over per cent of those aged -(united_nations Development Programme and the united_nations Population Fund, ). Similarly, older persons in the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland currently have the highest voting incidence in the population, well above that of younger age groups; during the parliamentary elections, for example, those aged years or over were twice as likely to vote as those aged -, with the voting rates of these two age groups being and per cent, respectively (International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, a).Similarly in the united_states, although voting rates of younger age groups have been falling over the past two decades, those for Americans aged years or over have held steady or increased slightly; in fact; older persons now constitute the most active part of the electorate (U.S. Census Bureau, ). There is no evidence, however, that older persons constitute a single, unified voting block: they are of different political persuasions and vote for a wide range ofEducation and literacy are important elements in the process of empowering older personsThe voices of older persons can be heard through their active political participationwess Organizations of older persons help to harness their political influence candidates. Yet they are becoming an influential force and one to be reckoned with regarding the issues and policies that most affect them, such as the current debates over social security reform and long-term care insurance. The expansion of the Medicare programme in to include prescription drug coverage represents one result of their growing political impact.Not all countries share the same tradition of the enjoyment by older people of high political participation and influence. Data from the first round of the presidential election in Liberia indicate that two groups had the lowest rate of voter turnout: older persons aged years or over and young people aged -(International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, b). In other countries, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, where older persons constitute only per cent of the population, compared with those under age who constitute per cent, relatively low priority is given to policies for older persons. They are also less likely to be sufficiently empowered to be able to draw attention to their concerns.Organizations of older personsOrganizations of older personsparticularly older women, who often remain voicelessprovide an important means of enabling participation through advocacy and promotion of multigenerational interactions. Furthermore, these groups can help to harness the political influence of older persons and ensure that they effectively participate in the debate and decision-making processes at all levels of government.There are several examples of successful and influential organizations of older persons, including AARP (formerly known as the American Association of Retired Persons) in the united_states, with its million members, and pensioners organizations in Sweden to which half of all older persons belong. Labour unions also provide older persons with an important means of representation, particularly in Europe where most retired workers remain active union members (Peterson, ). These organizations provide information, advocacy, resources, activities and support to older persons, and exert considerable influence in economic and social policymaking.HelpAge International is a prominent global network of non-governmental organizations whose mission is to improve the lives of disadvantaged older persons. The network consists of affiliate organizations in some countries which are committed to supporting practical programmes, giving a voice to disempowered older persons, and influencing policy at the local, national and international levels (HelpAge International, a). Actions are directed towards encouraging Governments and communities to recognize the needs, values and rights of disadvantaged older persons, and to encompass them in their programmes. In recent years, HelpAge International has been particularly influential in advocating for social pension plans to assist impoverished older persons in sub-Saharan Africa.There are also a number of prominent international non-governmental organizations that represent the interests of older persons. These include the International Federation on Ageing (IFA), the International Federation of Senior Citizens Associations (FIAPA) and the European Federation of Older Persons (EURAG). Through their various activities, these organizations aim to improve the quality of life of older persons by influencing policies, engaging in grass-roots activities and strengthening public-private partnerships. In addition, they also work to improve the image of older persons by challenging the prevailing stereotypes about ageing,Older persons in a changing society accentuating the contributions that older people make to society so as to counterbalance the emphasis on the economic challenges created by demographic ageing (Global Action in Aging, ). Another example is the International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics (IAGG), an international organization of researchers and professionals in the area of ageing. With its member organizations in countries, IAGG promotes the highest levels of achievement of gerontology research and training worldwide.Consultation and advisory committeesSeveral countries also provide for direct consultation and participation of older persons in the design and evaluation of government programmes. The most advanced in this respect have established government offices on ageing at the ministerial or similar level, such as the Department of Health and Ageing (Australia), the Division of Ageing and Seniors of the Public Health Agency (Canada), the National Committee on Ageing (China), the Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth (Germany) and the Administration on Ageing (united_states).A number of countries have established independent advisory bodies, composed of academics, representatives from the private sector and non-governmental organizations, to address ageing issues and the concerns of older persons. These advisory bodies, which are typically charged with the task of advising Governments on developing and implementing policies, can serve as watchdogs in the context of government policymaking. Advisory bodies can constitute an important mechanism through which to incorporate opinions and facilitate close and regular monitoring of policy implementation at the local or community level. They can also play a role in evaluating the impact of new programmes and improving their results.Advisory bodies currently exist in a variety of countries such as Austria, Chile, Guatemala, India and Mexico. Austria, for example, has established an independent council of senior citizens with rights and responsibilities similar to those of a chamber of commerce, which has become a major contributor to discussions on national policy on ageing. Chile has created a National Service for Older Persons which includes an advisory committee composed of representatives of older persons organizations, academia and institutions working with older persons. Guatemala has a National Council for Protection of the Aged which consults with civil society and organizations of older persons. In India, a National Council of Older Persons, whose membership comprises government representatives ( per cent), and academics and retired persons from rural and urban communities ( per cent), is accepted by the Government as a watchdog agency designed to monitor policy on ageing. In Mexico, the National Institute of Older Persons requires that senior citizens be included in advisory bodies concerned with relevant issues. A common feature of many of these advisory bodies is the independence they enjoy which enables them to play a role in monitoring the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action.A remaining challenge is to ensure that these advisory bodies become effective mechanisms of broad consultation and representation in respect of the various concerns that affect the welfare of older persons, while taking due account of major differences that may exist in the access to services and benefits by older people in urban and rural areas, based on income group, ethnicity and gender. This would be especially relevant in countries where inequality has traditionally excluded large groups of the population from participation in the political debate. In countries where older persons do not have formal mechanisms for participation in the policy debate, there is the double challenge of improving their opportunities to create organizations and increasing the policy space within the government needed to allow active participation in policy design and monitoring.Several countries that have established advisory groups designed to incorporate older persons in policy monitoringEnsuring broad consultation of older persons regardless of race, ethnicity, level of income or gender remains a challenge in countries with high inequalitywess Poverty, poor health and negative stereotypes preclude the active participation of older persons in societyEmpowering older members of societyThe International Federation on Ageing refers to the empowerment of older persons as the ability to make informed choices, exercise influence, make continuing contributions to society, and take advantage of services (Thursz, Nusberg and Prater, ). In this sense, empowerment is closely related to participation.There are several factors that preclude the more active participation of older persons in society including poverty, poor health, low educational levels, lack of transportation and access to services, negative stereotypes about ageing, and overt or subtle age discrimination (ibid.). The goals in empowering older persons are to overcome these numerous barriers, make optimal use of their potential societal contributions and enhance their life satisfaction.An important element in the empowerment process is the enforcement of legislative measures to guarantee the rights of older persons that are laid out in national constitutions and international human rights conventions. Recent examples include European Union Council Directive //EC of November establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation, which requires member States to enact legislation by the end of (article ) that would make age discrimination in employment and vocational training unlawful (see chap. IV). Additionally, some countries have adopted legislation to criminalize elder abuse and increase penalties for certain crimes perpetrated against older persons. Within the Latin American and Caribbean region, for example, some per cent of countries have legislation or policies protecting the rights of older persons, including measures on training and monitoring of abuse and neglect in institutions (Pelaez, ). Very often, however, there exist no mechanisms for enforcement.The first and most essential step in empowering older persons is to guarantee that the legal and justice systems that protect the human rights of citizens are effectively enforced so as to eliminate the risk of marginalization of, and abuse directed against, older persons in a variety of institutional, community and family settings. In some countries, culture and tradition may influence the extent to which older persons risk being discriminated against in mainstream social, economic, political and community life. In the most extreme cases, the denialor inadequate enforcementof the human rights of older persons can lead to neglect, abuse and violence.Fighting neglect, abuse and violence directed against older personsAbuse and neglect directed against older people are by no means new developments. Scattered evidence suggests that abusive behaviour has been present from ancient times, both within the household and in the society at large. In recent decades, ageing of the population and greater awareness of the need to ensure the welfare of older people have drawn attention to these issues. Although it is generally recognized that abuse, neglect and violence directed against older persons is a serious problem, there has been less attention given to developing the means to assess the extent of the problem in different countries and its evolution over time.At least three methodological hurdles may explain the absence of systematic data on abuse directed against older persons. The first hurdle concerns the definition of old age itself: several countries use different age benchmarks to identify someone as old. In most countries, old age is related to the age of retirement, which varies by country; in some others, the perception of old age is associated with physical decline and inability to meet family and/or work responsibilities (see chap. I). The second difficulty lies in the definition of abuse. The International NetworkEffective enforcement of the legal system to protect the human rights of citizens is essential to empowering older personsAbuse, neglect and violence directed against older persons are recognized as serious problemsSystemic data on abuse directed against older persons are lacking owing to disagreements about how to define old age and abuseOlder persons in a changing society for the Prevention of Elder Abuse suggests that elder abuse is a single or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust, which causes harm or distress to an older person and proposes several categories of abusive behaviour: physical abuse; psychological or emotional abuse; financial or material abuse; sexual abuse; and neglect (see World Health Organization, a, pp. -). The third problem is the lack of precise indicators to measure each one of the dimensions of abuse, as defined above, and the absence of reporting mechanisms to facilitate the capture and processing of the information needed to document abusive behaviour properly. Additional complications in respect of the measurement of abuse are related to cultural differences among countries and even within the same country. Overburdening older persons with family responsibilities may be perceived as elder abuse in some cultures, and as part of tradition in others.The lack of systematic evidence does not mean, however, that problems of abuse cannot be identified. Different instruments used to assess the problem suggest that abusive behaviour directed against older persons is prevalent among their family members, the community and the providers of services. On the other hand, it is difficult to come up with precise estimates of the magnitude of the problem and its evolution over time when there is a lack of information.Special surveys on domestic abuse were conducted in Canada, Finland, the Netherlands, the united_states and the united_kingdom. The evidence, combining all forms of abuse physical, psychological, and financial abuse plus cases of negligencesuggests that between and per cent of older persons living at home have experienced some form of abuse in these countries (World Health Organization, a).Across a broader range of studies, such prevalence rates tend to vary quite substantially, however, owing partly to the lack of a common definition of what constitutes abuse, as discussed above. A national survey found that per cent of older Canadians had experienced physical abuse, psychological abuse, neglect or financial abuse after having reached age (Podnieks, ). National surveys conducted through telephone interviews in Denmark and Sweden revealed a prevalence rate of per cent using a broad definition of elder abuse, with theft being the most common form (Tornstam, ). In the united_kingdom, per cent of older people were found to have experienced verbal abuse, per cent physical abuse and per cent neglect (Ogg, ). Research suggests prevalence rates of . per cent for Australia (Boldy and others, ), . per cent for Costa Rica (Direccion General de Estadistica y Censos, ), . per cent for Finland  and . per cent for the Republic of Korea (Cho, Kim and Kim, ). However, given the differences in the approaches, periods of reference and definitions used in these studies, it is impossible to make comparisons and draw conclusions on the scope of elder abuse.Older people living in long-term care facilities are also subject to abuse and negligence. Government reports and personal histories provide some order of magnitude of the degree of exposure to abusive behaviour at the small local level. Unfortunately, there are no data at the national level on the incidence of abuse in residential/institutional long-term care facilities and its evolution over time. However, the figures on abuse in institutional settings that do exist are staggering. WHO (a, p. ) cites data derived from a nursing home in one State in the united_states where per cent of the staff had witnessed at least one incident of physical abuse inflicted by a staff member in the preceding year, per cent admitted having committedPrevalence rates of elderly abuse vary across countrieswess Implementation of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing should include actions to generate consistent data on abuse directed against older people at least one act of physical abuse and per cent admitted having committed at least one act of psychological abuse. In a survey of a small sample of nursing-home staff in Germany, per cent acknowledged having abused or neglected a resident at least once during the prior two months and per cent having witnessed comparable actions by other staff, with neglect and psychological abuse the most common forms of abuse (Goergen, ).The lack of reliable data is a serious constraint on implementing adequate responses to a problem that appears to be larger than generally recognized. Implementation of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing with a view to protecting the human rights of older people should include specific actions aimed at providing the methodological framework for the generation of consistent data needed to assess the extent of abusive practices against older people, monitor trends over time and facilitate comparisons across countries. Such efforts would have to include actions to overcome the three hurdles that restrict the development of reliable statistics, namely, (a) the lack of a unifying definition of old age, (b) the lack of a common definition and taxonomy of abuse and (c) the need to develop instruments to facilitate measurement and report cases of abusive behaviour directed against older people.Risk factors for elder abuse and response mechanismsThere are a number of risk factors, including lack of resources, poor training and job-related stress in institutional facilities, negative stereotypes in society, and poverty and disruptive social behaviour, that contribute to generating the conditions leading to elder abuse and negligence within the family, institutions and the community. New approaches to the study of abuse include an understanding of the various levels at which the individual interactspersonal, community and societaland the triggering factors present at each level (World Health Organization, a). In all cases, it has been found that social isolation exacerbates the risk of abuse and mistreatment (Phillips, ; Grafstrom, Nordberg and Winblad, ; Compton, Flanagan and Gregg, ).Research has determined that domestic abuse directed against older people is more likely to occur in the presence of the following risk factors: alcohol and substance abuse and mental disorders (as they relate either to the older person or to the caregiver), physical impairment, economic dependency, overcrowding in the household, stress and lack of time to care for the elder, among others (World Health Organization, a; Wolf, Godkin and Pillemer, ; Anetzberger, ; and Paveza and others, ). However, these risk factors by themselves are not sufficient to explain cases of abusive behaviour. The dynamics of domestic abuse and the factors that trigger abusive behaviour have not been clearly identified. Better reporting systems are required to improve understanding of the causes and such understanding will lead to better policy responses.In residential settings, abuse occurs most often when there are poorly trained and/or overworked staff and standards of care are low or inadequately monitored. The staggering evidence of abuse in institutional settings presented above requires urgent consideration and a better understanding of risk factors. At the community level, overall social tension, high incidence of poverty, crime and social disruption, and the erosion of intergenerational bonds are factors behind the high incidence of abusive behaviour in general as well as that directed against older people.Abusive behaviour in long-term care facilities often occurs when staff are poorly trained and standards of care are poorly monitoredOlder persons in a changing societyCountries have been combating elder abuse and neglect in different ways. Some (for example, Argentina, Canada, Sweden, Turkey, the united_kingdom and the united_states) have included coverage of abuse of the elderly under their legal statutes and have created systems for reporting and treating cases of abuse; but many others do not have specific programmes designed to protect older persons from abuse (Podnieks, Anetzberger and Teaster, ).Non-governmental organizations dedicated to improving recognition of, and response to, elder abuse have emerged throughout the world, including the International Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, with representation in all six regions of the world. There are several national organizations, including the Japan Academy for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, the Canadian Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse and the Korean Information Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse. Local networks at the State and community levels have also been identified in the united_states.While the existence of national legislation and programmes established to respond to cases of abuse and neglect have contributed to protecting the elders concerned, effective mechanisms for preventing such cases and for providing adequate responses to them, require a comprehensive approach at three levels, encompassing (a) the creation of a monitoring system that would give people a window of access to reliable information and effective mechanisms for denouncing cases of abuse and neglect and would also help to make the problem visible to the society; (b) the strengthening of the judiciary system to enable effective enforcement of the national legislation on human rights and appropriate punishment to be meted out to perpetrators; and (c) the development of national training and education initiatives to raise awareness of the problem, to create more positive images of older people and to build adequate skills among the individuals who are taking care of older persons.These initiatives for the prevention of abuse should obviously be complemented by the provision of adequate services to abused, neglected or exploited older people. In most countries, these services are generally provided through existing health and social service networks and may include medical, psychological and financial services, as well as emergency shelters and support groups for victims of elder abuse and neglect.Advancing the human rights of older personsGuaranteeing and protecting their human rights as defined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (General Assembly resolution A (III)) constitute an important means of reducing the risk of abuse of older persons and of empowering them. The human rights approach also underlies the principles of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing. In fact, already in , the united_nations had taken a major step forward in advancing the rights of older persons when the World Assembly on Ageing adopted the Vienna International Plan of Action on Ageing (united_nations, ), which detailed the measures that should be taken by Member States to safeguard the rights of older persons within the context of the rights proclaimed by the International Covenants on Human Rights (General Assembly resolution A(XXI), annex). This was followed in by the adoption by the General Assembly of the united_nations Principles for Older Persons (resolution / of December , annex). These principles continue to constitute the most important international document promoting the rights of older persons in the five areas of independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment and dignity.Preventing abuse requires the creation of a monitoring system, the strengthening of the judiciary and the improvement of trainingwess Societies need to prevent age discrimination in labour markets, ensure intergenerational solidarity, and mobilize resources to provide health and long-term careThe Second World Assembly on Ageing anchored the human rights approach in the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing in . The aim of the Madrid Plan of Action is to ensure that persons everywhere are able to age with security and dignity and to continue to participate in their societies as citizens with full rights (para. ). The Madrid Plan of Action also states that the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, is essential for the creation of an inclusive society for all ages in which older persons participate fully and without discrimination and on the basis of equality (para. ).Important policy challenges remain in many societies in respect of finding effective mechanisms to ensure that principles of reciprocity, interdependence and equity between the generations apply in practice. Complementary legislation may be needed in some countries to improve the legal framework so as to protect the rights of older persons, prevent their abuse and neglect, and bolster their opportunities for participating in all aspects of social life. A better legal framework will not suffice, however. In addition, societies will need to find adequate mechanisms for preventing age discrimination in labour markets, ensuring intergenerational solidarity through adequate old-age income security systems, and mobilizing the resources needed to provide adequate health and long-term care.Improving images of older personsVery often the real contribution of older persons to society is obscured by negative stereotypes focusing on the potential problems of population ageing through the projection of images of older people portraying them as a liability to society and a drain on government and family resources. Negative images of older persons may trigger episodes of discrimination and abuse. A more balanced view of ageingone that gives attention to the authority, wisdom, dignity and restraint that comes with a lifetime of experienceis needed both to increase the self-esteem of older persons and to improve their contribution to development.The most serious repercussion of stereotyping for older persons is their exclusion from activities and/or social groups. Acceptance of stereotypes by older persons themselves could result in their not seeking help for medical conditions or their not claiming welfare benefits (because ageing stereotypically is equated with poverty) or even in their withdrawing from social relationships, thereby accepting the stigma of isolation and passivity (Victor, ).The sources of stereotypes can be both societal and individual. In societies, stereotypes arise for the most part owing to the lack of adequate information. Individuals may fear growing old because they anticipate stereotypic declines in memory and mobility and onset of stereotypic age-related diseases (International Longevity Center-USA, ). Exaggerated fears of deterioration, dementia and dependency are indeed powerful and can prevent people from planning for the later stages of their life.Negative images of growing old may also have a negative impact on self-perception, a factor that has been found to be vital to the well-being of older people. People with a positive image of themselves had lower blood pressure and cholesterol levels and maintained a healthy weight. A longitudinal study of self-perception of older men and women found that respondents in the more positive self-perception group lived, on average, . years longer than those in the more negative self-perception group (Levy and others, ).A creation of a new image of ageing as envisioned in the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing will take time. Specific actions have to focus on promoting inter-generational cohesion and interdependence. An increasing number of programmes and campaigns have been launched by both government and non-governmental organizations to counter negaPositive images of older people have an impact on their self-perceptions and contribute to the improvement of their well-beingOlder persons in a changing society tive stereotypes of older people and promote more positive images of ageing. For instance, the Office of Older Australians, a division of the Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing, has established a positive images gallery which portrays a selection of older Australians at work, in volunteer roles and in leisure-time activities (Office for an Ageing Australia, ). In the united_states, the Harvard School of Public Health and the MetLife Foundation have launched a national media campaign to Reinvent aging. This campaign uses news coverage, advertising and prime-time entertainment to promote healthy ageing and to reshape cultural attitudes towards the older years by demonstrating the active and productive role that older people play in society. Argentina launched the Vicente Lopez Parliament on Old Age and the campaign Old age, first to grow with the objective of providing a visual depiction of a healthy old age and thus helping to dispel prejudices directed against old persons (Global Action on Aging, a).An important focus of these various efforts is on showing that older persons constitute an often ignored resource and as such can make an important contribution to strengthening the socio-economic fabric of society. A more balanced perspective requires that the experiences of later life be seen not as one-dimensional, but rather as fluid, complex and heterogeneous (Lloyd-Sherlock, a). Overall, older persons possess higher accumulated stocks of human capabilities and experience, and their contribution to society should be recognized. Removing structural barriers, bringing an end to negative stereotypes and promoting more positive perceptions of older persons would play an important role in furthering improvements in their productive capacity and well-being.ConclusionsMost countries of the world are experiencing the rapid ageing of their population with its farreaching implications for the development of societies. The Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing expresses the international concern raised by the challenges of adjusting to an ageing world and of improving the quality of life of older persons and recognizing their contribution to social development.Changes in society simultaneously produced by industrialization, increasing participation of women in the labour force, decreasing family size, diminishing importance of extended families and increasing internal and international migration, among other factors, have important implications for the well-being of older people. These rapid changes are challenging traditional concepts of intergenerational solidarity as ensuring the provision of care and support to older persons; and better-integrated policy responses are therefore required to meet the needs of an ageing population, promote respect for their human rights and facilitate their continuing contribution to social development.This chapter has identified three areas that require better policy responses: improving the conditions of housing and living arrangements for the elderly; promoting empowerment and political participation of older people; and improving the legal framework and social awareness so as to protect their human rights.In developed countries, the rapid changes in the composition of the family which are leading to an increase in the number of older adults living alone or with their spouses have implications for the maintaining of intergenerational solidarity and family cohesion. The establishment and expansion of long-term care facilities have been the traditional response to the situation of older people who do not have family support and who need assistance in daily activities. Chapter VI will present cost estimates of future health costs, which would be muchImproving living arrangements, promoting empowerment, and improving social awareness so as to protect the human rights of older persons are major challenges for ageing societieswess Greater efforts are needed to embed the objectives of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing in national plans of action and to gain support from national and international stakeholders higher if long-term care were to expand at the rate required to accommodate the needs of rapidly ageing societies. An alternative to institutionalized long-term care that has been emerging in several countries demonstrates that it is possible, by combining resources from families, communities and the public sector, to provide support and assistance to older persons in their own homes without compromising their quality of life. A larger number of older persons will require assistance in order to be able to live alone in their own home; hence, explicit policy responses will be essential to replicating this kind of initiative in order that those needing support may be reached.In developing countries, new demands with respect to meeting the specific needs of an ageing population are in competition with the demand for the resources needed to extend the coverage of the most basic services and infrastructure. There are still a large number of older adults who lack access to appropriate water, sanitation and quality housing. Programmes to improve the living conditions of older persons will have to incorporate an explicit objective of equity to ensure that older people, regardless of their level of income or area of residence, have access to a minimum standard of living.Assistive technology and the redesigning of houses to facilitate the mobility of older persons constitute another area of development where public-private partnerships may prove effective. In developing countries, this objective carries the additional challenge of providing technical solutions at a cost that would make them affordable to those older adults who require assistance.Empowerment and political participation of older people vary greatly across countries. There are those where older people are better organized and have a tradition of political participation. In many other countries, however, older people are not organized and face great difficulty in voicing their concerns and incorporating their demands into the public debate and the policy agenda. International and national non-governmental organizations have been actively promoting the organization of the elderly as a mechanism for influencing the design and implementation of the policies that affect them. Efforts to organize older persons should be coupled with larger programmes of literacy and continuous education, including information about their human rights, as these are an important element of the process of empowerment.Building a supportive and enabling environment for older persons requires attention both to their human needs and rights and to their development through social participation. An important element of the contribution of older persons to development encompasses their participation in labour markets, an issue that will be discussed in chapter IV. This chapter has identified the policy challenges that remain to be met with respect to ensuring adequate living conditions for older people and protecting their human rights by enforcing legislation that bolsters those rights, provides safeguards against neglect, abuse and violence, and facilitates their participation in, and contribution to, society.Further recognition and respect should also be granted to older persons for their authority, wisdom and productivity and for their contributions to their local communities and to the society at large. Active social, economic and political participation and engagement of older persons can ensure a more vital, healthy and meaningful ageing process. Entering the older ages should be equated not with coming to the end of ones productive life, but rather with starting to take advantage of new possibilities and opportunities. The Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing lays out a framework for achieving these objectives, but in many countries much greater efforts are needed to embed these objectives in national plans of action on ageing and to gain the active support of national stakeholders and international donors for their effective implementation.Economic consequences of population ageingChapter IVEconomic consequences of population ageingIntroductionAgeing will affect the size and composition of the labour force and have important implications for economic growth and the participation of older persons in society. Countries with low and decreasing fertility ratesmostly the developed economies and economies in transition but also an increasing number of developing countrieswill face a slower increase or even a decline in the labour supply. A reduction in the number of workers may have negative implications for output growth and for securing the well-being of the population at large. Lower output growth implies that addressing the needs of a larger dependent older population will become a heavier task. Moreover, a gradual greying of the workforce is anticipated, as the share of older workers increases in the economically active population worldwide (see chap. II) and older workers undertake to handle a growing portion of the production of goods and services. This shift may impact on the way in which goods and services are produced and on the overall efficiency of the economy.A particular challenge for economies with declining fertility rates is therefore to sustain levels of material well-being while their labour forces are growing older and eventually shrink in size. This challenge poses a number of economic policy questions, not only about how to increase labour productivity, but also about what can be done to reverse declining trends in labour participation and adjust the retirement age.Meanwhile, countries where fertility rates are still high or above replacement level (mainly those in sub-Saharan Africa and South and Central Asia, but also developed economies such as the united_states of America and New Zealand) will continue to have an expanding labour supply, but over time will also have to deal with the implications of higher old-age dependency ratios. Developing countries confront additional challenges, such as the generation of much larger volumes of remunerative jobs.Population ageing will affect economic activity and growth performance through other channels besides the labour market. Economic growth bears a close relationship with consumption, investment and savings. Consumption patterns change with age. For instance, older people tend to spend a higher share of their incomes on housing and social services compared with younger population cohorts. Based on current consumption trends exhibited by persons aged years or over in developed countries, it is possible to anticipate, among other things, that the demand for health, long-term care, housing and energy expenditures will likely increase. Consumption patterns owing to population ageing, however, will change only very gradually over time. More importantly, other factors (especially income growth) tend to be more influential in determining the level and composition of consumption expenditures of old and young people alike. Labour earnings are a major component in an individuals income but tend to vary throughout the life cycle, often reaching a peak when that individual is in the prime working years of mid-life. If income declines with age, consumption levels may decline during older ages. Economic growth could then be negatively affected as an increasing share of consumers grow older.Ageing will affect the size of the labour force and will thus impact on economic growthAgeing will also affect consumption patterns ...wess ... and may be a factor in the generation of savings in the futureSimilarly, the capacity to save may diminish with age, which could impact on the generation of savings in the economy as a greater number of persons grow older. This may have implications for the level of global savings and availability of investment finance, particularly owing to the weight of the countries with ageing populations in the world economy. Again, ageing is but one factor influencing savings behaviour, making projections far into the future subject to considerable uncertainty. On the other hand, implications for financial markets may be more visible. Population ageing is already having an impact on financial markets as an increasing share of household savings flows into pension funds and other financial investment plans for retirement. Institutional investors can play an important role in the deepening of financial markets and in providing additional liquidity for long-term investment projects. At the same time, however, institutional investors largely operate outside of financial market regulation and supervision mechanisms that apply more generally to the banking system. If unchecked, the financial market operations of pension funds could thus be a source of financial instability and influence the effectiveness of monetary policies.Ageing, labour supply and productivity growthAsymmetries in labour supply growthAs shown in chapter II, the global labour force will continue to grow over the next years. Yet, relatively high levels of fertility in some parts of the world, accompanied by declining fertility in others, will generate asymmetries in labour-force growth across economies. Relatively strong labour-force growth will take place in low-income countries that are already experiencing significant labour surpluses, while limited gains (or even reductions) in the workforce are projected for most middleand high-income countries.Table IV. shows the absolute changes in the labour force that have taken place since and those projected through , by region. Adding to the analysis of chapter II, these projections take into consideration anticipated changes due to gender convergence in labourforce participation rates as well as the demographic composition at the country level.By , the global labour force will be about million workers larger than it was in , with the bulk of the increase taking place in the developing countries. For the developed countries as a group, the labour force will grow by less than million workers over this same period, owing in large part to increased participation by women. Projections by the International Labour Organization (ILO) indicate that the labour force in Europe, and most particularly in the russian_federation, will be smaller in than at present. Additionally, there will be a considerable slowdown in the growth of the labour force in east_asia (China, Japan and Singapore) owing largely to significant declines in fertility rate in the countries of this region, and in Southern Africa as a result of the AIDS pandemic (International Labour Office, a). In other subregions of Asia, the labour force will continue to grow, with the largest increases projected to take place in South-Central and Western Asia.In latin_america and the Caribbean and Northern America, the labour force will continue to grow during the period -, although at a slower pace. Relatively high albeit decliningfertility rates will support continued labour-force growth in latin_america throughout these two decades. Gradually, however, the rapid decline of fertility levels observedThe global labour force will continue to grow ...... but some countries will experience declines in their labour forceEconomic consequences of population ageing Table IV..Changes in the labour force, -and -, by region and sexRegionAbsolute change from to Absolute change from to Both sexesMenWomenBoth sexesMenWomenWorldDeveloped countriesa-.Less developed regionsbAfricaEastern AfricaCentral AfricaSouthern Africa-.Northern AfricaWestern Africalatin_america and the CaribbeanSouth AmericaCentral AmericacCaribbeanNorthern AmericadAsiaSouth-east_asiaSouth-Central AsiaeEast AsiafWestern AsiagEurope-.-.Eastern Europeh-.-.-.-.-.-.Northern EuropeSouthern Europei-.Western Europe-.OceaniajAustralia-New Zealandin the region during the past few years will cause labour-force growth to decelerate, especially in the decades beyond . In Northern America (Canada and the united_states), labour-force growth is supported mostly by international migration and higher labour-force participation rates. Meanwhile, the labour force will increase rather quickly in most countries of Africa (except for Southern Africa, as noted above) owing to the persistence of high levels of fertility in many countries of this region.wess Figure IV. provides information on labour-force growth at the country level. It shows the projected average annual growth in the period -compared with growth in the period -in countries. Most economies are clustered above the -degree line in the figure, thus indicating a deceleration in the rate of growth of the labour force. Economies experiencing acceleration are mainly the high-fertility economies located in Africa, Asia and latin_america.Figure IV..Labour-force growth, -and -PercentageJapanLabour-force deceleration -Brazil inaYemenunited_statesNigeriaYemen united_kingdomPakistanIndiaLabour-force acceleration -Germany BangladeshSomaliaTimor-Lesterussian_federationAfrica Asia Europe latin_america and the Caribbean Oceania Transition economies Western Asia Northern AmericaA slower labour-force growth may imply slower economic growth-.-. -.-. .Annual average growth -. .Policy interventions can offset the negative impact of declining labour forces on economic growthWhile an increasing labour force may imply a potential for accelerating growth, and thus improving the standard of living for all (see box IV.), a declining labour-force growth may have opposite effects and lead to slower output growth. For instance, it has been estimated that employment growth will account for almost half of output growth in the EU-until . After , the employment effect on growth becomes neutral, but it should turn negative after as the labour force shrinks (European Commission, ). A similar scenario is likely for such countries as Japan, where the labour force is expected to decline by approximately million by (International Labour Office, a). This is not to say that there will be no economic growth in this group of countries. Rather, employment will become a drag on growth unless the decline in the labour force can be sufficiently mitigated or labour productivity can be increased.Offsetting the slower labour-force growthThere is a series of policy options that can be employed to offset the anticipated decline in the labour force and its negative consequences. Migration, outsourcing, increases in fertility and enhanced labour-force participation by both women and older workers are often mentioned. Additionally, improvements in labour productivity can mitigate the negative impacts of slower labour-force growth on economic growth. There is, however, no single labour-market policy or. .Average annual growth -Economic consequences of population ageing The demographic transition: first and second dividends for the third age?Changes in the age structure of the population have the potential to affect the macroeconomy. During the second phase of the demographic transitionafter fertility has begun to decline but before the long-term increase in the size of the older population has startedthe proportion of people in the working ages rises relative to the dependent young and old population. If this relatively larger workforce is productively employed, a considerable boost to the growth rate of per capita income results. The potential for a surge in the income per capita is known as the first demographic dividend, and the period during which it occurs is referred to as thedemographic window of opportunity(see figure). This dividend results from changes in the ratio of the effective number of producers to the effective number of consumers, which is called the support ratio. Further population ageing will lead to additional declines in income per effective consumer as the support ratio declines.The demographic transition and the economic support ratio: the first years. . . . . . . .A higher support ratio can potentially be translated into higher output per capita, which implies that a greater share of national output can be diverted into investment without sacrificing consumption. If some of or the entire first dividend is invested in human and physical capital, a permanently higher economic growth can result. Additionally, depending on the choices made by individuals and the policies pursued by Governments, the first dividend may give rise to a second dividend that will persist well after the demographic window has closed.In theory, the prospects for a second demographic dividend are relatively promising (Lee and Mason, ). For several reasons, population ageing leads to an increase in the demand for wealth needed to maintain consumption levels at older ages. First, older people, having accumulated during their working years, hold more wealth on average than younger adults. An increase in the proportion of older people therefore causes an increase in wealth per capita in the population. Second, the anticipation of longer life leads individuals to save more and accumulate more wealth over their lifetimes, reinforcing this effect. Third, with lower fertility, individuals can allocate a larger share of their lifetime earnings to their own consumption, including in old age, again leading them to save more and accumulate more wealth over their working lives. For all these reasons, wealth per capita can potentially rise during the demographic transition.Demographic window Population ageingYears ().Box IV.Economic support ratiowess Box IV. (contd)This potential for increase in wealth per capita, and the rise in income and consumption that it generates, creates the possibility of a second demographic dividend. According to Lee and Mason, there is a possibility, in theory, that income per equivalent consumer could be permanently higher by -per cent owing to the second dividend. Yet, the second dividend will be realized only if some or all of the increased wealth generated by the first dividend is invested in assets and not merely transferred from one group to another. Different schemes for old-age income provision will have different implications for the promotion of growth and therefore for the income security of those who will be retiring (see chap. V).As in any other simulation exercise, the above estimate should be interpreted with caution owing to its sensitivity to implied assumptions about how consumption profiles, returns to assets and economic growth are likely to evolve. In this exercise, productivity is assumed to grow at a constant . per cent per year as a result of exogenous technological change. Another important assumption is that half of old-age consumption is funded through the accumulation of assets during working ages. This assumption may be unrealistic, especially for low-income countries, owing to the incipient development of financial markets in many of them. Finally, the accrual of the anticipated benefits due to the second dividend presupposes a risk-free rate of return of per cent and an optimistic per cent international real return on accumulated assets, which is expected to decline linearly to . per cent in .Policy responses should be tailored to the relative importance of the factors driving labour supply growth silver bullet that countries should focus on; rather, countries must take into consideration their own outlook for demographic change as well as their labour-market characteristics to determine a policy package that is suitable for their particular situation.The appendix to the present chapter presents a typology for countries and areas according to three main determinants of labour supply growth: fertility, immigration and labour participation rates. These determinants suggest a range of interventions that policymakers could consider to mitigate the projected declines in labour-force growth. For instance, in countries with a low fertility rate and high migratory flows, increasing migration may not be a feasible option. For such countries, for example, Austria, Germany and Spain, increasing participation rates of older workers may provide a way to offset the slowdown in labour-force growth. For others, such as Canada and Switzerland, where both migration and participation rates are already high, efforts perhaps need to be centred on increasing labour productivity.The scope for increasing fertility rates is limited as discussed in chapter II. Experience has shown that policies may influence the movement of fertility rates downward, but that reversing low-fertility trends through public intervention appears to be difficult. Other policy interventions may therefore be needed in the medium term, such as reducing unemployment, promoting labour productivity improvements and increasing overall labour-force participation. These options are analysed below.Can migration and offshoring compensate for a smaller labour force?There seems to be a potential for labour migration, drawing on the large existing pool of both skilled and unskilled workers in developing countries, to meet shortfalls in labour demand in ageing countries. Moreover, the constraints on production capacity caused by a smaller labour force could be offset in part by foreign direct investment (FDI) via the offshoring of production processes (Freeman, ).Economic consequences of population ageingIt is doubtful, however, whether international migration can sufficiently offset the projected increases in dependency ratios. As discussed in chapter II, very large net flows of migrants would be needed to keep the labour forces stable or to significantly affect trends in dependency ratios. For instance, as shown in table II., net migration inflows needed to offset the decline in working-age population in Europe have been estimated at . million migrants per year during -, which is almost triple the annual levels observed during the period -(about , persons). Large migration inflows such as those just mentioned may not be feasible for various reasons. Recipient countries may encounter political and social difficulties in integrating so many immigrants, while the sending countries may suffer an undesirable brain drain.The outsourcing of employment to offshore locations, through production facilities being brought to workers instead of workers being brought to the production facilities, is another option for dealing with the asymmetries in the global labour supply. As the spread of information and communication technologies (ICT) continues to ease the transferability of both manufacturing and service jobs to offshore locations, global production networks will continue to expand in developing economies with surplus labour. Moreover, with the continued improvement in the education and skills levels of their workforce, these labour-surplus economies will likely attract more offshore jobs, thereby bolstering their competitive wage positions. Estimates for the united_states, for instance, have indicated that in the industries that use ICT the most, approximately . million jobs are expected to move offshore by (Forrester Research, ). Meanwhile, half of the major companies in the united_states are currently engaged in some form of outsourcing and an additional number of companies are expected to follow suit in the coming years (Sperling, ).Notwithstanding the above, it is unlikely that offshoring will overcome all the challenges posed by rising dependency ratios and shrinking workforces in countries with ageing population. Although it does alleviate labour shortages by shifting production to workers abroad, offshoring does not offset existing pressures on domestic old-age pension systems brought about by the fact that the retired population is increasing while the contributory base is not expanding (see chap. V). At the same time, offshoring may also result in deteriorating trade balances and increased unemployment owing to cost competition in affected industries. These short(and medium-) term effects can be mitigated by wage and investment compensation mechanisms. For example, wage-cost savings from offshoring would spur increased firm investment and capital deepening in complementary domestic activities, leading to both higher productivity and high economic growth in the domestic economy (Mahoney and others, ; Mann, ). However, there is no conclusive evidence that such long-term benefits may indeed be reaped.Boosting female labour participationThe participation of women in the workforce varies considerably across regions. In most countries, increasing female labour participation has been one of the most significant drivers of structural change in the labour force over the past years. Yet, in spite of the impressive gains, female participation rates remain below those of men in every age group (see figure IV.). First, women continue to be disproportionately involved in unpaid housework and caregiving. Second, participation rates of women under age have been falling owing to higher educational opportunities for women, thus postponing their entry in the labour market (International Labour Office, ). Nonetheless, improved educational attainment has been credited with raising female labour-force participation (among women aged years or over): the participation rate for women with third-level education is higher than that for women who have completed highInternational migration is not likely to offset the impact of population ageing ...... nor is outsourcing of employment to other countriesFemale labour participation has increased ...wess Figure IV..World male and female labour-force participation rates by age group, Percentage of population aged -Male Female... but additional support is needed to help parents combine family and labour responsibilities---Age group--+school. Similarly, participation rates for women who have completed high school are higher than those for women with very limited educational attainment (Fitzgerald, ).Evidence from developed countries suggests that there is a trade-off for women between work and having children: increased participation of women in the workforce has been accompanied by delayed childbearing and declines in fertility rates (International Labour Office, b). Therefore the challenge for policy intervention is to pay due attention to the need for reconciling the conflicting demands of family and workplace that may arise from increasing female participation. In this regard, employment and social policies need to be directed towards reducing the opportunity costs for women of having children by allowing them to stay in the labour market and maintain their careers.Participation of older workers in the labour forceAnother policy option for offsetting the decline in labour supply is to increase the labour participation rates of older workers. Ideally, older persons should be able to continue working for as long as they wish and for as long as they are able to do so productively. To this end, new work arrangements and innovative workplace practices can be developed to sustain the working capacity and accommodate the needs of workers as they age. At the same time, it is important to combat damaging stereotypes concerning older persons by fostering a positive awareness of theirEconomic consequences of population ageing skills and abilities in the workplace (see chap. III). In particular, emphasis needs to be placed on increasing the participation rates of older workers so that the effective retirement age is brought more closely in line with the statutory retirement age (see chap. V). Additionally, those who have reached the statutory retirement age should be given the choice of continuing to participate in the paid labour force wherever practicable.The definition of older worker, like that of older person, is rather fluid (see chap. I). In general, however, those workers aged -are considered older workers. Labour participation rates of those aged -are significantly lower than those of persons in their prime working years of -(see table IV.) Among men, the decline is most pronounced in the economies in transition, represented by a fall of percentage points, and it is least apparent in Africa, where the drop is about percentage points.Table IV..Labour-force participation rates, , by region, sex and age groupPercentage of population of working ageAge groupRegionMenWomenMenWomenMenWomenDeveloped countriesEconomies in transitionAfricaAsialatin_america and the CaribbeanOceaniaWorldThe decline in labour-force participation rates is greater among women in all groups of countries. In particular, women in the economies in transition experience a precipitous fall in their labour-force participation upon entering the -age range, with average rates dropping from to per cent. In developed countries, as well as in developing Asia and latin_america and the Caribbean, women experience a decline of about percentage points in their labourforce participation rates after turning . This phenomenon in part reflects the fact that many countries still have lower retirement ages for women despite their relatively higher life expectancy (see chap. II).Several factors underlie the decline in participation rates for older workers. Poor working conditions, ill health or low job satisfaction may influence the decision to exit the labour force early. Individual preferences also have an impact. For instance, the preferred age of retirement for men in the EU-was found to be compared with the early retirement age of adopted in many countries (Howse, ).Institutional arrangements surrounding the organization of pensions systems are also an important factor (see chap. V). In the case of economies in transition, statutory retirement ages may be as low as for men and for women. In developed countries, particularly several Western European ones, workers often choose to withdraw from the labour force prior to the official retirement age (usually ), as financial incentives make the choice of work over leisure increasingly unattractive. The commonly used rule of in some developed countries, whichLabour-force participation declines among older workersThe possibility of early retirement underlies lower participation among older workerswess Negative perceptions about older workers are also a factor combines a persons age and his or her years of experience to determine the point of full pension entitlement, enables a worker to retire in his or her mid-s upon having completed years of continuous employment. In some instances, developed countries (Denmark and Germany are notable examples) also provide public pre-retirement benefits to bridge the gap in years between early withdrawal from the labour force and eligibility for a public pension (Howse, ).Cultural norms and discrimination against older workers are another factor. In fact, a growing body of research in developed countries (McKay and Middleton, ; Jensen, ) has indicated that age-based discriminatory practices, especially with regard to recruitment, retention and retraining of workers, have contributed to the decline in labour-force participation among workers of pre-retirement age (Leeson, ).Efforts are being made, howeverespecially in countries where older persons are politically engagedto combat these negative perceptions and encourage employers to hire older workers. A key initiative, for instance, is the European Union (EU) Directive establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation, including the prohibition of discrimination based on age (Council of the European Union, ). To this end, EU member States committed to enacting legislation by that would make age discrimination in employment and vocational training illegal. In the Asian and Pacific region, Australia, Japan, and New Zealand have established anti-age discrimination legislation to protect the employment rights of older people. The Republic of Korea has enacted affirmative action legislation to promote the participation of older persons in job markets, whereby businesses are required to ensure that at least per cent of their workers are aged years or over. In addition, its Aged Employment Promotion Law identifies types of jobs, ranging from parking lot attendant to bus ticket seller, for which hiring priority should be given to older persons (Cheng, Chan and Phillips, ).Removing disincentives to work and improving working conditionsIn addition to the legislation barring discrimination against older workers that has been introduced, there are initiatives to raise the labour participation rates of pre-retirement age workers (primarily those aged -) that focus on creating positive incentives for extending ones working life. These considerations, while applicable to all countries, are particularly relevant for developed countries and economies in transition. In developing countries, participation rates among older workers are relatively high (see table IV.), largely owing to the limited coverage by formal pension systems (see chap. V).One important measure that could be taken to encourage people to increase the number of their working years would entail improving working conditions and promoting the overall greater availability of satisfying and adequately paid work. Appropriate adjustments may be needed in the work environment to ensure that older workers have the skills, health and capacity to remain employed into their later years.Age-related changes in aerobic, cardiovascular and musculoskeletal function may result in decreased breathing capacity, reduced ability to carry out aerobically demanding tasks, and a decline in maximal muscle strength (Harper and Marcus, ). Data from the EU, for instance, suggest that the proportion of early departures from the labour force attributable to health problems is higher than that due to dismissal or redundancy (European Commission, ).Reducing the risk of injury among older workers in the later years of their working lives may entail making different job positions available to them that utilize their talents and experience without exposing them to harm. The ILO Human Resources Development RecomThe improvement of working conditions can help increase participation by older workersEconomic consequences of population ageing mendation adopted on June (International Labour Organization, ) suggests that measures be taken to develop work methods, tools and equipment that are adapted to the special requirements of older workers. Sometimes simple adjustments to the workstation or other ergonomic changes are sufficient to accommodate older workers (Benjamin and Wilson, ). For those who perform physical work, appropriate modifications may include the use of equipment for lifting, restrictions on the amount of lifting or on the number of physically demanding tasks, and additional rest breaks (Harper and Marcus, ). In sum, a shift in focustowards changing the job to accommodate the worker rather than changing the worker to accommodate the jobneeds to be implemented in order to curb the tendency towards early retirement among older workers.Finally, delaying the transition from work to retirement can be an important ingredient in active ageing as well. It enables older workers to remain engaged in a productive activity through which they retain social status and self-esteem and give structure to their day. If these benefits are not renewed upon exit from the labour force, older persons may find themselves in a situation that favours passive time use ... underutilizes remaining productive capabilities and fosters disengagement (Hinrichs and Aleksandrowicz, , p. ).Working beyond retirement ageThe imposition of a mandatory retirement age means that people must exit their remunerated jobs upon reaching a prescribed age, usually or . In many low-income developing countries, mandatory retirement affects only a small share of workers. Therefore, a distinction must be made between allowing people in developed countries to work for as long as they would like and offering older people in developing countries the option of retiring.Participation rates drop off considerably for workers around age , in line with the mandatory retirement age in several countries (see table IV.). Yet, there are substantial variations across regions and gender. In developed countries and in economies in transition, labour participation rates are about -per cent for men and -per cent for women. In Africa and in developing countries in Oceania, on the other hand, labour-force participation remains at relatively higher rates particularly for males over age . Among African low-income countries, for example, have labour-force participation rates above per cent for men aged years or over. In of these countries, the labour participation rates exceed per cent. The Congo, where labour participation among older persons reaches per cent, is a case in point. In addition to low pension coverage mentioned above, rampant poverty in the region leads to prolonged labour-force participation. By contrast, among the developed countries included in the analysis, only Iceland, Japan and Portugalmost likely owing to factors such as cultural norms rather than inadequate pension coveragehave participation rates in the per cent range for men aged years or over. Meanwhile, in of these countries, the labour participation rates are below per cent.In all, there is a clear inverse relation between levels of GDP per capita and participation rates of older persons (see figure IV.) which provides an indication of inequalities existing among older persons across countries. Not only are people in high-income countries more likely to live longer, healthier lives, but they also have the opportunity to retire from the labour force and enjoy many years of leisure, thanks to the security of pensions and health-care coverage. Wide disparities in social protection programmes reinforce existing labour-market inequalities, making the notion of working beyond retirement age an option (where allowed) for older workers in developed countries and a necessity for those in low-income countries.Labour participation drops considerably around age in countries with mandatory retirement and high pension coverageIn low-income countries, participation rates remain high among those aged years or overwess Labour-force particpation rate, Lifelong learning is beneficial to older persons and society ...India NepalUzbekistanRepublic of Korea Japan... but it requires explicit strategies targeted to older workersVanuatu BoliviaFigure IV..Relationship between labour-force participation rates of older workers aged years or over, , and GDP per capitaMalawiMozambiqueCentral African Republic ChadBurkina FasoEthiopiaPeru GabonLao Peoples Democratic RepublicPhilippines GuatemalaMalaysia BotswanaMexicoChileYemenTajikistanAzerbaijan EgyptBelarusLn PPP-adjusted GDP per capita, Access to knowledge, education and trainingLifelong learning is beneficial to both older persons and society: it facilitates the recruitment and retention of older persons in the labour market and also helps to enhance their participation in society in general. Recent studies, conducted in countries worldwide, have shown a strong correlation between added years of education and increased longevity and improved health in older ages (Lieras-Muney, ).The Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing (united_nations, a) makes explicit reference to the importance and value of lifelong learning. Specifically, it states that there should be equality of opportunity throughout life with respect to continuing education, training and retraining as well as vocational guidance and placement services. Furthermore, the Madrid Plan of Action stresses the need for fully utilizing the potential and expertise of persons of all ages, thus recognizing the benefits conferred by the increased experience that comes with age. This includes acknowledging and appreciating the value of intergenerational transmission of customs, knowledge and tradition.The European Employment Strategy also acknowledges that lifelong learning is an important precondition for a longer working life. Within the EU-, . per cent of all workers were participating in lifelong learning activities, with the rate slightly higher for women than for men (. compared with per cent). However, participation tends to drop according to age, largely because most countries have not adequately included the needs of older workers in their strategies for lifelong learning (European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, b). Additionally, policymakers fail to recognize the importance of investing in the education and skill development of people as they age. Throughout the Asian and Pacific region, for example, the concept of lifelong learning has taken hold in only a handful of countries, such as Australia, China, Japan and New Zealand, where the notion of a university of the thirdNorway IrelandLuxembourgEconomic consequences of population ageing age has gained wide acceptance (Leung, Lui and Chi, ; Purdi and Boulton-Lewis, ). The importance of providing effective and adequate vocational guidance and training for older workers has also been reflected in the above-mentioned ILO Human Resources Development Recommendation. The Recommendation acknowledges that training for particular groups of the population such as older workers can enhance equality in employment and improve integration into society and the economy. Nonetheless, opportunities for older workers to be engaged in training remain limited. In many contexts, employers seem to be unwilling to invest in the continued training and skills upgrading of workers nearing retirement age, given that the period within which they might reap a return on their investment would be limited (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a). In Europe, for instance, although access to training for workers increased from to , training opportunities provided by employers for older workers remained infrequent. According to a recent survey: (o)nly in of those aged and over report having received training paid for or provided by their employer in the previous months (compared to per cent of all workers). For other categories of training, such as on-the-job training, older workers also fare worse than their younger counterparts(European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, a, p. ). While there are some exceptions, a majority of older workers beyond retirement age find themselves in unskilled or semi-skilled occupations, owing largely to a perception that their skills are outdated and that they especially lack information technology skills (Chan, Phillips and Fong, ). In fact, older workers are less likely than younger workers to use new technologies, such as computers and the internet. Although this difference has been narrowing over the past decade, additional efforts are needed so that older persons and those currently in their middleage years can upgrade their skills and thus remain competitive in the labour market. Finally, it is important to recognize that older persons themselves can be resistant to training opportunities, especially if they have remained employed performing the same job in the same industry for many years. This may stem from a fear of having to learn something new. Men in particular tend to resist learning new skills. Programmes targeting older workers should take these concerns into consideration and develop measures and incentives that are adequate for addressing them.The potential impact of increased labour participation on economic growthHow would increasing the labour participation rate of older workers impact on labour-force size and on the growth of output per capita? A decomposition analysis was used to give an idea of the possible growth implication of increased labour participation of workers aged -. The analysis was applied to five economies that are in varying stages of the demographic transitionLifelong learning allows older persons to upgrade their skills and remain competitive in labour marketsIncreasing the labour-force participation of older workers can accelerate GDP growth ...wess and exhibit different characteristics in terms of older workers participation rates: fast-ageing Germany, Italy and Japan, and moderately ageing India and the united_states.For the simulations, it was assumed that the participation rates of those aged would converge to the rates of those aged -starting in . These results were then compared with those of a baseline scenario where participation rates did not change. (See figure IV.).Figure IV..Increased participation of older workers in the labour force: impact on the average annual rate of growth of GDP per capita, -, selected countriesPercentage increase in growth of GDP per capitaIncreased participationIncreased participation with adjusted productivity-.-.... when complemented by strategies to increase their productivityGermany IndiaItaly Japanunited_statesThe figure shows that increasing the labour-force participation rate of those aged between -to the level of younger cohorts in the labour force would help to increase the annual rate of growth of GDP, but only by a small margin. The effect was largest for Germany where the GDP per capita growth would go up by . percentage points. For countries where differences in participation rates of younger and older workers were relatively small, boosting participation rates of older workers had negligible impact on the projected rate of growth of GDP per capita.Economic consequences of population ageingNonetheless, such an increase in participation rates might contribute positively to the financial sustainability of those countries pension systems (see chap. V).The impact of possible lower productivity of older workers on GDP growth (discussed below) was also simulated. Average productivity growth for older workers was assumed rather arbitrarilyto be . per cent per year compared with per cent per year for other workers. Under this hypothesis, and with the exception of Germany, increasing the participation rates of older workers would actually result in a lowering of the rate of growth of GDP per capita relative to the baseline scenario where participation rates were not increased. Thus, should a decline in productivity of older workers occur, policies aiming at boosting their rate of participation in the labour force will not be effective in raising the level of output per capita unless those policies are complemented by measures designed to enhance older workers productivity as well, such as those discussed above.Ageing labour force, declining productivity?While it may be possible to partially offset the trend of a declining labour force in some countries through a mix of the policies discussed in the previous section, the changing age structure of the labour force is inevitable as societies continue to age. Accordingly, the following factors need to be considered: (a) the probable impact of the changing age characteristics of the labour force on labour productivity; (b) the potential for increasing overall productivity; and (c) the identification of policy interventions able to raise productivity.The impact of ageing on labour productivityIf productivity growth is not fast enough to compensate for the impending changes in the labour supply, the burden of maintaining and improving living standards while supporting an increasingly dependent older population becomes heavier.At the macroeconomic level, productivity is enhanced by, among other things, advances in knowledge, which take the form of innovations, such as new working methods and the development of new technologies, as well as new products. Because innovation implies a certain degree of creativity, and creativity is often higher among the younger members of society (see below), innovation is typically associated with younger workers. It is thus argued that a shrinking proportion of younger workers in the labour force may result in slower advances in sciences and technology which could have an adverse impact on productivity growth.The impact of ageing on productivity is more readily noticeable at the firm level than at the macrolevel. A seminal study in this area on age and learning (Lehman, ), revealed a creative age curve showing productivity starting to increase in creative occupations such as the sciences, arts and athletics at around age , reaching a peak in the period from the late thirties to the mid-forties, and beginning to decline thereafter.Subsequent studies have supported this thesis and indicated that any decline in productivity associated with age takes place gradually and varies across occupations (see the comprehensive overview of studies by Skirbekk ()). For example, occupations where reduced cognitive ability may have an impact on performance, such as in the sciences, would likely witness productivity declines among older workers. Alternatively, in the managerial positions, for example, in professions where experience is a more important factor for job performance, olderLabour-force ageing may have an impact on productivity growth ...... but it is gradual and varies across occupationswess Countries need to draw their own age profiles in order to craft strategies to boost productivity workers would work just as efficiently as their younger counterparts, if not more efficiently. The factor of experience can help to offset age-related productivity declines, while changes in organizational structure, more effective use of ICT in specific occupations, and ensuring better access to knowledge, education and training throughout working life have also been identified as means to maintain and improve productivity (European Commission, ; Black and Lynch, ). Thus, age-productivity profiles may change over time, as technological advancements and structural changes within an economy render some skills related to specific occupations more or less obsolete in the domestic labour market (European Commission, ;Nishimura and others, ).Based on the literature, it is possible to argue that as workers continue to age in many middleand high-income economies, the age profile of the workforce will move away from exhibiting a high share of peak productivity workers. Such a scenario suggests that those economies will need to boost their labour productivity growth, which would require a substantial increase in broad capital investments, that is to say, human capital, intangible capital (research and development) and physical capital. Conversely, in low-income economies with a higher proportion of young people, the age structure of the labour force will be moving towards exhibiting a potentially greater productivity. However, non-demographic factors may impede these countries from reaping the benefits of their demographic bonus.Can labour productivity growth compensate for age-related output changes?That improvements in labour productivity could offset the impact of population ageing on economic growth raises the question how much productivity would be needed to overcome the impact of ageing and how much productivity would need to increase so as to sustain a certain level of welfare. In the case of Japan, for instance, and assuming all other things being equal, labour productivity would need to grow by . per cent per year in order to sustain a per capita income growth of per cent annually during the next years. More than per cent of the required labour productivity growth would be needed to overcome the growth impact of population ageing (see figure IV.). This holds, though to a lesser degree, for other countries with ageing populations like Italy and Germany, and also for the united_states. The required productivity growth in all these cases seems, however, within reach by historical standards. Yet, it is equally important to note that at per cent per year, GDP per capita growth is slower than that achieved on average by these economies in the past. Finally, maintaining an annual rate of productivity growth of about -. per cent for five decades is not an easy task and may require a sustained policy environment stimulating technological progress and innovation.Investments in the form of broad capital, namely, physical capital, research and development (R&D) and human capital, have long been identified as significant factors in increasing productivity growth. The European Commission has targeted policies designed to increase the quality of investment in R&D, infrastructure and human capital and stimulate the creation of technological synergies within the economy in order to achieve the required higher productivity (Commission of the European Communities, ). For example, in addition to initiativesImproving labour productivity is important for sustaining economic growthInvestment in R&D and human and physical capital is needed to boost productivityEconomic consequences of population ageingAgeing effectOther labour supply factorsNote: The ageing effect is calculated on the basis of a counterfactual exercise: The productivity growth required to generate a certain level of GDP per capita growth in view of anticipated changes in the population age structure is compared with the productivity growth required to maintain the same level of GDP per capita growth in the absence of such changes. It is assumed that the old-age dependency ratio is kept constant at the level observed in .Figure IV..Impact of population ageing on required annual average rate of labour-productivity growth, -, Germany, Italy, Japan and the united_states of AmericaPercentageGermany Italyunited_statesJapan calling for a doubling of the EU research budget, there are initiatives for the creation of regional innovation poles and the European Institute of Technology. These research hubs should attract researchers worldwide and create better linkages between research and industry in order to foster innovation. In the developing economies, technology and innovation policies are often targeted towards specific industries and sectors that have particular strategic importance for growth. Meanwhile, the challenge for many developing countries is also to improve economy-wide productivity by increasing productivity in the traditionally low-skilled informal economy, where a large share of workers are employed. In this regard, increased investment in infrastructure and human capital are equally important for improving productivity (united_nations, a). Additionally, improved access to technology and the creation of forward and backward linkages in the supply chain between the formal and informal sector can enhance worker skills and ultimately lead to higher overall productivity growth (International Labour Office, c). In this regard, while developing countries are in that stage of the demographic transition where a window of opportunity is still open (see box IV.), the benefits of such demographic opportunity will be realized only with the adoption of the policies necessary to harness the productive potential of the working-age population.Ageing and consumption patternsAs discussed above, population ageing will affect economic growth owing to its impact on the supply of labour. Yet, this is not the only channel through which the effects of ageing on the economy will be felt. Economic growth also has a close relationship with consumption, investment and savings patterns. Consumption patterns may change as one ages. At the macroeconomic level, such changes can have implications for the demand for goods and services and therefore for investment opportunities, thus influencing patterns of investment and labour allocation in economies with ageing populations. Additionally, the overall level of consumption by older persons may change as well and have a negative impact on economic growth if demand declines.Consumption patterns may change as one ageswess Levels of consumption may change over the life cycleLife-cycle patterns of income and consumptionInsights generated by economic theory with respect to consumption (and saving patterns) and its relationship with ageing are derived from the life-cycle model and are based on the consumption-smoothing hypothesis (Friedman, ; Modigliani and Brumberg, ; Ando and Modigliani, ). The model indicates a constant trajectory of consumption and a humpshaped saving pattern. Consumption supported by accumulated savings or intergenerational transfers takes place even in the absence of labour income (see figure IV.).The intuition behind the figure is simple: Everyone needs to consume; but the very young and older individuals are less likely to participate in the labour market or earn an income. In order to consume, children rely on parental transfers. Older persons will draw on their accumulated wealth through dissaving and/or receive intergenerational transfers after they leave the labour market. During their working years, individuals tend to earn incomes higher than their consumption levels. The surplus can be used to provide for their dependent children and older persons in the household and saved for old-age income security.Available evidence does not, however, always support the models assumption that consumption levels are relatively stable throughout the life cycle. Empirical studies indicate that there may be a drop in consumption to a lower level following retirement which cannot be explained using the consumption-smoothing model (Banks, Blundell and Tanner, ; Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, ). This finding has given rise to the term retirement-consumption puzzle. The drop in consumption has been found to be substantial in the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland, but has not been observed in the united_states, for example. In countries such as Italy, no abrupt fall in consumption has been noted once leisure was taken into account (Miniaci, Monfardini and Weber, ). In the united_states, consumption levels for older persons are considerably higher than those for the average person of working age becauseFigure IV..The economic life-cycle profile for the developing worldLabour IncomeSurplusConsumptionDeficitDeficitNote: Values based on detailed estimates for a number of developing countries. Values have all been normalized by dividing by the average labour productivity of those in the prime working ages of -.AgeConsumption per capita and labour income per capitaEconomic consequences of population ageing of increased consumption of publicly supplied goods, more specifically health services (Lee and Mason, ). Increased consumption levels during older ages have also been observed in other developed countries such as Japan and Sweden when publicly supplied goods and services were considered. Trends also vary among developing countries and areas: consumption levels during old age remain relatively constant in Taiwan Province of China, but tend to decline in Indonesia and Thailand. In Costa Rica, an initially declining trend at old age is reversed in very old age.Arguments put forward to explain the retirement-consumption puzzle in the developed countries, where the phenomenon is most conspicuous, include the role played by workrelated expenses, which will drop once one retires. Moreover, increased leisure time allows households to purchase goods more efficiently and/or to engage in home production of certain goods. Additionally, in situations where retirement arrives earlier than anticipated, or when there is uncertainty regarding future needs, individuals may cut consumption in order to stretch available resources. Smith () thus concludes that there is no retirement-consumption puzzle once the implications of increased leisure time, or the uncertainties related to the time of retirement, are accounted for.Even if it may be the case that consumption levels do not decline as one retires, consumption by the retired population may not grow as fast as that of workers, as pension incomethe major source of income, on average, for older persons with access to pension systemsgrows slower than wages, particularly if pension benefits are not indexed to wages (see chap. V; Schaffnit-Chatterjee, ).Figure IV..Consumption may decline after retirement owing to lack of work-related expenses and to increased leisure timeStructure of consumption expenditure by age group, united_states of America, , and European Union, Percentage of expenditure united_states Percentage of expenditure European Union Under ----Age groupHousing and energyFood and clothing or overTransportUnder Recreation and cultureOthers-yearsHealth-yearsAge groupEducationOlder people tend to spend a higher share of their incomes on housing and social servicesAge-induced shifts in consumption are gradual and modest relative to the economy as a wholeDo consumption patterns change with age?Needs and tastes change over the life cycle. Older people tend to spend a higher share of their incomes on housing and social services than younger population cohorts do (Luhrmann, ; Lee and Mason, ). Figure IV., based on household income and expenditure survey data, shows that the shares of housing-related services, energy and health in household expenditure seem to be steadily increasing with age in both the united_states and EU. Pursuant to the consideration of current consumption trends exhibited by those aged years or over in developed countries, it is possible to anticipate that the demand for health and long-term care expenditures will likely rise (see chap. VI), while housing and energy expenditures will increase as a result of more time spent at home by the retired population. On the other hand, expenditures on entertainment and transportation may decline, while the share of consumption of basic goods such as food and clothing will remain relatively constant.Long-run trends in household consumption patterns at the aggregate level appear to reflect those observed above. The shares of health care and energy spending have increased notably in the selected countries since , whereas the shares of spending on food and clothing have declined. Such trends may be expected to continue in the future; however, a closer look at existing trends suggests that the changes in consumption patterns owing to ageing take place very gradually and are rather modest in magnitude for the economy as a whole (Luhrmann, ; Schaffnit-Chatterjee, ). Moreover, shifts are gradual.It is noteworthy that service-related expenditures, especially for health care, and spending on energy have increased their share in total expenditures over time in both relatively older and younger countries (see figure IV.). It is income that will, no doubt, remain the most important factor underlying the structure and the level of demand in an economy. Thus, when analysing the influence of demographic change on consumption patterns, one needs to consider the relationship between age and income. If income changes with age and old age may imply lower income in some circumstances, as discussed in chapter V, then a growing older population will affect the structure of demand owing not only to aging per se (with its different tastes and needs) but also to the changes in income brought about by ageing. Lower income for a growing number of older persons will lead to lower consumption levels and shift consumption demand towards basic goods. Thus, in projecting the structure of demand in the future, one also needs to take into account (or make assumptions about) possible changes in the purchasing power of older people.As noted above, the rise in per capita income is the main factor behind the changes in consumption observed in countries included in figure IV.. As income per capita rises, consumption shifts from necessary goods such as food and clothing towards services. The increase in the share of health expenditures is particularly evident in the united_states, most likely owing to the fact that price increases in health care have been relatively more rapid than the growth in prices for other goods and services (see chap. VI). In any case, the structure of demand changes owing not only to changes in tastes and preferences (which may be age-dependent) but also to changes in income level.Ageing and savings dynamicsChanges in the age structure of the population may have important implications for the generation of savings. Based on the description of the behaviour of individuals in the life-cycle model, it may be assumed that economies with high child dependency ratios would have relatively low saving rates. Countries with an age structure dominated by persons in working age may experience faster rates of growth and could potentially have higher saving rates as individuals save inIncome remains the most important factor underlying the structure and level of demand in the economywess Economies with high old-age dependency ratios experience a decline in the savings rate ...... but the impact of ageing on saving rates is not uniform across countriesAgeing is not the only factor underlying the generation of savingsTable IV..anticipation of their retirement. Meanwhile, economies characterized by high old-age dependency would experience a decline in their savings rates (see box IV.).Table IV. presents data on household savings as a percentage of disposable income and old-age dependency ratios for selected developed countries. Net household saving rates have declined in most countries for the last two decades. At the same time, old-age dependency ratios have been on the rise. This would suggest that demographic changes may in fact have important implications for saving rates at least at the aggregate level, but the impact is not uniform across countries.In France, for instance, household saving rates have remained relatively constant despite higher old-age dependency ratios. In contrast with Germany, in Australia the old-age dependency ratio did not change much, but household saving rates fell precipitously during -. Countries with the highest dependency ratios (Japan and Italy) do not have the lowest saving rates. In fact, saving rates are lowest in Australia and the united_states, where oldage dependency ratios were also the lowest in . In several countries (Australia, Canada, the Netherlands and the united_states), the fall in household saving rates has been more rapid than the increase in old-age dependency ratios.The differences across these economies may be associated to other factors. For example, highly developed financial markets in combination with financial deregulation in the united_states allow economic agents, and the corporate and household sectors, easier access to capital markets both as investors and as borrowers. Owing to reduced constraints on borrowing on the one hand, and the possibility of capital gains on invested funds on the other, the relation between ageing and wage-based saving behaviour, as suggested by the life-cycle model, weakens.Household saving rate and old-age dependency ratio in selected OECD countries, , , , and AustraliaOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rate-.-.CanadaOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateFranceOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateGermanyOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateItalyOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateJapanOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateNetherlandsOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateunited_kingdomOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateunited_statesOld-age dependency ratioHousehold saving rateNote: Old-age dependency ratio is defined as the number of persons years or over per persons aged -. Household saving rates are expressed as a percentage of disposable household income.Economic consequences of population ageingFor instance, revaluations of the stock of wealth following fluctuations in asset prices on capital markets also have a powerful impact on household savings. The fact that favourable movements in asset prices lead to an increase in net worth encourages individuals to save less than they would in the absence of such movements, which implies increased consumption and less savings than would otherwise be the case. This outcome has been observed for the united_states household sector which has been saving at a declining pace following the wealth effects that originated in gains on the stock market in the mid-s and those derived, more recently, from real estate investment. In fact, it has been remarked that the decline in private savings in the united_states cannot be attributed to demographic changes, as saving rates for all age groups have declined (Deaton, ).While ageing is not the only factor affecting savings behaviour, and the magnitude of its impact on savings may not be established with certainty, ageing and the resulting increase of retired populations will certainly lead to an expanding number of non-active individuals whose consumption needs will have to be satisfied. Thus, one may expect that an increasing share of the income generated by those who are active will have to be transferred to those who are inactive. If income does not grow fast enough, there will be implications for savings (alternatively, the distribution of consumption between workers and retirees will have to be renegotiated or consumption by both will need to decline). For instance, in the case of the united_states, calculations of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the united_nations Secretariat indicate that on the basis of current consumption levels of active and non-active populations, the share of total consumption in GDP will increase from per cent in to per cent in . This is a significant but not a dramatic increase. It does indicate, however, that the domestic savings rate may fall by percentage points by . Naturally, the degree as well as the timing of the impact of having an increasingly larger body of non-active consumers is country-specific. The outcome will depend not only on demographic dynamics but also on differences in consumption levels of the various age groups, the desired rate of increase of such consumption levels, and the overall rate of GDP growth. Implications for global savingsAs seen above, the increase in the retired population may exert some pressure on savings, especially in the absence of faster growth. One would expect that the events unfolding in the ageing regions mainly consisting of countries with a dominant presence in the global economy would have an impact on global savings and investment (see figure IV.). At the global level, the developed countries, with more advanced population ageing, contributed per cent to world total saving and generated per cent of world total investment in . This group of countries, while providing the bulk of world savings, are already entering a stage where the old-age dependency ratio is expected to increase over the next decades. With a share of per cent, China is another important player in the worlds supply of savings and is expected to suffer a rapid process of ageing as its old-age dependency ratio jumps from in to in .Countries more advanced in the ageing process provide the bulk of the worlds savingswess OECDa Asian newly industrialized economies China Central and Eastern Europeb latin_america and the Caribbean Asiac AfricadHousehold savings is only one component of domestic savingsFigure IV..Global saving and investment per capita by major groups of countries and areas, , , and Current dollarsInvestment SavingInvestment SavingInvestment SavingInvestment SavingIndividual behaviour may not conform to the assumptions of the life-cycle modelThe existence of a significant relationship between global and OECD savings would imply that if ageing is a major driver in respect of the generation of savings, and the rest of the world is unable to grow faster, global savings will decline in the future. Lower global savings may lead to reduced resources available to finance investment and may thus create pressures on interest rates, although the latter will depend on how the demand for investment evolves at the global level.While age may exert an influence on the level of savings, there are many determining factors other than demographic variables as proposed by the life-cycle model. For one, the model applies to household or personal savings only, while the overall level of savings in the economy is also generated by the corporate and the government sectors. Moreover, the relative importance of household or personal savings in the generation of national savings varies across countries and over time in a given country (see figure IV.). Hence, it is important to be cautious when making claims regarding the dramatic effects of ageing trends on savings patterns. Some of the factors that have an impact on saving and consumption behaviour include: the presence and depth of capital markets, financial innovation and deregulation, the existence of mandatory pension schemes which may affect voluntary saving effort by reducing incentives to save for old age (see chap. V), the presence of bequests that may support saving effort during old age, and fluctuations in levels of income and economic performance in general, as well as simply cultural traits and the institutional framework in place.Individual behaviour also varies and does not necessarily conform to the assumptions of the life-cycle model. Some individuals may place great value on preserving bequests left to their family and may thus continue to save after retirement. There are those who may choose to utilize their savings earlier on in the post-retirement period so as to enjoy life fully while in good health, whereas others might prefer to spread out their accumulated wealth over a longerEconomic consequences of population ageingFigure IV..Gross household savings as a share of gross national savings, Japan and the united_states, -PercentageJapanunited_states(accessed May ).A causal relationship between savings and investment cannot be established period of time. Moreover, cohort effects and cultural changes can also impact on individuals, resulting in a saving behaviour that is different than the one foreseen by theory. As a consequence, the hypothesis that people accumulate during working years and decumulate during retirement (thus implying high saving rates for economies where individuals of working age dominate the age structure of the population and low or negative saving rates for ageing countries) needs to be assessed in the larger economic and institutional context of the economy in question.From the accounting point of view as it holds for a closed economy, at the global level savings must equal investment and, as shown in figure IV., investment per capita does decline at the same pace as savings. Yet, a causal relationship cannot be unambiguously established between these two aggregates. It is not clear that savings drive investment and thus economic growth. Empirical evidence from developing countries, for instance, suggests that higher savings are often the result of faster growth, in other words, that it is economic growth that pushes saving levels up.In fact, most developing countries have experienced a discrete increase in domestic savings and investment rate only some time after they underwent a spur in growth (united_nations, d, overview, p. v). Such growth spurts are in turn related to a variety of external and domestic conditions, including credible and stable policy interventions. Subsequently, growth is sustained by capital investment and increases in productivity. In many developing countries, the bulk of capital formation has been financed by domestic savings and in this regard, constraints on the mobilization of domestic savings in those countries need to be addressed.Moreover, it is not obvious that a declining labour force necessarily leads to lower investment demand in ageing countries. As seen above, the lower labour supply and the changing structure of aggregate demand may give rise to wage pressure in the ageing economies, hence entrepreneurs may well choose to direct their efforts towards higher investment in labour-saving technology and not lower investment in conformity with reduced availability or costlier labourInvestment may increase in response to declines in the labour supplyInstitutional investors are transforming the structure of financial systemsPrivatization of pension systems has been a factor leading to the shift towards institutional investors inputs. The speed of technological change and its impact on productivity as well as the resulting obsolescence of existing machinery and equipment are also important factors underlying investment demand. Additionally, in todays increasingly integrated world, investment responds not only to domestic market opportunities but also to opportunities in the global market. Accordingly, the way investment reacts to changes in the size and cost of the labour force, and to the anticipated shifts in the level and composition of demand, together with the necessary technological change and other interventions that allow for increased productivity, will ultimately be crucial for determining and sustaining growth in the future.Ageing and the structure and stability of financial marketsWhile it is not particularly clear whether global and national savings will indeed decline in the future as a consequence of population ageing, the implications for financial markets are already apparent. Increasing amounts of household savings are being directed towards pension funds and other financial investment plans for retirement. Demographic changes together with increasing sophistication of financial instruments and changes in institutional arrangements in many countries have led to an increased presence of pension and mutual funds in the financial markets, with numerous potential implications.The presence of institutional investors in advanced economies and their rapid rate of growth in many emerging economies are transforming the structure of financial systems around the globe. In the developed economies in the period from to year-end , assets under management by institutional investors rose from about $ trillion to $ trillion and from some to per cent of their aggregate GDP. All three of the major institutional groups (insurance companies, pension funds and investment companies) that are used by households as repositories for retirement savings experienced strong growth during this period (see table IV.). A number of developing economies have seen a similar surge in the presence of institutional investors. Chile leads with a total asset of pension funds that was equal to no less than per cent of GDP in , followed by Singapore ( per cent) (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, ).The factors that have induced this shift towards institutional investors vary among countries but a common thread has been the recent emphasis on private pension and retirement funding as government-funded pensions come under pressure (see chap. V). In fact, in those emerging economies that have established fully funded systems, the rise in assets under management by pension funds from . per cent of their combined GDP in to . per cent in is evidence that shifts of savings into these channels is transforming their financial systems as rapidly and effectively as was the case earlier in the more advanced economies. Yet, there are other contributing factors as well: growing wealth, tax incentives, opportunities to diversify holdings, increased liquidity and the contributions to efficiency resulting from technological advances, financial liberalization and product innovation (Davis, ).Economic consequences of population ageingTable IV..Assets under management by institutional investors, developed economies, -Trillions of united_states dollarsInstitutional investors..Insurance companiesPension fundsInvestment companiesHedge fundsOthers..As percentage of GDPInstitutional investors..Insurance companiesPension fundsInvestment companiesHedge fundsOthers..Note: The data may reflect some double-counting of assets owned by defined-contribution pension funds and managed by investment companies. Investment companies include closed-end and managed investment companies, mutual funds and unit investment trusts. Other institutional investors include real estate investment trusts (REITs) and private equity and venture capital funds. GDP is total for OECD countries.Institutional investors: transforming financial marketsThe increased role of institutional investors as the principal managers of household savings has brought about positive externalities for financial development and economic growth. The rise of institutional investors and the increased supply of financial liquidity have indeed led to the transformation of financial markets in the direction of enhanced sophistication of the financing mechanisms and a wider range of available instruments in the markets, thus contributing to a further deepening and increased innovation in financial markets in developed economies and supporting financial development in emerging market economies. In the case of the united_states, for example, pension and mutual funds contributed to the spectacular rise in the assets of the housing-related Government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and federally related mortgage pools, as well as the group of asset-backed securities issuers that include the finance affiliates of automobile manufacturers, credit card issuers, private mortgage companies and other non-bank lenders (DArista, ). In emerging markets, the emergence of pension funds has been paralleled by increased equity market capitalization, the development of corporate bond markets and the expansion of debt maturities owing to the longterm nature of pension fund investments and the increased availability of long-term finance. Meanwhile, the greater supply of liquidity brought about by pension funds can also contribute to market stability, as it provides a buffer against potential adverse shocks (Davis, ).On the other hand, the move towards institutional investors and fully funded pension schemes (see chap. V) has allowed new channels for savings to emerge over the past three decades without there being sufficient attention paid to the need to update the bank-centred monetary and regulatory frameworks that have traditionally governed national financial systems.Institutional investors have contributed to the deepening and developing of financial marketsUpdated monetary and regulatory frameworks are needed as the risk of systemic instability has increasedwess Monetary authorities have lost a great deal of influence on credit supplyFirst, it should be noted that the increasing presence of institutional investors has also meant greater competition for the banking sector. As a result, banks have moved towards accepting greater risks by becoming involved in riskier leveraged transactions in order to maintain or expand operations and profits. Additionally, banks (especially those based in the united_states) have increasingly relied on non-deposit liabilities for funding as savings move from banks into institutional investors. By tightening the links between the various financial sectors, these developments have led to greater probability that problems in one group of institutions will spill over into others, thus increasing the risk of systemic instability.Second, monetary authorities (at least in the united_states) have lost a great deal of influence over the credit supply as the rise in the market power of institutional investors has led to the transformation of financial markets from a bank-based system into a market-based one, which contributes to increasing pro-cyclicality in financial markets (DArista, ). For increased pro-cyclicality there are two main explanations. One, the fact that institutional investors are not subject to the central banks quantitative monetary controls, such as reserve and liquidity requirements, makes it difficult for the monetary authority to conduct counter-cyclical policy. Moreover, the fact that institutional investors act mostly on secondary markets both domestically and internationally compounds the problem. This implies that the monetary authority has lost a great deal of its ability to intervene and sterilize inflows with the existing monetary tools. Two, the reorientation of households savings towards credit market instruments such as bonds and corporate equities leads to a pro-cyclical wealth effect on household balances: during an upswing, assets prices may rise leading to spending booms while during the downturn, asset prices may fall leading to a decline in consumption, thereby magnifying the swings of the business cycle.In response to these developments, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) has proposed a macroprudential stabilization framework which aims to return to the monetary authorities some of the control that they should have, especially over unchecked credit growth. The framework, however, excludes important functions of monetary policythose that should be concerned with targeting non-banking financial actors such as the institutional investors among whom most of the financial leveraging has been taking place.Finally, with increasing liberalization of financial markets across the world, the concentration of capital in the hands of institutional investors may also have implications for the allocation of international capital flows (see box IV.) In particular, the role of institutional investors in contributing to the volatility of capital flows and increasing the potential for systemic risk raises questions about the stability of the global financial system and the links forged between institutions and markets worldwide. Reforms should be conducted so as to ensure that international financial markets are also protected from excessive volatility of capital flows. Because most of the capital inflowsespecially to developing economiesare destined for secondary markets, they often contribute to increased volatility rather than to sustained economic expansion, while outflows give rise to currency and financial crises. The introduction of capital controls can help to offset the pro-cyclicality and volatility linked to capital flows, in particular portfolio flows, to developing countries, thereby contributing to greater macroeconomic stability in their economies (Ocampo, , united_nations, a).A macroprudential stabilization framework is neededEconomic consequences of population ageing Pension funds: international capital flows and the home biasThe ageing of populations and the need to set aside resources for retirement together with changes in institutional arrangements have led to a substantial growth of the assets under the management of pension funds in both developed and developing countries. The likely effects of these developments on the volume and direction of international capital flows will depend on the investment strategies adopted by the funds and on the regulations and practices in place in different countries.Pension funds invest the contributions collected from sponsors and beneficiaries to provide for the future pension entitlements of the beneficiaries. To the extent that international financial markets are not perfectly correlated, international portfolio diversification can reduce the risks as well as provide access to more profitable investments, by providing opportunities for investing in industries and economic activities as well as a wider range of financial instruments that may not exist in home markets. It also provides an outlet for countries where financial and equity markets are small in relation to the volume of pension savings, thereby helping to prevent the emergence of bubbles.Notwithstanding the above, pension funds in both developing and developed countries display a marked tendency to select domestic over foreign assets. This tendency is commonly known as home bias. According to the International Monetary Fund (), in the pension funds of the five biggest economies that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (France, Germany, Japan, the united_kingdom and the united_states) invested in aggregate only per cent of their portfolios in foreign assets ( per cent in foreign equities and per cent in foreign bonds). Pension funds in developing countries also tend to invest mainly in domestic assets (see table ). Additionally, portfolio allocation seems to be country-specific. Institutional investors operating in the developing countries and in European countriesbecause of either a relatively less developed financial system or the more pronounced presence of welfare Statetend to be more conservative in their investment, as evidenced by their allocation of funds in public and corporate bonds or saving deposits. Equity and mutual funds seem to be the class of financial assets preferred by pension funds in Canada, the Netherlands, the united_kingdom and the united_states (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, ).Table .Portfolio allocation by pension funds as a share of total investment, selected countries in latin_america and Europe, PercentageState sectorCorporate sectorFinancial sectorForeign sectorOther assetslatin_americaArgentinaBoliviaColombiaCosta RicaChileEl SalvadorMexicoPeruUruguayaEuropeBulgariaPolandBox IV.Box IV. (contd)The home bias may also be induced by regulatory policy. Many countries have strict investment regulations and impose tight limits on the acquisition of foreign securities and equities to avoid currency mismatches. Some countries often impose limits on foreign allocation or do not allow it altogether. For example, the current ceiling on foreign asset allocation is per cent in Hungary and per cent in Argentina, Colombia and Peru. In the Dominican Republic and Uruguay, pension funds are not allowed to invest abroad, while in Mexico such a restriction was lifted as of October . Limits evolve over time. In the case of Chile, investment abroad had not been allowed initially and was gradually introduced. In , about per cent of funds managed by Chilean pension funds were invested abroad, which has contributed, however, to increased pro-cyclicality of capital flows.Limits are also common among developed countries. Recently, the Government of Norway announced that the Government Pension Fund will increase its exposure to global equities from the current to per cent (Financial Times, April / , p. ). Tax regulations imposed on Canadian funds, for example, limit foreign investment to per cent of the portfolio. In Italy and Germany, the limit is set at per cent. On the other hand, in such countries as the Netherlands, the united_kingdom and the united_states, pension funds are simply subject to a prudent man rule, which requires the pension fund managers to make sensible investment decisions based on what is perceived as best practice among other institutional investors.Regulators consider these investment limits necessary to prevent pension funds from taking excessive risks and to thereby protect pensioners rights and future entitlements. In many circumstances, limits are imposed pursuant to such macroeconomic objectives as promoting the development of local capital markets, retaining scarce resources in the domestic economy, preventing a run on the currency, and facilitating the financing of pension systems reforms (discussed in chap. V). In developing countries, preventing currency mismatches and pro-cyclical flows based on exchangerate expectations is among the main concerns underlying the imposition of investment limits.Yet, regulations imposed on investment allocation do not fully explain the small share of foreign assets in pension fund portfolios. Table shows that for many countries adopting restrictions on international asset allocation, the share of foreign assets held by the pension funds are on average well below the maximum threshold permitted.Table .Limits on and actual foreign assets allocation by pension funds, selected developed and developing countriesPercentageForeign assets allocationLimitActualDeveloped countries, united_kingdomunited_statesGermany.bJapan.cCanadaHungaryPolandDeveloping countries, ArgentinaPeruMexicoEconomic consequences of population ageingA number of other factors, reflecting pension funds strategies and the nature of international transactions, contribute to the reduced exposure to foreign assets. Pension fund managers seek not only to maximize returns but also to align the mix of their asset holdings to the structure of their liabilities. In particular, mature pension funds will avoid instruments that entail currency risk and potential capital loss and will prefer domestic bonds instead. Moreover, transaction costs are higher in international asset trading. Gaining access to a foreign market may entail extra costs owing to the registration and the commissions for foreign currency transactions. Also, the relative scarcity of information on foreign markets may represent a significant obstacle to certain investments, particularly where disclosure standards differ substantially from those of home markets (see Ahearne, Griever and Warnock, ; and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, ). Finally, pension fund managers tend to have a liquidity bias in respect of their portfolio allocation, as reflected in high shares of national treasury bills. This liquidity bias may also be partly induced by regulatory provisions.Looking ahead, it is likely that the absorption of pension fund assets by developing countries will increase in the next to years, provided that these countries are considered attractive enough by pension managers in terms of their investment strategies. Even assuming that portfolio shares remain unchanged and home bias persists, as household savings are increasingly channelled to pension funds, an increase in the overall volume of resources will naturally translate into an increase in the volume of international investment of pension funds. While representing an important source of finance and a growth opportunity for developing countries, these developments may also generate some worries in the light of the vulnerability of many of the emerging markets to volatile capital flows.Box IV. (contd)ConclusionsWith population ageing, the share of the population in the working ages will shrink and the labour force itself will grow older. This holds especially for the countries, mostly developed, with low fertility rates. In contrast, countries with relatively high fertility levels (primarily low-income economies) will continue to experience strong labour-force growth until , which may open a window of opportunity for accelerated economic growth.Population ageing could become a drag on economic growth unless the decline in labour-force growth can be controlled or greater efforts are made to increase labour productivity. In most contexts, increases in labour productivity would be required to complement measures that would contribute to stemming the fall in labour supply.Various measures have been proposed to mitigate the effects of rising dependency ratios, including international migration, outsourcing of employment and increasing labour participation rates.International migration is often mentioned as a possible tool to ensure an adequate supply of workers in developed countries, but it is not expected that any country will admit the massive numbers of migrants that would be needed to offset population ageing.The outsourcing of employment to offshore locations is another possibility, but it would fail to address the challenge of mounting old-age dependency ratios. While offshoring alleviates labour shortages by shifting production to workers abroad, it will not reduce pressures on old-age pension systems because employment, and therefore the contributory base of such systems, will not expand.The analysis of this chapter suggests that the greatest potential for counteracting the projected changes in labour-force growth lies in raising the participation rates of women and older workers. In the latter case, many countries still possess considerable scope for enacting measures aimed at increasing the participation rate of older workerstypically those aged Higher labour participation by women and older workers can offset some of the decline in labour forcewess Concerns about possible acute declines in economic growth appear unfoundedby bringing the effective retirement age more closely in line with the statutory retirement age. Yet, these measures will need to be complemented by interventions aimed at raising the productivity of older workers, if in fact productivity tends to decline with age.There are also a range of options for removing disincentives to prolonged employment, such as altering workplace practices to better accommodate the needs of workers as they age; improving working conditions to sustain working capacity over the life course; countering age-based discrimination; and promoting positive images of older workers. Older workers will also be in a better position to extend their working lives if they are given the opportunity to engage in lifelong learning and on-the-job training initiatives. Such measures are expected to increase economic growth in ageing countries, though the impact may not be very large.More generally though, worries that ageing populations and ageing workforces will lead to acute declines in economic growth appear unfounded. The analysis provided in this chapter indicates that the productivity growth required to sustain a given level of per capita GDP growth compares favourably with that of past experience. Yet, sustaining relatively high productivity growth for prolonged periods may be a challenge, which underlines the importance of continued efforts to upgrade skills and promote technological development.Countries with growing and still relatively young labour forces may be able to accelerate growth. However, in order to reap this demographic dividend, they will need to deal with a different set of issues. Rather than be concerned about impending labour shortages, they should remain focused on creating decent employment opportunities, especially for the growing numbers of young people expected to enter the workforce. Boosting employment rates in the formal economy will help to raise tax revenues and set the stage for expanding social protection schemes where they are currently underdeveloped, thereby enabling older workers to retire with financial security. Productivity growth is also important for developing economies with respect not only to supporting an expanding older population, but also to raising overall living standards and reducing poverty.By many accounts, population ageing is expected to have implications for patterns of consumption, investment and savings. Understanding whether and how population ageing will affect these aggregates is crucial to anticipating how economic growth and development may unfold in the future. Although economic theory offers some clear conceptions of this relationship, in reality it remains rather difficult to predict how ageing will influence future consumption and growth patterns.Consumption needs and tastes change over the life cycle. It has indeed been established that older people, in contrast with younger population cohorts, tend to spend a higher share of their incomes on housing and social services. Population ageing thus could lead to substantial changes in the composition of the demand for goods and services.A closer look at existing trends suggests, however, that these changes occur slowly over time. Furthermore, levels of consumption are more closely related to income than to the demographic structure. This complex reality makes it difficult to predict future trends in consumption, as the growth of incomes for older persons in the coming decades is a subject of relative uncertainty.Similarly, the implications of ageing for savings patterns are difficult to gauge. It is often assumed that economies with high levels of child and old-age dependency have relatively low national saving rates, while economies with large shares of working-age population have high savings rates. Ageing may indeed exert an influence, but there are many other factors determining savings behaviour and the level of savings in the economy.Changes in consumption are more closely related to income than to ageEconomic consequences of population ageingIt is clear, however, that an increasing share of available (household) savings flows into pension funds and other financial investment plans for retirement. Institutional investors, which typically manage such savings, have already become the main players in financial markets. These investors manage not only large amounts of household savings from developed countries, but also, increasingly, household savings from developing countries where the importance of privately managed capitalized pension systems has grown. Institutional investors contribute to the development and deepening of financial markets in developed countries and emerging market economies, but in doing so, they largely operate outside of financial market regulation and supervision mechanisms that apply more generally to the banking system. If unchecked, the financial market operations of pension funds could thus be a source of instability and enhanced market speculation. Also, as increasing financial investments are intermediated outside of the banking system, monetary authorities are losing some control over credit growth, thereby limiting the effectiveness of monetary policies. Improved (international) regulatory measures are needed to avert possible financial market destabilizing effects of the operations of large pension funds and to prevent the income security of older persons from being jeopardized.Increased presence of institutional investors require updated financial market regulatory measuresOld-age income securityChapter VOld-age income securityIntroductionLiving standards often decline for people at older ages. Reduced economic opportunities and deteriorating health status frequently increase vulnerability to poverty as people age. Such conditions vary greatly, however, across contexts and groups of older persons and livelihood strategies tend to differ accordingly. In developed economies, the main source of livelihood and protection shifts from employment to pension income as one reaches a given retirement age. In developing countries, few have access to pensions and most have to rely on other sources of income. In fact, per cent of the worlds population do not have sufficient protection in old age to enable them to face health, disability and income risks (International Labour Organization, ). This would mean that in developing countries alone, about million older persons currently lack adequate income security. That number would rise to . billion by , if the coverage of current mechanisms designed to provide old-age income security is not expanded. The demographic transition poses an enormous challenge with respect to ensuring the availability and sustainability of pensions and other systems providing economic security for an ever-larger number of older persons in both developed and developing countries.For the unprotected, the notion of retirement does not exist; they must continue to rely on their work, which is a greater challenge for those in advanced age ( years or over). To survive, older persons also count on the support of the family and the community, which, if also resource-constrained, may not be able to offer solid social insurance. In this regard, older persons who are single, widowed or childless (particularly women) face an even higher risk of destitution. Meanwhile, countries with formal pension systems have been successful in reducing, if not eliminating, poverty during old age.Yet, the sustainability of existing pension systems has been increasingly put in question. Increased longevity, faulty programme design, mismanagement, and insufficient economic growth and employment-generation have undermined the financial viability of many of these systems. Additionally, the increase in the old-age dependency ratio, as described in chapter II, will place significant pressure on both formal and informal support systems if economic growth (and the generation of decent jobs) cannot be accelerated and sustained. At the same time, smaller family sizes and the reduced importance of the extended family will alter the availability and patterns of informal support as well (see chap. III).Pension systems should ensure income security during old age for all and, as a minimum, need to provide benefits that place recipients above the poverty line or any other socially acceptable minimum standard. Issues of solidarity, accessibility, affordability and sustainability are at the core of old-age pension system design and reform. In practice, these principles appear to be best approached through national pension systems designed on the basis of several pillars addressing specific needs, complementing one another, and tailored to particular circumstances. For instance, in a country with a large informal sector, universal coverage could be attained through a pillar offering minimum benefits. This minimum benefit should be made available preferably on a universal basis. The analysis in the present chapter shows that a universal social pension scheme which offers benefits equivalent to the international (extreme) poverty line can be affordable for the majority of developing countries, including most low-income countries. Another pillar could be introduced providing basic pensions for those segments of society holdThe economic security of older persons is challenged worldwideInformal support mechanisms do not provide solid social insuranceOld-age pension systems need to be reformed and expanded ing formal jobs. In this pillar, pensions could target a minimally accepted wage-replacement level. Moreover, this pillar should build in the necessary incentives for consistent participation while including solidarity mechanisms directed towards those contributors who are less well off in order to enhance their benefits. Last, those more affluent segments of society should be encouraged to complement the public pensions with their own accumulation of savings, either through private pension or employer-sponsored schemes or through other forms of asset accumulation, upon which they can draw when they retire.Pension systems may be privately or publicly administered, but ultimately the responsibility to guarantee, regulate and supervise the delivery of a basic pension lies solely with the government. Several countries introduced structural reforms in their pension schemes, moving from a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) scheme with defined benefits to a fully funded defined-contribution system (see box V. for definitions). Ultimately, these systems, the latter in particular, cannot guarantee income security during old age. Moreover, pension systems would still have to adjust in order to cope with the anticipated increases in demographic pressures: as the dependent population increases, more resources will be needed if a certain level of welfare is to be mainBoxV.Pension systems: a multitude of arrangementsThere is great diversity in respect of the design of old-age pension systems. In systems that are contributory, beneficiaries (and their employers in some cases) are asked to contribute to the financing of the benefits. Such contributions often take the form of a tax on labour income. Entitlement to future pension benefits is contingent on ones having a minimal history of contribution. The government may also participate in the financing of contributory schemes with funds from general revenues (or specifically earmarked taxes) for the purpose of subsidizing low-income workers, of covering administrative expenses and/or of making up deficits. Non-contributory systems, an alternative, are often financed with general taxation revenues and generally provide a flat benefit. These systems can be universal (covering the entire population) or targeted (covering only a target group, say, the poor). The targeting mechanism may be based on a means test, that is to say, access to benefits may depend upon recipients meeting certain criteria (for instance, that their income must fall below a certain level).Pension benefits can be financed on a pay-asyou-go basis (PAYG), where the contributions paid by the current generation of workers into the system are disbursed to pay benefits to retirees and no accumulation of financial assets occurs. Conversely, benefits can be pre-funded, that is to say, paid using resources accumulated previously in a fully funded (FF) system, by which each generation finances its own pension. Under a fully funded system, pension reserves should total per cent of the present value of all pension liabilities owed to current contributors.Defined-benefit (DB) schemes refer to pension plans that guarantee the application of a predefined or prescribed formula determining, for instance, a certain wage-replacement level. Defined-contribution (DC) schemes prescribe a periodic contribution, and future benefits depend on the level of contributions made and the returns on the investment of those contributions. Pay-asyou-go systems often operate on a defined-benefit basis. Recently, however, some countries have been reforming their pay-as-you-go systems and introducing a defined-contribution approach, whereby current contributions are used to finance current benefits; such schemes thereby retain the characteristic of a pay-as-you-go system. Under these schemes, however, in contrast with traditional pay-as-you-go schemes, contributions are credited to a notional individual account which earns a notional return based on a predetermined formula; in other words, resources are not actually put into a depository, thereby making this approach a pure accounting exercise. As the overall accumulated notional principal and return later determine ones pension benefit, such approaches can be considered defined-contribution schemes.Old-age income security tained for all and the burden is not to become too heavy for the working population. This is not to say, however, that current pay-as-you-go systems need not be reformed. This chapter indicates some of the adjustments that should be introduced, which could go a long way towards ensuring the financial sustainability of current systems while providing a minimum degree of income security for all based on solidarity among and between generations.Old age and income povertyInformation on the incidence of poverty among older persons is scattered, not readily available and often not comparable across countries or regions as data are derived using different methodologies, concepts and period coverages. Yet, it is possible to say that, in general, for countries where formal pension systems or old-age public transfers have extensive coverage, older persons are likely to be less affected by absolute poverty than the rest of the population. This is the case both in developing countries, such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay, and in developed economies. In the united_states of America, for instance, the poverty rate for the total population in was higher (at . per cent) than that among those aged years or over (at . per cent) (Social Security Administration, ; U.S. Census Bureau, ). In fact, the expansion of old-age pension coverage and increases in benefits have been important factors behind the decline in the incidence of poverty among older persons in the united_states, from per cent in (Engelhardt and Gruber, ) to less than per cent at present.Estimates of poverty among older persons in other developed countries with extensive pension coverage are often based on a concept of relative poverty. Related studies tend to use a definition of the poverty line based on a share of the median income. Being poor according to the relative poverty concept does not necessarily imply that a person or a household is unable to afford a minimum of basic goods and services. Rather, because it measures peoples positions relative to the mean or median of the distribution, relative poverty should be seen in this context more accurately as an indicator of inequality. In this regard, available data show that in some developed countries older persons are overrepresented in the bottom of the income distribution. In Denmark, for instance, per cent of persons aged years or over belonged to the bottom two deciles of the income distribution in , while the corresponding figure was about per cent for Greece, Portugal and the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland (Heinrich, ). Relative poverty seems to be higher among older persons than in the rest of the population in the majority of developed countries shown in figure V.a. In the case of the united_states, for instance, relative poverty remained stable in the s and s, thus indicating that older persons have not shared the increases in standard of living realized by the rest of the population (Engelhardt and Gruber, ). Similar trends were observed in Ireland in the late s as the income of older persons had not grown at the same pace as the median income (Forster and dErcole, ).For countries without or with limited pension systems, poverty among older persons tends to be comparable with the national average (see figure V.b) but is often higher than among the working-age populations. In the absence of access to old-age pensions, the greater risk of falling into poverty at older ages is typically caused by the limited job opportunities and/or reduced working capacity of older persons. Available evidence for latin_america indicates that older people (aged years or over) are not necessarily more likely to be unemployed than other age groups of the labour force (Gasparini and others, ). Rather, when employed, older persons tend to work fewer hours and to receive lower wages than younger cohorts.Pension systems reduce the likelihood of poverty in old agewess IrelandPortugalAustraliaUSA JapanNew ZealandFigure V.a.National and old-age poverty headcount ratios, selected developed economies, circa National poverty rateFigure V.b.National and old-age poverty headcount ratios, selected developing economies, -National poverty rateZambiaHaitiCote d'IvoireUruguayBrazilNote: Old-age poverty refers to those individuals aged years or over.Old-age poverty rate Old-age poverty rateOld-age income securityMore education generally provides access to better-paid jobs. The incidence of illiteracy is still relatively high among older persons in developing countries. As older persons also have fewer years of completed schooling, when they do continue to work they are more likely to have a low-skilled job. In Brazil, for instance, the incidence of poverty among those aged years or over with no schooling was at per cent in , whereas poverty affected only . per cent of older persons with eight years of schooling (Paes de Barros, Mendonca and Santos, ). The risk of falling into poverty at old age may also relate to family size. Older persons in latin_america tend to live in smaller households and are therefore less able to benefit from the sharing of goods in the household, that is to say, they do not gain as much as those in larger households from economies of scale in consumption (Gasparini and others, ).Large differences in poverty incidence also exist between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of pension schemes. For instance, in the case of the united_states, while the poverty rate among pension beneficiaries was . per cent in , the corresponding figure for non-beneficiaries was significantly higher at . per cent (Social Security Administration, ). Also, in other contexts, the impact of old-age pensions on poverty reduction can be considerable. In the absence of pension benefits, and all other things being equal, poverty among older persons would be much higher. Table V. presents evidence for a group of Latin American countries. The case of Brazil stands out, as per cent of those aged years or over living in rural areas receive pensions. The incidence of poverty among this group lies at . per cent (poverty line at $ purchasing power parity (PPP) per day); it would lie at per cent in the absence of such benefits (Gasparini and others, ).Even when the level of benefits is less than the monetary value of the poverty line, old-age pensions may help reduce the intensity of poverty and they can reduce household economic vulnerability by strengthening livelihood strategies and crowding in other support mechanisms that provide for income security. For instance, a significant proportion of beneficiaries of the rural pension in Brazil reported using part of their pension to purchase seeds and tools to support agricultural production (Delgado and Cardoso, ). Furthermore, pension incomes are often shared with other household members. In Namibia, for instance, over per cent of the pension income was shared among household members, and was spent on food as well as on education for grandchildren (Palacios and Sluchynsky, ). In this regard, pension-sharing can be a factor in reducing the overall degree of poverty. Naturally, the impact on poverty will depend on the size of the pension benefits and on the absence of offsetting reductions from other sources of income. If pension benefits are too small, sharing will imply minimal income gains on a per capita basis for household members. Yet, even in this case, pensions may contribute to poverty reduction if benefits are used for improving the educational or nutritional status of household members.Old-age pensions do not necessarily eliminate poverty and large differences in welfare among pensioners do exist. The incidence of poverty tends to be higher among older pensioners, as pension benefits and a longer history of contribution favour younger cohorts. Female pensioners tend, in general, to be poorer than their male counterparts, partly owing to the fact that older women often have not participated in the labour market and have not acquired a pension on their own. Living longer than men, and having survived their husbands, they receive survivors benefits which are lower than regular old-age pensions. In the case of the United KingVulnerability to poverty also depends on the level of education, access to jobs and household sizeOlder women tend to be poorer than older menTable V..Proportion receiving pensions and poverty headcount ratio for persons aged years or over, nationally and by urban/rural, selected Latin American countries, -aPercentageNationalUrban areasRural areasProportion receiving pensionsIncluding pension incomeExcluding pension incomeProportion receiving pensionsIncluding pension incomeExcluding pension incomeProportion receiving pensionsIncluding pension incomeExcluding pension incomeArgentina......BoliviaBrazilChileDominican RepublicEcuadorEl SalvadorGuatemalaHaitiHondurasJamaicaMexicoNicaraguaPanamaParaguayUruguay......Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of )......Note: Poverty line at $ purchasing power parity (PPP) per day. a Results of a simulation exercise.dom, for instance, the survivors pension is typically per cent of the couples pension, while income from other State benefits also declines after widowhood (Whitehouse, ). Additionally, as mentioned above, household arrangements may have a compounding effect on poverty; for instance, older persons living alone will not be able to benefit as much from economies of scale in consumption as those living in extended households. Consequently, one typically finds a higher incidence of poverty among both male and female pensioners who live alone; and older women are more likely to be poor than older men, as women are more likely to live alone in old age (see table V. and chap. III).The increase in female labour-force participation may mitigate the risk for women of falling into poverty during old age in the coming decades. However, as long as women continue to have shorter working lives than men and to earn lower salaries, the level of pension benefits will likely be lower and provide insufficient income security at old age. Additionally, if pension benefits have originated in fully funded schemes and are determined on a defined-contribution basis (see box V. for definitions), the annual pension income will be lower than mens owing to womens greater longevity. In all, the incidence of poverty tends to be higher among older women, and more so among those living alone.This does not mean that older persons living with a partner or in a multigenerational household will necessarily be less vulnerable to poverty. Other factors may come intoOld-age income securityTable V..Incidence of poverty among persons aged years or over and among persons aged years or over living alone, by sex, selected developed countries, PercentageMaleFemaleFemale living aloneMale living aloneAustriaBelgiumGermanyDenmarkSpainFranceGreeceItalyNetherlandsunited_kingdomNote: Poverty rate has been established at per cent of the median per capita income.play. If anything, co-residence tells very little about how income is generated and consumption allocated within the household. In some instances, large households may be a symptom of poverty in themselves, rather than a source of support and intergenerational solidarity (LloydSherlock, ).The risk of, and vulnerability to, poverty vary at the individual and country levels, reflecting differences not only in the availability and adequacy of old-age pensions but also in the patterns and the dynamics of traditional social insurance mechanisms and household coping strategies. Nonetheless, poverty was found to be higher than the national average in sub-Saharan households headed by older persons, whether they lived alone, with their adult children or in the company of their grandchildren. A study of sub-Saharan African countries showed that the incidence of poverty was significantly higher in countries among households where older persons were living with children, usually their grandchildren (Kakwani and Subbarao, ). In fact, it has been established that (a)mong the older persons who do not live alone, those living with grandchildren but not with children are in general the ones with lower indices of material well-being (united_nations, b, chap. V, p. ).In such living arrangements, often called skipped generation households, adult children are absent largely owing to mortality from HIV/AIDS and older persons are the sole breadwinners and caregivers for young children. Over per cent of orphaned children in South Africa and Zimbabwe, and per cent in Botswana, Malawi and the United Republic of Tanzania, live with their grandparents. In Namibia, the proportion of orphans living with their grandparents increased from per cent in to per cent in . This phenomenon is not restricted to Africa: in Thailand, half of the orphans live with their grandparents (Zimmer and Dayton, ). Owing to limited coverage of formal social security mechanisms and the disastrous impact on entire communities, these older persons continue to work as they shoulder the responsibility for caring for their orphaned grandchildren.AIDS contributes to an increased vulnerability to poverty in old agewess Livelihood strategies of older persons differ across countriesLimited pension coverage implies greater economic insecurity in developing countriesSources of economic support and livelihood for older personsThe livelihood strategies of older people vary greatly across countries and regions, but they are likely to be more complex and diverse in developing countries than in developed economies. In developed economies, with strong and extensive pension provisions and deep capital markets, the main source of livelihood and protection shifts from employment to pension income as one reaches a given retirement age.In developing countries, few have access to pension benefits and most have to rely on other, often insecure sources of income. Those who were poor during their prime working years have a high probability of remaining poor during old age. Those who were above the poverty line but who have been unable to accumulate enough funds to finance consumption also face the risk of poverty in old age. Informal support mechanisms, such as the family and the community, usually do not provide a stable and reliable source of income and can provide only limited insurance. Operating on a small scale, they cannot pool risks in order to provide greater protection against income shocks and guarantee a certain level of benefits, as do insurance systems provided by the State.During old age, people tend to rely on four main income sources: (a) private transfers from the family and social networks; (b) public transfers from pensions and other cash transfer programmes; (c) labour earnings; and (d) financial and other assets, including private pensions.Available data suggest that the composition of the various income sources is context-specific. The importance of private transfers tends to fall as the average income level rises, which appears to be the case, for instance, in Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China (see table V.). This trend could indicate that the higher the level of the mean income of the population, the smaller the importance of private transfers as a source of income during old age.The relative importance of the various sources of income also tends to vary with the age and gender of the head of household. In the case of the united_states in , for instance, those aged -derived a greater share of their income from earnings through work (about per cent) than those aged -( per cent). Meanwhile, publicly provided pensions are a relaTable V..Main sources of income during old age as a proportion of total income, selected countries, and Taiwan Province of China, selected yearsPercentageYearLabour earningsPrivate transfersPublic transfersAssets and otherJapanRepublic of KoreaTaiwan Province of ChinaThailandunited_statesOld-age income security tively more important source of income for older women ( per cent of annual income) than for older men ( per cent) (Employment Benefit Research Institute (EBRI), ).Labour earnings during old age are more important in developing countries than in developed ones. Issues of access to labour markets and employability of older persons were discussed in chapter IV and the discussion will not be repeated here. In contexts of widespread poverty, however, continued labour-market participation will most likely intensify poverty conditions during old age as labour productivity may decline as age advances. This is not to say that older persons should not seek to remain engaged in labour markets if they so desire. It is highly unlikely, however, that those whose labour earnings were not sufficient to place them above the poverty line during their working age years will command higher labour income when they age. Under these circumstances, continued engagement in labour markets per se will not be sufficient to guarantee an old age free of poverty.In developed countries, contributory pension schemes constitute the main policy instrument for ensuring income security during old age and provide regular and reliable income transfers in old age (Diamond, ). Financial and other assets accumulated during peoples working life are relatively more important income sources in developed countries than in developing ones. Developed countries have deeper capital markets, providing a wide range of financial instruments for savings, while higher average incomes provide more room for savings during working life.Such conditions are more restricted in developing countries. Asset accumulation is a part of the livelihood strategies utilized by people in developing countries, including the poor. However, assets are often used to smooth consumption, as a buffer, during times of adverse shocks, such as a bad harvest, rather than to provide for income security during old age. Even when assets are accumulated to provide resources during old age, they may prove to be an insecure source of such resources in many developing-country contexts. The returns from and the value of assets may be highly volatile. For instance, in rural societies, while cattle can be an important asset, they, like other animals, may die during an episode of drought, or sale proceeds may be lower than anticipated as other individuals (hit by the same shock) also try to sell their cattle (Dercon, ). Financial crises in many emerging market economies have sometimes caused a dramatic erosion of the value of the financial assets held by households, including savings of older persons.Private transfers are a main source of income during old age in much of the developing world. Such resource flows may take the form of monetary support, transfer of assets or in-kind support in the form of food, clothing, shelter and time for care. Generally, children are the largest providers of private transfers to older persons. Other relatives or friends, but typically those who are members of the extended family, may sometimes also contribute (Hermalin, ). The probability of receiving family support is higher when older persons reside with their children or other relatives than when they live alone. Co-residence is a more important determinant of the likelihood of older persons receiving private transfers than the fact that they have children who are still living (united_nations, b).Private transfers may turn out as well to be unreliable sources of income. First, reliance on family networks might not fully protect older persons against poverty, particularly in situations where these networks are themselves vulnerable to adverse shocks. Second, in most contexts, such transfers are voluntary and based on informal arrangements which may be subject to change. Only in a few countries has the obligation of the family to provide support to older parents been formally set out in the constitution or other legislation (Bongaarts and Zimmer, ). Such legislation does exist in China and Singapore, for instance. In the case of Singapore, policies have been adopted according to which the family has primacy as the primary source ofLabour earnings are a major source of income during old age in developing countriesAssets play a greater role as a source of income during old age in developed countriesPrivate transfers are important, but sometimes also unreliable, sources of incomewess A formal approach is needed to ensure economic security in old age income support and care for older persons, and the economic support of aged parents by their children is governed by law (Chan and others, ).The importance of private transfers in providing income security at old age is likely on the decline in many contexts owing to the reduction of family size, the rise in the number of older persons living alone and the changes in attitudes about care for older persons (as discussed in chap. III), although there exists no systematic empirical evidence in this regard. Hence, whether poverty at old age can be avoided in developing countries will greatly depend on the possibilities of extending the coverage, and ensuring the adequacy of the level of benefits, of formal pension schemes.Formal pension systems: ensuring income security during old ageThe inability of informal mechanisms to provide for adequate and sufficiently reliable income security in old age points emphatically to the need for ways to be found to improve and expand formal mechanisms so as to ensure economic support for all older persons. Formal mechanisms are already present in most countries in one form or another. Occupational or employer-related pension schemes have a long history: the first publicly managed and broad-based scheme was introduced just over a century ago in Germany under Otto von Bismarck, its first Chancellor (see box V.).BoxV.A brief history of old-age income securityGermany is credited with having been the first Western industrialized country to adopt (in ) a formal mechanism for instituting an old-age and invalid public pension programme, in this case, a contributory pension plan wherein workers, upon reaching the retirement age of , would be entitled to a regular pension payment. Pension payments were financed by contributions from those currently working. Hence, this scheme was labelled pay-as-you-go.The German pension scheme has served as a model for many pension systems around the world; and in the course of the twentieth century, the majority of developed economies also introduced formal public pension programmes through one means or another. These include (to name but a few) the united_kingdom, whose National Insurance Act mandating, inter alia, old-age insurance was passed in and expanded, following recommendations put forth by Sir William Beveridge in , after the Second World War; France, which made insurance plans for the aged and ill mandatory in ; the united_states, whose Social Security Act became law in ; and Chile, which established its social security system in .Social security was established as a right in the Declaration concerning the aims and purpose of the International Labour Organization adopted in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on May , and is integral to the implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ( December),a which states that (e)veryone ... has the right to social security and is entitled to realization ... of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity (article ) and that (e)veryone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control (article ).Guaranteeing these rights, which have been reaffirmed many times since and have been of intrinsic relevance to the provisions of many conventions and recommendations, may present a challenge to ageing societies; however, they should recognize their obligation to meet that challenge.Old-age income securityPublic pension schemes are often also an important tool for effecting income redistribution within cohorts, in particular to lower-income groups, with the aim of reducing poverty among those who were previously in low-paying occupations and thus unable to accumulate wealth. Yet, the extent to which formal schemes provide income security for older persons varies significantly. There are large disparities in terms of coverage, adequacy of benefits and contribution costs of old-age pension systems not only among but also within countries.The available cross-country evidence suggests that the share of the labour force contributing to a formal pension scheme increases with per capita income. On the other hand, as indicated in figure V., a few countries, including Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and Ukraine, have a pension coverage that is higher than might be expected given their level of gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. The importance of social pensions in these countries suggests that a commitment to universality does indeed matter.Labour-force pension coverage increases with income levelFigure V..Contributors to public pension schemes as a proportion of labour force, by income per capitaaBelarusGeorgiaUkraineArmeniaKyrgyzstanGabon. .. . .Income per capita (log). .Lower coverage in many developing countries is partly the result of the way in which contributions are generated and collected. Only a few countries finance the provisioning of public pensions through general taxation (in other words, only a few have non-contributory pension schemes). More often, public pension schemes are financed through contributions levied on wage-related income (contributory schemes). In such cases, the eligibility for pension benefits is contingent upon prior participation. Thus, the contributory approach typically excludes selfemployed and other workers in informal sectors for whom participation is at best possible only on a voluntary basis. There are a number of countries, however, that have successfully introduced old-age pension schemes for some segments of informal workers and are considering extending such coverage more broadly. This is the case for India (see box V.).Given the relationships observed in figure V., one might expect that with economic growth and industrialization, pension coverage would also increase in developing countries. This does not appear to be the case, howevernot even in the more advanced developing countries.Contributors as proportion of labour force (percentage)BoxV.Expanding social security in IndiaThe share of Indias population that is over years of age is expected to triple to per cent in , up from about per cent in . The provision of income security through traditional earnings-based arrangements is mainly constrained by the fragmentation of the labour force. Approximately per cent of the labour force (more than million persons) do not have any income security protection, as they are informally employed. Of these workers, million work in the unorganized sector and million in the organized, but small-scale business sector (comprising all unincorporated enterprises employing less than persons). A total of million are employed in the agricultural sector.India has undertaken a number of pension reforms in recent years. These have been largely confined, however, to the formal and public sector pension systems. Examples are the New Pension Scheme entailing the introduction of a defined-contribution scheme for new entrants to government service in . In the formal private sector, an employee provident fund and an employee pension scheme are operational as part of the Employee Provident Fund Organization. These are mandatory schemes for workers in defined industries earning below , rupees (Rs) ($) per month in establishments with more than workers. They covered only about million workers in (Shah, ).The provision of old-age income insurance to the vast majority of workers in the informal sector is limited and fragmented. Numerous central and State government programmes have been introduced. The National Social Assistance Programme, launched in , is a case in point. It provides the poor and destitute over age who have neither a source of income nor the support of family members with an old-age pension of Rs ($) (about half of the poverty line) through the National Old Age Pension Scheme.Despite the introduction of similar initiatives, only per cent of the informal sector ( million) had access in to social security entitlementslargely welfare assistanceprovided by the central and State government schemes: about million were covered by central government schemes, million by State government schemes and million by the National Old Age Pension Scheme. In addition to the central and State governments, there are non-governmental organizations involved in the provision of social security. Non-governmental organization-sponsored programmes reach an estimated million informal workers and provide health and life insurance, with old-age pension provision being relatively sidelined (National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector, ).Several proposals have been made aimed at providing social security to informal workers. In , the National Commission on Rural Labour recommended that, inter alia, an old-age pension benefit be targeted to low-income informal workers based on a means test. In , the National Commission on Labour made several recommendations, including a basic benefits package of death and disability insurance, health insurance, maternity coverage and old-age benefits.Recently, the National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector put forward a comprehensive proposal for extending coverage to workers in the unorganized sector. The draft unorganized workers social security bill calls for a comprehensive package providing to workers in informal employment a national minimum social security, which includes universal health and life insurance benefits as well as old-age security (in the form of old-age social or non-contributory pensions to poor workers and a provident fund to all others). Although the scheme excludes workers and farmers having an income of more than Rs , per month, it would cover some million workers ( per cent) in the unorganized sector and also provide coverage (through the health and maternity insurance component) for up to four dependent family members per contributor (Sengupta, ).Significantly, while the proposal foresees the existence of a provident fund, earning a guaranteed rate of return of per cent, for contributing workers, it also calls for a universal old-age pension for workers aged years or over who are below the poverty line, with a benefit equal to that of the National Old Age Pension Scheme. The scheme envisages financing from daily contribuOld-age income security tions by workers, employers and the government of Rs ($.) each for each participant. When the employer is absent, which is the case for the majority engaged in the informal sector, the government would provide the employers contribution. The total contributions of Rs , ($) per annum are to be split in order to provide for sickness and maternity insurance (Rs ), life insurance (Rs ) and old-age security (Rs ) (National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector, , p. ). The benefits provided will include, for example, coverage of hospital costs up to Rs , per year to workers and their families, sickness allowance for hospitalization beyond three days, a life insurance of Rs , ($) per beneficiary, and maternity benefits of up to Rs , ($).The Commission has detailed at some length how the scheme is expected to operate (including registration procedures and mechanisms for collection of premiums and disbursement of benefits) and has also clearly indicated that such a national scheme is indeed affordable. After five years of operation of the scheme, all million informal workers would be covered and total costs would reach . per cent of GDP per year. The central Government would bear responsibility for the cost of all pension benefits for those below the poverty line. All other costs would be shared with individual States which would bear one quarter of the costs.The challenges for implementing such a comprehensive scheme include ensuring that individuals continue contributing and that employers do not shirk their obligation to contribute. Tracking the eligibility for benefits may prove to be another challenge in practice. However, with sufficient political will, such hurdles can be overcome and the emergence of such a scheme will no doubt contribute significantly to providing greater income security in old age to informal sector workers.Box V. (contd)In many contexts, the liberalization of labour markets, which occurred during the s and s, have limited the expansion of wage employment in the formal sector and left the informal sector as the major employer (Gill, Packard and Yermo, ; Rofman, ). Pension coverage in latin_america, for instance, has not improved in the last years, as most employment growth has come from the creation of informal sector jobs and pension system reforms have failed to increase coverage (Economic Commission for latin_america and the Caribbean, ; and see the analysis on pension reforms below).Even in countries where coverage is extensive, income security in old age may be in jeopardy as the sustainability of existing pension systems is increasingly questioned. Countries with weak growth and weak employment performance over longer periods of time will, of course, feel a larger strain as they attempt to keep their pension schemes financially viable. High prevalence of early retirement practices as well as rising costs of welfare-indexed benefits may further undermine the sustainability of pension systems. In some cases, problems have been compounded by mismanagement, poor investment decisions and bad governance of the pension systems themselves, leading to their bankruptcy or to drastic reductions in benefits for pensioners.It is believed that, with population ageing, many existing pensions systemsnot only many private (that is to say, employer-provided) schemes, but also public schemes in many developing and developed countrieswill become too costly over time. In developed economies, there is an overall perception that pension systems have become unaffordable, with public spending on old-age pension benefits having already surpassed in per cent of GDP in countries such as Austria, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Poland and Sweden (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, ). The costs of public pension schemes are forecast to increase to per cent of GDP in countries such as Cyprus, Portugal and Slovenia during the first half of the present century owing to population ageing (European Commission, ).The sustainability of existing pension systems is increasingly questioned ...... as population ageing can lead to higher costs and lower revenueswess A broad approach is necessary for pension system design and reformsThe expected impact of population ageing on the financial sustainability of current pension schemes adds urgency to the need for reform. Pay-as-you-go pension schemes are considered particularly vulnerable, as a dwindling number of workers would have to support an increasing number of pensioners. Moreover, in some countries, the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic exacerbates the pressure exerted by natural population ageing on pay-as-you-go systems by disproportionately affecting those of working age and thereby eroding the contributory basis of pension systems.Consideration of pension systems design and reform, including coverage expansion, is therefore relevant to both developed and developing regions and countries, as schemes must be made readily available and accessible, economically sustainable, and financially affordable, while providing meaningful benefits for all to allow for economic security and old age free of poverty.Sustaining and expanding pension systemsHow pensions should be provided is the subject of considerable debate. The economics of pension systems are too complex and too context-specific to be encompassable by a one-size-fitsall framework. Pension systems also reflect societal preferences in terms of the redistribution of resources within and among generations. More importantly, pension schemes also indicate who should participate. As discussed above, any pension system should be built on the notion of providing income security for all.Those with the capacity to participate in the financing of their future pension benefits should do so not only to ensure equity but also to realize their rights and duties as citizens of a given country (Economic Commission for latin_america and the Caribbean, ). Thus, it may be useful to approach pensions systems as constructions comprising several layers or pillars, as suggested in various studies by the world_bank () and Holzmann and Hinz (), and as evidenced in the practice adopted by many countries. The different layers of the system should be tailored to specific country conditions and social preferences. For instance, in countries where formal labour markets are dominant, a single basic public pillar may be sufficient to provide income security in old age, one whose financing could be based on earnings-related contributions, as is the case for most pension systems in many developed countries. In such cases, the benefit level could be determined as a function of earned labour income, with the aim being to attain a certain wage-replacement level. At the same time, the system should offer the appropriate incentives so as to ensure consistent participation during a specified period of time. Moreover, solidarity mechanisms should be built in so that workers with lower incomes and/or workers with unstable and insufficient work history can also be provided with a minimum benefit.Countries where employment is largely informal or where there are dual labour markets could perhaps consider two basic public pillars: one non-contributory, offering minimal flat benefits, and the other contributory, along the lines described above. Moreover, it is important that the design of public pension schemes not intensify existing inequalities. For example, the disincentives to participate that contributory schemes may create for lower-income and informal sector workers should be avoided. In particular, contributory and non-contributory pensions should be available simultaneously for low-income groups, with the non-contributory element gradually declining in relation to the pre-retirement income (Economic Commission for latin_america and the Caribbean, ). Finally, individuals who have the capacity to do so should be encouraged to make provisions for their own old-age income security (through private or employer-sponsored old-age saving schemes or the accumulation of other assets) in order to complement income to be received from publicly provided pensions.Pension systems need to be tailored to the individual country contextOld-age income securityThe way in which pension systems are designed will influence exposure to, and distribution of, risks and consequently the degree of income security in old age. Under unfunded pay-as-you-go systems, pension rights constitute a claim against future GDP and are enforced through future contributions and/or taxes. This claim is subject to political risk directly and to macroeconomic and demographic risks indirectly. In regard to the latter, a deterioration of macroeconomic conditions or adverse demographic developments imposes a heavier burden on the future cohorts of workers, thus making the claim more difficult to enforce. In a fully funded system, pension benefits will depend on the value of accumulated assets and, in this case, they are directly subject to an investment risk and the volatility of returns on such assets (Turner, ). In a defined-contribution (DC) scheme, pension beneficiaries bear most of the risks, including that of not being able to systematically contribute to the system. In its purest form (without minimum pension guarantees), a defined-contribution system offers no insurance. The possibilities for intragenerational distribution and poverty relief are also more limited. In defined-benefit (DB) systems, risks are largely borne by the sponsor or provider of benefits, inasmuch as there is a promise that the pension will correspond to a certain fraction of the retirees wage (Barr, ).In any case, and perhaps more importantly, the ability of any pension scheme to generate adequate benefits and to remain affordable is rooted in the capacity of the country concerned to sustain economic growth.The centrality of output growth for pension sustainabilityWhile focusing on reform of formal pension systems, it is also essential to recognize that economic growth is necessary in order for an economy to provide income security for those who are retired. As discussed in chapters II and IV, the ongoing demographic transition implies that fewer workers will be providing for a larger number of non-working consumers. In the long run, the support of larger dependent populationswithout a lowering of the standard of livinghinges essentially on faster economic growth. This is especially true for developing economies with low pension coverage and where the informal sector dominates economic activity. An increase in formal sector employment widens access to pensions by strengthening participation in contributory schemes, hence improving income security in old age. Additionally, the relative expansion of formal sector employment will further contribute to increased sustainability of pensions in pay-as-you-go schemes by broadening the contributory base, thus reducing the pressures of ageing on such schemes.Much of the debate on pension reforms and pension system design concentrates, however, on the financial aspects of the two predominant pension schemes, without paying due attention to the question of output growth. Yet, any pension-related asset acquired by todays working populationeither as a financial asset, in the case of a pre-funded system with individualized accounts, or as a promise by the public sector through a pay-as-you-go schemeis a claim on future output. Thus, economic growth is at least as fundamental for the sustainability of a pension regime as the design of the regime itself.The macroeconomic implications of pension system performance may in turn influence the growth prospects of the economy. For instance, increasing deficits of public pension systems could raise public debt, which in turn could put upward pressure on interest rates and crowd out private investment, thus affecting economic growth negatively. Rising pension deficits could also lead to higher taxation, which in turn could increase labour costs and lower disposable household incomes and depress employment and output growth accordingly. Such possible macroeconomic implications underline the need to strive for financially balanced pension sysDifferent schemes imply different forms of risk-sharingWhile growth is key to increased income security for older persons ...... the pension system performance may also affect growthwess Existing schemes are being fine-tuned to enhance financial sustainability tems. On the other hand, the impact of pension funding mechanismsfully funded or pay as you goon savings is less clear. Although higher contribution rates may increase compulsory saving, overall higher mandatory savings may be offset by a reduction in voluntary private savings or savings elsewhere in the economy (see below). Further, the standard argument assumes that higher savings rates will always lead to higher productive investment, effecting thereby a permanent increase in real output per capita. In reality, however, the link between an increase in savings and increased investment is more complex, and not all savings necessarily will end up in investments that lead to faster growth (Barr and Diamond, ). Finally, it may also be the case that efforts to build up financial assets to support consumption in old age lead to a reduction in effective demand during the period of saving for such assets which could in turn could be detrimental to economic growth.Reforming pension systems I: fine-tuning system designTwo types of contributory pension system reforms have been undertaken: (a) strengthening existing systems by changing underlying parameters (parametric reforms) and (b) radically changing system design (structural reforms). Parametric reforms have been implemented in virtually every pay-as-you-go scheme and are much more widespread than structural reforms. This type of reform is attractive largely for political reasons, as these reforms are easier to implement and likely more acceptable to the public than those entailing a more fundamental change.Countries have introduced measures on both the revenue and expenditure sides to ensure the affordability of such schemes. One common adjustment has consisted in increasing the contribution premium paid into social security systems. There are limits, however, to the exercise of this option owing to the distortive effects high contribution rates have on labour markets, on both the demand for, and the supply of, labour. Other possibilities include the reduction of pension benefits (as undertaken in Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Republic of Korea, Portugal and Switzerland), the tightening of pension eligibility requirements (Germany, Italy and the united_states) and changing the indexation of benefits (Germany, Japan and Sweden). In fact, every member of the European Union (EU-) has undertaken some form of adjustment of the parameters defining its social security schemes (Zaidi, ). Changes to parameters related to retirement age, the pension formula and the contribution rate were part of the reform package in the majority of cases.In a growing number of countries, a raising of the retirement age, despite being unpopular, is being considered or has been already effected. For instance, in the united_states, the retirement age is to increase to in , while in France the latest reform proposes to increase the number of years of contribution required to receive a full pension by one year, between and , as well as to base future increases on changes in life expectancy as of . Such measures attempt to reduce the gap between the increases in life expectancy and the retirementPostponing retirement is inevitable ...Old-age income security age, which can be considerable. Currently, life expectancy at retirement in developed countries is already years higher than the statutory retirement age of that is common in many of them (see table II.).An increase in the retirement age is also expected to boost revenues as the length of the average working life is extended. At the same time, old-age pension expenditures will decline as retirees benefit from the system for a shorter period. In fact, this measure is potentially so effective that in the case of the united_states it has been estimated that if the normal retirement age were increased to by , about half of the current long-term deficit in social security would be eliminated and that (i)f the age of early retirement were increased at the same time from to , the currently projected deficit would essentially disappear (Bosworth and Burtless , p. ).An increase in the statutory retirement age will help to improve the viability of pension schemes only if accompanied by policies that also increase the effective age of retirement. This may require changes in labour-market conditions for older workers as discussed in chapter IV. Among industrialized countries, the age at which early retirement benefits can be retrieved ranges from in Italy for some occupations to in the united_states, while in most of those countries the regular retirement age is . In most countries, however, people retire before they turn . Early retirement is promoted by many pension schemes: According to Gruber and Wise (, p.): Once benefits are available, a person who continues to work for an additional year will receive less in social security benefits over his lifetime than if he quit work and started receiving benefits at the first opportunity.This implies that the number of pensioners will be much larger and benefits will have to be paid over a longer period than would be the case without early retirement, thus putting an unnecessary burden on pension systems. Problems affecting many pay-as-you-go systems therefore seem to stem largely from the fact that there are a larger number of years of retirement, not only because of increased longevity but also, and perhaps more importantly, because of a shorter working life involved. The European Commission (, p.) has in fact argued that member States are facing a problem of retirement rather than a problem of ageing. An increase in the effective retirement age from approximately years to the statutory age of years is probably the single most potent parametric reform option in the European Union. According to some estimates, it would reduce the increase in social security contributions required to finance future benefits by per cent, as compared with the scenario where no changes in the retirement age would be made. Delaying the retirement of workers and having them stay longer in the workforce (discussed in chap. IV) can go a long way towards sustaining pay-as-you-go systems, provided labour markets, reacting accordingly, are able to retain those workers.... as working lives have shortenedwess Creating a closer link between contributions and benefits may encourage longer labour-force participationWhile defined contribution schemes strengthen the sustainability of pay-asyou-go systems ...Reforming pension systems II: introducing notional accountsA number of countries have carried out a structural reform of their pay-as-you-go system without moving into a fully funded scheme. These countries introduced individual capitalization with defined contribution benefits while maintaining the pay-as-you-go form of their public pension scheme, having recognized that parametric reforms of pay-as-you-go schemes, as outlined above, offer an only partial solution to deficiencies in the design of pension systems. Additionally, in many pay-as-you-go defined-benefit schemes, the link between contributions and benefits typically is not very transparent to participants (especially when benefits are based upon an incomplete earnings profile). Thus, the incentive for continued labour-force participation once the minimum age eligibility for benefits has been met is weak, particularly if early retirement does not entail an actuarial reduction in benefits.In pay-as-you-go defined-contribution schemes, or so-called notional defined contribution (NDC) systems, individuals contributions are registered in notional individualized accounts, the balance of which is credited with a notional annual return (see box V.). Benefits depend on each individuals accumulated (notional) fund balance, that is to say, they are based on a complete contribution history and not just on a given number of years of contribution as is the case in most defined-benefit systems (Economic Commission for latin_america and the Caribbean, ). Thus, there is a priori no need to introduce a retirement age, as individuals themselves can decide when to retire, based on the annualized benefit they would receive. Such schemes are therefore designed to address the issue of early retirement.Pay-as-you-go defined-contribution schemes can, in principle, resolve the sustainability problem faced by many pay-as-you-go defined-benefit schemes, as no future defined-benefit obligations are incurred by the system. Rather, future benefit obligations depend on the rate of return. In particular, the rate of return that is credited to individual accounts can be linked, for example, to productivity changes, current and prospective demographic changes, wage growth, and so on. Thus, benefits are automatically adjusted with changes in the relevant parameters. For instance, in Latvia, the formula defining the notional return is based upon the growth of total contributions. In Sweden, it is based upon the growth rate of nominal wages, whereas in Italy it will follow the growth rate of nominal GDP.It is therefore possible to ensure that the pay-as-you-go defined-contribution scheme remains financially sustainable by adjusting the rate of return on contributions which will lead to a commensurate adjustment of benefits. Thus, reforms such as these facilitate maintaining financial sustainability of pension systems while retaining an important intergenerational solidarity component. Like any other individual capitalization system, however, such a scheme does not guarantee that everyone will have a pension and at least a minimum level of benefits, because benefits are based on each individuals contributions. This being the case, notional defined contribution reforms need to be complemented by measures that will ensure universal coverage and a minimum level of pension benefits (see below).... redistribution to lower income workers is limitedOld-age income securityReforming pension systems III: switching to fully funded systemsIt is frequently argued that fully funded schemes remain financially sustainable because benefits depend on the amount invested and the returns on such investment. The united_kingdom was among the first nations to move towards a funded provision of pensions in , but only partially. Chile adopted a more radical approach in by replacing the publicly administered pay-as-you-go defined-benefit pension scheme with a mandatory privately managed fully funded defined-benefit scheme (see box V. for definitions). Several other Latin American countries have introduced similar reforms. Structural reforms have also been implemented in Central and Eastern Europe and, to a lesser extent, in South and east_asia. Kazakhstan, for instance, switched completely to a fully funded scheme in . Other countries have maintained their pay-asyou-go scheme while introducing a fully funded pillar. These include Bulgaria (), Hungary (), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia () and Estonia ().While fully funded systems with individual capitalization can be financially sustainable in principle, the transformation of a pay-as-you-go system into a fully funded system has negative implications for public finances, as the pension obligations contracted under the old system have still to be honoured while pension contributions are being channelled to the new system (see box V.). Pensions funds typically provide much of the financing for these fiscal costs, as they tend to invest large shares of their portfolio in Treasury bonds. There are, however, macroeconomic implications. The related increase in public sector debt may put upward pressures on interest rates, thus further increasing the fiscal costs of the transition, and may affect private investments. The rising public sector debt may affect interest rates, thus increasing the cost of the transition and having implications on private investment.The claim that reforms leading to fully funded systems contribute to increasing savings, discussed previously, cannot be validated in many countries. Evidence from latin_america does indicate, however, that savings may have increased in response to the pension reform, but the precise impact is difficult to establish, as pension reform is often a part of wider reform efforts (Holzmann and Hinz, ). Moreover, if the objective is to increase savings, reforming the pay-as-you-go schemes need not be discarded. In particular, it has been estimated that raising the retirement age in a pay-as-you-go scheme could, through higher savings, increase GDP in Europe up to per cent (European Commission, ).Fully funded individual capitalization has been credited with offering superior rates of return. It is often ignored, however, that the higher return is a reflection of higher risk. While explicit capital returns may exceed the implicit returns on a pay-as-you-go scheme, the volatility of capital returns is also significantly higher. As a result, by shouldering the investment risk which may be very difficult, particularly for those in low-paying jobsparticipants are exposed to the possibility of significantly lower returns should their portfolio sustain large losses towards the end of their working lives.The advantages of switching to fully funded schemes may have been oversoldReforms have shifted risks to retireeswess BoxV.Moving from pay-as-you-go to fully funded schemes: a long and costly transitionAn important issue in structural pension reform is how to deal with, and finance, the transition from the existing scheme. In the case of a multi-pillar system, where fully funded and pay-as-you-go systems coexist, the burden of transition is often placed directly on contributors, who are required to contribute a given amount to the fully funded scheme in addition to what they contribute to the pay-as-you-go scheme. In Sweden, for example, workers contribute . per cent of wages to a fully funded, defined-contribution system, which operates alongside the public pay-as-you-go system.When the fully funded system replaces the pay-as-you-go scheme, however, workers who have contributed to the system but are not yet retired need to be compensated for their past contributions if they opt to switch to the new system. Current retirees need to continue receiving their pensions as contracted under the old system but this will occur in the absence of payment of contributions from current workers who have moved to the new system. On the fiscal side (and assuming there are no changes in pension benefits), the government may run a larger deficit, which will have to be financed by higher taxation, cuts in public spending or an increase in the public debt, thus making the implicit pension debt explicit.The experience of Argentina has shown that reform leading to fully funded schemes can have a significant economic impact on public finances. Argentinas reform of the pay-as-you-go system in led to a significant increase in public debt as the financial position of the social security system showed increasing deficits after . The balance of social security contributions and expenditures was positive at . per cent of GDP in , but by this balance had become a deficit of . per cent of GDP. It contributed to an unsustainable public debt situation which came to a head during the economy-wide crisis of .In the case of Chile, the cost of financing the operational deficit of the old pension system plus the cost of recognition bondsissued to compensate workers who had switched to the new system but had accrued pension rightsaveraged approximately . per cent of GDP per year during -, having peaked at . per cent of GDP in (de Mesa and Mesa-Lago, ). The costs have decreased over time, but are expected to persist up to (in the case of recognition bonds) and up to (in the case of the operational deficit), signalling the fact that transition is long-term, particularly when the pay-as-you-go system is abolished with a bang instead of being phased out gradually.The above cases illustrate how costly reforms can be (naturally, there may also be costs associated with not reforming unsustainable systems) and also point to the need for a strong fiscal framework to support such reform.Coverage has not increased under fully funded systemsMoreover, with benefits tied to contributions (and their return), involuntary interruptions to the payment of these contributions will imply lower pensions and increased risk of economic insecurity during old age. Additionally, when comparing returns, it is important to adjust administrative costs and charges, which can absorb a considerable amount of the returns. Such charges can amount to up per cent of contributions (compared with charges of approximately . per cent of contribution income to the publicly managed pay-as-you-go definedbenefit scheme in the united_states) (Thompson, ). Administrative charges lower the net returns for beneficiaries. For instance, per cent of administrative fees charged over the working life of a contributor will imply a per cent reduction in the value of the pension to be received (Diamond, , as cited in Barr, ).For Chile, after years of experience with pension reform beginning with the replacement of a pay-as-you-go scheme by a fully funded scheme with individual accounts, theOld-age income security outcome in terms of coverage has not been overly satisfactory. Despite the popularity of the fully funded system in the early years of reform, overall coverage declined relative to the pre-reform era from per cent of the employed population in to about per cent in (de Mesa and others, ), partly owing to low participation rates of the self-employed, as participation is not mandatory. Increased informalization of the labour market has also been a factor.Additionally, the closer correlation between contributions and benefits notwithstanding, the private capitalization systems have failed to increase the number of contribution payments by participants. It has been estimated that in latin_america, contribution densities (the ratio of the number of contribution payments made to the number of months the individual was of working age) of a large share of participants in fully funded, defined-benefits systems are insufficient to ensure their receiving a retirement pension or to generate adequate pensions (Economic Commission for latin_america and the Caribbean, ).Through the introduction of individual accounts, the social insurance component of social security is reduced, as these accounts limit the extent to which the scheme can function as a tool for redistribution within a generation and for the alleviation of poverty. In systems without individual capitalization, redistribution can take place depending on how benefits are calculated. For instance, lower-income individuals may receive greater benefits (in relation to their contributions) or have the value of their benefits adjusted under more favourable terms compared with the adjustment received by higher-income retirees.With individual capitalization, benefits are dependent on the value of contributions made and on their return. In such circumstances, workers in low-paid jobs may be unable to amass a minimum amount of income as pension benefits even if they duly contribute to the pension schemes. Moreover, contribution densities are much lower among lower-income groups, compared with those better off, and even more so among women. Women often have an interrupted and shorter employment history than men owing to childbearing and child rearing. Lower-income workers are frequently more reluctant to contribute to pensions, particularly if they are self-employed (and hence also more prone to periods without employment) and contributions are not mandatory, as is the case for Chile. As noted above in the section dealing with the sources of income of older persons, pensions are particularly relevant to the low-income workers, as these are most likely to have been unable to accumulate any (substantial) assets to complement their public pensions and therefore most likely to be threatened with destitution. Some redistribution may therefore be necessary either within or outside the pension systems in order to not exacerbate income differences and to prevent poverty in old age.Indeed, in the case of Chile, additional reforms are being considered owing to dissatisfaction with the current system. Minimum pension benefits financed by the Government out of its general revenues may not be available to any participant whose accumulated funds do not allow for a certain level of pension. Many participants will in fact be unable to meet the minimum requirement of years of contribution needed to qualify for the minimum pension; and it has been projected that approximately per cent of women who are currently between the ages of and will not qualify. Those not qualified to receive the minimum pension can apply for a social assistance pension; however, since the number of social assistance pensions is limited by the level of funding made available annually, not every eligible person who applies will receive one. Proposals for new pension reform in Chile therefore include, inter alia, a broader-based solidarity pension, financed by general taxation and provided on a means-tested basis. This reform would ensure a monthly pension to workers who were unable to save towards their retirement.Fully funded schemes with individual capitalization often lack the feature of solidarityNew reforms are being considered for the fully funded system in Chilewess A non-contributory minimum pension can be an important component of old-age income securitySolidarity, accessibility and affordability: moving towards universal coverageIssues of pension affordability are country-specific. With greater formal employment-generation, faster economic growth and improvements in the asset base of low-income households, the capacity to contribute to old-age pensions increases and the need for non-contributory pensions declines. In the meantime, however, for those living in poverty, the capacity to contribute is limitedif not impossibleand benefits need to be supported by other segments of society.The simplest minimum pension scheme designed to ensure old-age income security would be a universal transfer equal to the poverty line granted to all those above a certain age. Such a scheme could be entirely non-contributory, that is to say, beneficiaries would not directly participate in the financing of benefits. Benefits might be financed through general taxation (as, for example, in Mauritius), by some solidarity tax imposed on those participating in contributory earning-related schemes (as in Colombia) or by some specific earmarked tax (as in Brazil, for instance). Alternatively, benefits could be delivered on a contributory basis, but in that case access by those unable to contribute would need to be facilitated by subsidization.A simple exercise was conducted to assess the cost of universal non-contributory pensions for those aged years or over in developing countries and in economies in transition. The exercise assumed a basic pension equivalent to $ per year or $ per day (expressed in international dollars, that is to say, in purchasing power parity (PPP)), which corresponded to the international threshold used to define extreme poverty. The pension would be made available to all those aged years or over. The exercise also assumed that the universal pension could remain constant in real terms at $ per year during the entire period -. Further, it was assumed that GDP growth would be sustained at the average rate achieved during -. However, for countries with a rate of growth of more than per cent, the growth assumption was capped at the per cent level. Countries with negative growth performance during the period -were not considered in the exercise.The results are presented in figure V., which shows that the costs of providing a universal old-age pension scheme with benefits equal to the international poverty line does not appear to be very high for the majority of the countries considered in the exercise. For countries, the cost would be less than per cent of GDP in and for the cost would be less than . per cent of GDP. Additionally, costs could be kept relatively low, during the entire period, as for the majority of countries the rate of GDP growth would be comparable to, or faster than, the rate of growth of the population aged years or over. For many of the poorest countries however, the burden would be more substantial (see annex table A. for detailed results by country).In all, universal old-age pensions schemes offering benefits equal to the extreme poverty line seem to demand only a relatively small share of the GDP currently. Even if the cost of these programmes as a share of GDP is relatively small, it is still not clear whether they are affordable for low-income countries. Besides constraints such as the limited fiscal resources mentioned above, there is the fact that spending on social pensions might have to compete with public spending on what, like education and health, are typically qualified as priorities, or spending in areas, such as defence and debt service, in which countries often allocate a significant amount of resources. A cost of a universal old-age pension scheme of per cent of GDP would absorb about per cent of tax revenues in countries such as Cameroon, Guatemala, India, Nepal and Pakistan, among others, and would be equivalent of the size of the health budget in Bangladesh, Burundi, the Comoros, Cote dIvoire, Equatorial Guinea and Myanmar, to name just a few. Interestingly enough, some of these countries (Bangladesh, India and Nepal) are already providing non-contributory pension benefits, though not in all cases on a universal basis (see annex table A.).Universal old-age pensions may not be costlyCompetition for scarce resources is a challengeOld-age income securityFigure V..Simulated costs for developing countries of a universal social pension scheme designed to keep older persons out of extreme poverty, and Percentage of GDPMore than .-. .-. .-. .-. . or lessCosts can be lowered by increasing age eligibility. For instance, in the case of Nepal, benefits are paid only to those aged years or over, instead of to those aged years or over, the age group considered in this chapter. Other countries, like Mauritius, are moving towards age-differentiated benefits in order to lower costs by, say, providing a modest pension for the youngest old, who may be able to complement income by continued participation in the labour market, and a relatively larger one for the oldest old (Willmore, ). Costs could also be lowered by reducing benefits. Targeting, for instance, through a means test, is another option for lowering costs, particularly in contexts where poverty is not frequent among older persons. Conversely, in countries where old-age poverty is rampant, targeting would not provide much savings for the public budget.ConclusionsEmpirical evidence suggests that older persons living in countries with comprehensive formal pension systems and public transfer schemes are less likely to fall into poverty than younger cohorts in the same population. In countries with limited coverage of pension systems, old-age poverty tends to parallel the national average. The majority of persons in developing countries face, in the absence of formal pension coverage, considerable income insecurity during old age.With, on average, only per cent of their populations covered by social security benefits, developing countries face considerable challenges with respect to expanding formal protection so that old age can be free of poverty. In this regard, low-income countries often face a double challenge. On the one hand, the States capacity to raise revenues is limited and tax revenues tend to amount to a relatively small share of GDP (about per cent on average).Note: Universal pensions are estimated at $ per day for those aged years of over. The annual rate of GDP growth for the period -is assumed to be equal to that observed in the period -.Number of countriesLack of formal pension coverage contributes to income insecurity in old agewess The demographic challenge can be dealt with successfullyOn the other hand, the demands on scarce resources are multiple so that provisioning of old-age income security may be imperilled by the costs of achieving other social goals.In developed countries, well-regulated labour markets have made it possible for employment-based contributory pension schemes to cover almost the entire population. Thus, older persons living in countries with comprehensive pension systems are considerably less vulnerable as regards falling into poverty, but their economic security is in jeopardy as pension systems become financially unsustainable.Although demographic change can create problems for old-age pension schemes, from an economic perspective these problems are not insoluble (see also Barr, , p. ). In particular, the financial resources available to a pay-as-you-go system depend on the level of wages and employment rather than on the ratio of young to old (non-retired to retirees). By the same token, resources available for consumption for older persons (both in a fully funded and in a payas-you-go system) will depend on the goods and services produced by those of working age and on how much consumption workers are willing to forgo in favour of dependent populations.Output growth is essential for the sustainability of pension systems, particularly if the income distribution between active and non-active populations is not to be altered significantly and a given level of overall well-being is to be sustained. This is not to say that current systems are not in need of reforms and that systems in financial imbalance do not have negative consequences for the growth prospects of the economy. As discussed in this chapter and in chapter IV, steps to eliminate the perverse incentives of early retirement and other design flaws in current pension schemes and, to tap the large pool of inactive workers, including those in involuntary retirement, as well as to increase labour productivity, can potentially go a long way towards saving social security as we know it. This implies maintaining a system that provides a sufficient degree of risk-sharing and guarantees a socially acceptable level of benefits, so that old age will be free from poverty for all.The design of pension systems and their reform thus need to be based on a broad approach. Pension systems have to be tailored to country-specific conditions. In this regard, pension systems can be approached as constructions consisting of multiple layers or pillars adjusted to the prevailing characteristics and needs of different segments of society.Financial sustainability should be an important guiding principle in the design of any pension system, but not the only one. There is no point in having a financially viable system that provides inadequate benefits or does not reach all older persons. It is worth recalling that old-age pensions were introduced to address the risk of income insecurity, or poverty, in old age. As discussed above, the incidence of poverty among older persons is higher in countries where pension coverage is incipient. Social insurance has been the preferred mechanism for pooling the risks among a large enough number of individuals in order to protect them as much from suffering economic vulnerability during old age as from suffering financial shocks because of unemployment, disability and ill health during their working life.It is precisely the safeguarding of social insurance that has been the one important component missing in reforms that have focused on building pension systems centred around individual capitalization schemes. More generally, the move from a defined-benefit to a definedcontribution system (pre-funded, notional or otherwise) shifts the economic risks entirely to the pensioners. In a defined-benefit scheme, risks are largely borne by the sponsor or provider of benefits. For this reason, most countries that moved towards a fully funded defined-contribution system did introduce guarantees of minimum levels of pension benefits. This, however, has not solved the problem of ensuring adequate income security for all. For one, coverage has not improved. Moreover, not all participants may qualify for receipt of the minimum pension or may bePension schemes must be tailored to individual country needsSustainability is one important goal but solidarity also mattersOld-age income security able to accumulate enough funds to ensure a certain wage-replacement level. Therefore, solidarity mechanisms targeting lower-income contributors need to be strengthened in these systems.In fact, the move to a dominant fully funded scheme with individual accounts and paying benefits on a defined-contribution basis is no longer seen as the main ingredient in pension reform, but rather as only a component with respect to increasing protection in old age. Recognition of the need to undertake reform yet still maintain existing pay-as-you-go schemes whereby social insurance and an adequate level of wage replacement can be ensured has resurfaced. Furthermore, the failure of reforms of the contributory pillar as regards addressing the lack of access to old-age pensions for informal sector workers and persisting poverty in old age, especially in developing countries, is now increasingly being recognized.Accessibility should be an equally important guiding principle in the design and reform of pension systems. Emphasis on earnings-based social security schemes will necessarily lead to exclusion of large proportions of the population, particularly in developing countries, thus increasing the vulnerability of older persons to poverty. In this context, non-contributory pensions are distributional mechanisms designed to improve the economic security of older persons. It is clear from the experience of developing countries such as Brazil, Mauritius, Namibia, Nepal and South Africa that non-contributory pension schemes substantially reduce the risk that older persons and their families will fall into (extreme) poverty.Finally, affordability of old-age income security systems should be considered a guiding principle. Public resources are finite and, for many developing countries, insufficient to meet all social needs, hence trade-offs between development goals may have to be considered. International development assistance may help overcome a lack of resources, but ultimately it is the societies themselves that will have to decide on how to address the issue of conflicting interests with respect to the distribution of resources. In many instances, though, small distributional shifts can make a large difference. Along the same lines, it was shown that the cost of a social pension scheme providing a one dollar-a-day benefit to the entire old-age population would be less than per cent of GDP for most developing countries. Thus, even for many low-income countries with large informal sectors, it would seem that introducing and maintaining a basic layer of non-contributory social pensions represent an affordable option. More generally, in most developing countries, there is a need to ensure that sustainable non-contributory programmes are an integral component of pension systems aiming to provide a minimum degree of income security for all during old age.Old-age pension systems should be accessible to allHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesChapter VIHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesIntroductionThe health profile of populations has changed in parallel with the demographic transition. The importance of communicable or infectious diseases has declined and that of non-communicable or chronic diseases has increased. This phenomenon is referred to as the epidemiological transition. Its implications, particularly for the delivery of health and long-term care services to older persons, will be examined in the present chapter.In most developed countries, the epidemiological transition took place in the nineteenth and the early twentieth century. Developing countries are now at various stages of the transition, but taken as a group they are forecast to face a dramatic shift in the early part of the twenty-first century. There will be a major shift in the occurrence of deaths from predominantly among younger ages to mainly among older ages and from deaths due to communicable disease or maternal or prenatal causes to deaths due to non-communicable disease. Global HIV/AIDS deaths are projected to rise dramatically; on the other hand, the proportion of deaths due to non-communicable diseases is projected to rise from per cent in to per cent in (Mathers and Loncar, ). Ischaemic heart disease and stroke followed by cancer, chronic lung diseases and diabetes mellitus will become the main causes of death in the world. Notably, these causes of death share many of the same key risk factors: tobacco use, unhealthy diets, lack of physical activity and alcohol abuse.The demographic and epidemiological transition in developed countries took place over a long timespan. Increased life expectancy reflects improvements in nutrition and the success of public-health interventions on various fronts, including improvements in public systems for providing clean drinking water and for disposing of human and animal wastes and for ensuring the quality of food products, such as through the pasteurization of milk, as well as educational campaigns promoting healthy practices in matters of infant care, personal hygiene, sound nutrition, use of tobacco, alcohol and other drugs, sexual habits and so on.Many of these interventions were made possible thanks to substantial advances in medical knowledge dating from the middle of the nineteenth century. Improvements in the medical treatment of sick individuals advanced dramatically in the latter half of the twentieth century, especially following the development of antibiotic drugs as well as therapies for the effective management of cardiovascular disease. Most developed countries are already preparing for population ageing and have undertaken scenario analyses of the social and economic implications, in part out of concern for possible future strain on national and budgetary resources, especially in relation to the financing of pension and health and long-term care systems.The demographic transition in developing countries is taking place at a much faster pace. The health-care challenge for these countries is therefore generally much larger, as their health-care systems still have many deficiencies in respect of addressing diseases for which the younger population is most at risk, while the rapid ageing process has already led to much greater demands for health care by older persons. Out of an estimated million deaths in the world from all causes in , chronic diseases accounted for million ( per cent); and per cent of chronic deaths are considered to have occurred in lowand middle-income developing countries, primarily because these countries contain most of the worlds population, but also, partly,The epidemiological transition has already taken place in developed countries, and is now under way in many developing countriesPublic-health interventions contributed to the start of the demographic and epidemiological transitionsDeveloping countries face a double burden of diseasewess Developing countries need to expand and reform their health-care systems so as to manage this double burdenAgeing is a factor in increasing health costs, but not the main one.because the developing world is experiencing rapid ageing and the need to address the greater health needs of older persons (World Health Organization, , pp. and ). Concurrently, communicable diseases still constitute the major causes of death in many developing countries. Many developing countries thus face a double burden of disease: the large death toll and ill health associated with both communicable and non-communicable diseases.Developing countries need to expand and reform their heath-care systems so as to manage the double burden of disease. The establishment of prevention programmes to delay the onset of diseases and of formal systems for catering to the special needs of older persons, including long-term care if needed, is required. Moreover, such expansion must be accompanied and supported by a strong political commitment to expand health-care coverage and strengthen the administrative capacity of various levels of the Government. An additional reason for increased involvement of different levels of government is that familyor community-based informal support for older persons is under growing pressure due to falling fertility rates, smaller family sizes, increased longevity of older persons and changing cultural norms regarding caring for older persons, as discussed in chapter III.This chapter argues that, while the challenges are large, they are not insurmountable. The analysis shows that population ageing is a factor, but not always the main factor, in rising health costs. Estimates of future health costs for an ageing population vary and are subject to much uncertainty, but, as analysed below, most studies concur that the impact of ageing per se would be to increase public-health expenditures by a range of from about to percentage points of gross domestic product (GDP) over several decades. Similar figures apply for the future increase in public spending for long-term care in the developed countries, although very much depends on the design of systems of health-care delivery and financing.Other factors besides ageing are pushing up health costs and much will depend on whether the prices of health-care provisioning and medicine can be contained. The challenges will differ from context to context and will reflect the stages of the demographic and epidemiological transitions that countries have reached. Action will be required on many levels to provide in an affordable manner for the health needs of the whole population, including older persons. Taking into account the expected speed of the demographic and epidemiological transitions, all levels of government will have to re-examine the way in which health-care services are provided to the population in general and to older persons in particular; the way in which the system that eventually emerges is financed by both public and private sectors; and the ways in which the ability of society to offer special programmes for older persons can be enhanced. However, there is little question but that the size of the health sector in the economy and public expenditures on that sector will tend to increase over time, even if efforts are made to contain the increase in costs; but as this expansion has been foreseen and is taking place over time, it should normally be manageable in a country that sees a steady rise in per capita incomes. As much of this expansion can be foreseen as part of a long-term trend, economies can be made to adjust to it gradually over time.Epidemiological transition and population ageingMortality decline and the epidemiological transitionIn pre-transitional, high-mortality populations, infectious and parasitic diseases were the dominant causes of sickness and mortality, and a large proportion of deaths occurred at younger ages. Mortality rates were high across the age range, but infants and young children were particularly vulnerable. Chances of survival improved, especially among children, as the risk of infectious disease was reduced through improvements in sanitation, hygiene, nutrition and medical therapy. As more and more individuals survived to adulthood and even to old age, they were increasThe epidemiological transition implies a shift from the predominance of infectious diseases at younger ages to that of non-communicable diseases at older agesHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies ingly exposed to the risk factors associated with chronic diseases. Over time, non-communicable, chronic and degenerative diseases became the foremost causes of morbidity and mortality, so that the vast majority of deaths now occur at older ages in the countries that have completed this transition.In developing countries, this transition started later than in developed countries and was particularly rapid in the second half of the twentieth century. Large differences remain in the epidemiological profiles of various regions. Figure VI. illustrates regional differences in the breakdown of causes of death into three major groups: (a) communicable, maternal and perinatal, and nutritional causes; (b) non-communicable chronic diseases; and (c) injuries. In the figure and the following discussion, countries and other areas are grouped into regions according to the classification framework used by the World Health Organization (WHO).The epidemiological transition in developing countries accelerated in the second half of the twentieth centuryInjuriesNon-communicable diseasesCommunicable, maternal, perinatal and nutritional conditions on WHO Global Bureau of Disease projections for , available from  (accessed January ).In Africa, communicable diseases are still predominantFigure VI..Distribution of deaths by major cause group, WHO regions, PercentageEastern MediterraneanSouth-East Europe AsiaWestern PacificAfricaAmericasIn Africa, per cent of deaths in were attributable to the first group of causes, whereas per cent were due to chronic diseases, reflecting the fact that this region is still at an early stage of the epidemiological transition. Sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, has been severely affected by HIV/AIDS, with an estimated . million HIV-positive individuals in , although in several affected countries, the pandemic has slowed or reversed a downward trend in mortality. Moreover, associated infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, have continued to rise. Available data indicate that by more than million people worldwide had died of AIDS and an additional . million were living with HIV (UNAIDS ; UNAIDS and World Health Organization, ).wess Non-communicable diseases are predominant in other developing countriesTwo other WHO regions, South-east_asia and the eastern Mediterranean, also have a substantial burden of disease from the first group of causes, but more than half of the deaths in these regions are now due to non-communicable diseases. In Europe, on the other hand, the vast majority of deaths are attributable to non-communicable causes.The differing epidemiological profiles of the various regions reflect their age patterns of mortality. For the developing world as a whole, deaths in -were distributed relatively evenly across the age span, with per cent taking place under age , per cent among adults aged -, and per cent among adults aged years or over. In sub-Saharan Africa, however, children under age had the highest number of deaths (estimated at per cent of total deaths), reflecting the large burden of communicable, prenatal and nutritional causes. Another per cent of deaths, many of which were caused by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, took place among adults aged -; maternal mortality, injuries and chronic diseases leading to early death were also important causes. The patterns observed in sub-Saharan Africa mark a strong contrast with those in developed countries, where deaths were concentrated among persons aged years or over ( per cent) and only per cent among children under age . Yet, non-communicable diseases are becoming increasingly important as causes of death in lowand middle-income countries; moreover, they tend to occur at younger ages than in high-income countries (World Health Organization, b).With continued medical advances, most developed countries experienced continued declines in mortality in the second half of the twentieth century as deaths from non-communicable diseases, particularly cardiovascular disease, took place later in life. France, where between and the estimated level of life expectancy at age rose from to years for men and from to years for women (united_nations, b), is a representative case among developed countries. With increased longevity, death has become increasingly concentrated at advanced ages: for example, in -, more than per cent of deaths in France took place at ages and above and per cent occurred at ages and above.In some countries, mortality has increased even if the epidemiological transition has taken place, owing to assorted social, economic and behavioural causes, including accidents, violence and substance abuse, which are often a reflection of stress caused by the profound changes in socio-economic conditions (Kinsella and Phillips, ). In the countries of Eastern Europe, infectious diseases had been largely controlled by the s, but mortality from cardiovascular disease continued to rise; and during the period of central planning, the region did not see the health advances witnessed by its Western neighbours, some of which had started off with lower life expectancy (united_nations, b, p. ). In the early s, several countries of the former Soviet Union experienced a marked worsening of mortality from cardiovascular disease and external causes, particularly for men. In the russian_federation, the death toll in recent years has been particularly high for working-age males.With increased longevity, death has become more concentrated at advanced agesHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesHealth and disability in the older populationWhile episodes of communicable disease can have disabling consequences, non-communicable diseases, such as cardiovascular disease and cancer, often bring about a long period of poor health and diminished functioning. In addition, some non-fatal (but often chronic) conditions can have an important impact on the quality of life and health-care costs for older individuals. Examples of such conditions include hearing and vision loss, musculoskeletal conditions such as osteoarthritis, and cognitive impairments including Alzheimers disease and other dementias.With populations ageing rapidly in developed countries, as well as in many developing countries, the evolution of the health status of older persons has broad implications. Increased life expectancy is usually considered to be a favourable outcome of social and economic development, but how healthy are the added years of life? If medical treatments postpone deaths from chronic conditions but do not delay the onset of the conditions themselves or their disabling consequences, the result could be an expansion of morbidity and disability over the life course of individuals. Alternatively, if the same forces that delay death also delay the onset of chronic conditions, then morbidity and disability could be contracted into a shorter period (representing the so-called compression of morbidity).Little information is available about long-term trends in the incidence or prevalence of chronic disease and morbidity. One set of data provide information about white veterans of the Union Army of the united_states of America, who fought in the American Civil War of -. These veterans had been subject to regular medical check-ups and, at the beginning of the twentieth century, would have been between about and years of age. Only per cent of this cohort was found to be free of chronic disease conditions. By contrast, survey data from indicated that per cent of white males of the same age group were free of such conditions. Similar evidence indicates that the average age of onset for heart disease rose from at the beginning of the twentieth century to at the end of the century; for arthritis, the rise was from age to age . Thus, the average delay in the onset of chronic conditions over the century was more than years, whereas the average increase over the same period in male life expectancy at age in the united_states was about . years (Fogel, ). Significant factors underlying the declines in chronic disease observed during the twentieth century included reduced exposure to infectious diseases in childhood and young adulthood, occupational shifts leading to changes in the nature of work and working environments, and increases in average body size.More recently, several health indicators designed to examine whether a compression of morbidity and related changes are taking place in a similar fashion in various populations have been proposed. Among these measures, a few variants under the rubric of healthy life expectancy are perhaps the most widely used. They measure how many years a person can expect to live in a healthy state, given current rates of mortality, morbidity and disability. Since, by definition, healthy life expectancy can be no greater than total life expectancy, a comparison of the two statistics provides an indication of the relative length of life spent in good as opposed to bad health. There are various definitions of healthyit can mean living in the absence of all disease, or of severe disability, or of even mild disabilityand thus healthy life expectancy can be computed in various ways. These computations have different names, including active life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy and health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE). It should be noted that using these measures for comparing levels of healthy life expectancy across countries remains difficult, particularly because the resultant indicators are influenced by whether they are based on diagnosed conditions or self-reported health status, by the specific questions asked or the definitions applied to assess health and disability in surveys, and by cultural differences in the perceptions of health.Some non-communicable diseases often bring about a long period of poor healthThe evolution of health status at older ages has implications for health systemsThe prevalence of chronic disease and morbidity seems to have declined or been delayedover the long termSeveral health indicators designed to measure healthy life expectancy have been proposedwess Despite these problems of comparability, a few general conclusions can be drawn from the available evidence. Most studies have found that women have longer life expectancy compared with men, but also spend a longer period of their life in poor health (Romero, da Costa Leite and Landmann, ). Another common finding in these studies was that people in developing countries are likely to spend a greater fraction of their total lifespans in poor health. In developing countries, the onset of both fatal and non-fatal diseases tends to occur at younger ages than in developed countries. As a result, when developed and developing countries are compared using health-adjusted life expectancy by WHO, the estimated number of years spent with a disability is about the same in both groups of countries. Figure VI. presents the WHO estimates by sex of total and healthy life expectancy at birth and at age for developed and developing regions. In the low-mortality countries, women typically live longer than men but spend a longer period. years for women as against . for menin ill health at the end of their lives.Women tend to spend a longer period of their (longer) lives in poor health, and people in developing countries spend a greater fraction of their total life in poor healthFigure VI..Total and healthy life expectancy at birth and at age , by region and sex, At birthAt age Low-mortality Male countries FemaleEastern Europe Male Femalelatin_america Male FemaleEastern Male Mediterranean FemaleSouth-east_asia Male FemaleChina Male FemaleOther western Male Pacific FemaleHALE Africa Female LHEWorld Male FemaleNote: HALE refers to health-adjusted life expectancy and LHE to the expectation of lost healthy years, that is to say, to the difference between total life expectancy and health-adjusted life expectancy.Sub-Saharan MaleExpectation at birth (years)It is difficult to go beyond these broad statements about differences in healthy life expectancy between men and women and between developed and developing countries, and draw firm conclusions about trends and differences in healthy lifespan around the globe and its relationship to total life expectancy. For example, in a recent study of trends in healthy life expectancy in countries of the European Union (European Health Expectancy Monitoring UnitHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies(EHEMU), ), where one would expect comparable data to be most readily available, there were found wide variations in the estimated level of disability and different directions in trends. Although some countries showed evidence of a compression over time in the duration of morbidity across the age range, others showed evidence of an expansion. The study concluded that those conflicting results might have indicated that the estimates were still not comparable across countries, despite efforts to adjust and harmonize the data.Another example of the difficulties of interpreting such information comes from a study in China (Qaio, ), which found that the active life expectancy of older personsthat is to say, the number of years of life spent disability-freehad declined between and . This decline could have been due to a transition from a system of universal but often rudimentary Government-provided health care under the centrally planned economy to one characterized by an increased reliance on user fees and the privatization of many medical services, which might have been detrimental to the poor, especially in rural areas, with respect to coverage for their basic medical care. However, this conclusion constitutes only one possible interpretation of the data. Since the measure of active life expectancy was based on self-reported health in a series of surveys, it is unclear whether actual health had worsened over the study period or whether a negative reaction to changes in the health-care system and new expectations about medical care had led more people to report that they were unhealthy.Health differentials and their implications for future trendsStudies of older populations in developed countries have found consistent relationships between socio-economic status and levels of morbidity and mortality. In general, the more advantaged segments of those populations (comprising people with higher incomes, higher levels of education, higher perceived social status, etc.) tend to be healthier and to live longer than their less advantaged counterparts. Therefore, it is expected that future levels of health and disability will likely be influenced not only by changes in the general health environment and medical technology, but also by changes in the composition of the older population with respect to per capita income, educational levels, health status in early life and subsequent behaviour as adults.Various studies have shown that lower levels of chronic disease and disability are experienced by those with higher levels of education. Experts have not yet reached an agreement on the exact mechanisms producing this link. Possible explanations include psychosocial effects on persons associated with different types of jobs and differential use of health knowledge and technology, and the high correlation between education and incomes and therefore the ability to pay for medical services (Cutler, Deaton and Lleras-Muney, ). As access to education, including higher education, is improving in most parts of the world, this should produce extra pressure for an expanded coverage and enhanced quality of health care. Moreover, the population cohorts moving into the older age range in the coming decades will be increasingly well educated, suggesting a possible beneficial effect on future trends in health and overall well-being for older persons and greater health-seeking activity by them. It should be stressed, though, that the strength of the relationship currently observed between education and health is not uniform across countries (Kinsella and Velkoff, ).General living conditions at earlier ages, including nutritional status and exposure to communicable diseases, are known to have important impacts on health in later life. For example, exposure to the hepatitis B virus has been linked to later development of liver cancer, and acute rheumatic fever in childhood often leads to rheumatic heart disease, which is still aHigher incomes, higher levels of education and higher perceived social status are associated with healthier and longer lifeWhile better living conditions at earlier ages may have positive impacts on health in later life ...wess ... there are still many unknown factors that affect health status in later lifeSmoking, exercise and diet have major impacts on health significant killer of adults in developing regions (Elo and Preston, ). Short stature, where it is an outcome of retarded growth due to nutritional deprivation and disease in childhood, has been associated in developed countries with higher risks of mortality at older ages, particularly from cardiovascular diseases (Aboderin and others, ; Elo and Preston, ; Fogel, ).Nevertheless, there are still many unknowns with respect to the relationships between conditions in early life and health outcomes in later life. A WHO report concluded that it is still premature to recommend policy interventions in the early stages of life (for example, measures to increase birth weight) for the express purpose of influencing adult health, especially since evidence that these relationships hold in developing countries is still lacking (Aboderin and others, ).More policy-relevant are trends in individual behaviour such as smoking, exercise and diet. For example, in an estimated . million adult deaths worldwide were attributable to smoking (Ezzati and Lopez, ). Compared with non-smokers, smokers are at extremely high risks for many diseases. The list includes but is not limited to lung cancer, cardiovascular disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This excess risk is reduced almost immediately by smoking cessation and continues to fall with increasing length of time after cessation.Although smoking rates have been higher historically in developed countries, more than half of all deaths attributable to smoking now occur in developing countries. These countries are beginning to experience the impact of the accumulated hazards of the increase in smoking in recent decades. In Northern America, Japan and some Western European countries, smoking rates among men have declined in recent decades. However, over this same period, the prevalence of smoking among women in these regions has either continued to rise, stabilized at high levels or declined only slightly. Smoking rates vary widely among developing countries but are generally either rising or stable at high levels. In general, smoking is much more prevalent among men than among women in these countries.The mortality burden from smoking in developing countries is concentrated in a relatively young age range compared with that in developed countries, reflecting a more recent widespread use of tobacco. However, given the population growth projected for developing countries, there will be an increasing burden of tobacco-related morbidity and mortality unless steps are taken soon to reduce rates of smoking in men and to prevent increases in those rates among women.In developing countries, higher socio-economic status is sometimes associated with a higher prevalence of risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such as high blood pressure (Aboderin and others, ), since urban and other advantaged population segments are more likely to adopt Western lifestyles. However, as unhealthy behaviour patterns like smoking and overeating spread to larger segments of the population, it seems likely that socio-economic gradients in risk factors and non-communicable disease morbidity will come to resemble those in the developed countries, with worse outcomes among groups with lower socio-economic status.Much of the preventable component of the non-communicable disease burden is linked to a number of risk factors that can be modified through individual behaviour. Risk factors with quantifiable causal effects on chronic diseases include high blood pressure, high cholesterol, overweight and obesity, low fruit and vegetable intake, physical inactivity, smoking and alcohol use (Ezzati and others, ).An increasing burden of tobacco-related morbidity and mortality is expected in developing countriesOver time, noncommunicable disease morbidity in developing countries will come to resemble that of developed countriesHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesAre health-care systems prepared for population ageing?Health resources and expendituresThe coverage and benefits provided by health-care systems to older persons vary considerably between developed and developing countries. The differences reflect not only the human and financial resources made available for older persons, but also societal values and views concerning the role and responsibilities of the public sector in caring for the general health of the public. Differences in the history and structure of overall social welfare programmes for income support and health care across countries therefore make it difficult to provide a general picture of the typical health-care system in developing countries (Ofstedal and Natividad, ).The existing health systems in developing countries, particularly low-income ones, are still mainly geared towards providing care for acute episodic conditions and not towards chronic care needs and care specific to older persons. As noted above, however, evidence from developing countries shows a high prevalence of risk factors for chronic conditions, such as smoking, alcohol, diet and weight. The missed opportunity to prevent or deal earlier in life with age-related non-communicable diseases may lead to increases in their incidence, prevalence and complications later in life.Overall, resources devoted to the health sector in developing regions are not up to the levels observed in the developed world (see table VI.). For the most recent year in the period -for which data were available, African countries, for example, had . physicians per , residents, compared with . in developed countries and . in Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). Furthermore, the shortage of health workers is often associated with difficult working conditionslong hours, low pay and the shortage of adequate medical supplies, for example. While these differences in health-care inputs do not necessarily translate into similar differences in the general health status of populations, the lower availability of physicians and hospital beds no doubt do adversely affect health conditions. The World Health Organization (a) offers evidence that the number and the level of professional skill of health workers are positively correlated with the degree of immunization coverage and primary-care outreach, which in turn are important factors in infant, child and maternal survival.Table VI..Number of physicians and hospital beds, by region, -Health-care systems vary considerably among countriesThe existing healthcare systems in many developing countries face difficulties in meeting the double burden of diseasePhysicians per , residents (-a)Hospital beds per , residents (-a)Developed economiesAfrica.beast_asia and the PacificSouth AsiaWestern Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanEconomies in transitionwess The brain drain of health professionals constrains the required expansion of health systemsThe emigration of health professionals (and home-care workers) from developing countries further aggravates the situation. This migration is a result of a shortage of nurses in many developed and some middle-income developing countries. Emigration of health workers from developing countries is further induced by the relatively low pay, unattractive working environment, and lack of investment in education and training in their own health sectors (World Health Organization, a).Medical care and delivery are indeed becoming more of a global industry, with doctors throughout the world learning of the latest techniques being practised in the countries with the most advanced medical research facilities. While this may be to the advantage of developing countries, the brain drain of health professionals is straining the required expansion of their health systems. According to one study, already in practising physicians in the united_states is foreign trained and it has been estimated that by the united_states could face a shortage of , nurses and , doctors (Garrett, , p. ). The same study argues that unless domestic training facilities and salaries of teachers expand sufficiently in the developed countries to be able to satisfy their expanding needs for medical personnel from their own populations, the result could be a further drain of medical personnel from developing countries. The brain drain phenomenon has been particularly noticeable in Africa: for example, Zimbabwe trained , doctors during the s, but only remain in the country today (ibid.). In , the country had been able to fill per cent of its nursing positions nationwide; today only per cent are filled. In Zambia, only of the doctors trained over the last years remain in the country today.On the other hand, as the medical industry is a global industry, patients from developed countries are frequently visiting poorer countries to obtain at lower cost medical services that they would otherwise have received at home. This is especially the case for cosmetic and elective medicine that might not be covered by the insurance policy or health system at home. Similarly, in order to reduce their living costsincluding medical and, in the case of a chronic illness, nursing costsand perhaps in order to enjoy a healthier climate, richer older persons often choose to relocate to a poorer country. It could be the case that this extra demand for the medical services of poorer countries will help them to retain medical and nursing staff and to expand coverage to the overall population.In general, however, developing countries, particularly low-income ones, tend to spend a much lower share of their national income on health care (see table VI.). For example, per capita health expenditure in sub-Saharan Africa is over times less than the average of such expenditure in the developed world.The disparity in health-care services between rich and poor countries becomes even clearer when sources of health spending are examined (see table VI.). Notably, the public share of total health spending tends to increase with per capita income, implying that individuals in developing countries are more likely to obtain health care through private schemes. In practice, most people pay for such services directly out of their own pocket, given the low coverage of private health insurance schemes in developing countries. What is more, the poorer the country, the larger the share of out-of-pocket expenses is likely to be. In , the share of public spending in total health expenditures was per cent in the low-income countries group, as defined by the world_bank, per cent in lower middle income countries, and per cent in upper middle income countries. In particular, the share of public spending in total health expenditure in South Asia as a whole in was . per cent, the lowest among the regions. Also withinAt the same time, patients from developed countries now visit poorer countries to obtain medical services at lower costIn developing countries, most people pay directly from their own pocket for health careHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies Table VI..Total health expenditure, by region, -Health expenditure as percentage of GDPHealth expenditure per capita (current united_states dollars)Developed countriesDeveloping country regionsAfricaSouth and east_asiaWestern Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanEconomies in transitionTable VI..Share of public spending in total health expenditures, by region, -PercentageDeveloped countries(excluding united_states)Developing country regionsAfricaSouth and east_asiaWestern Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanEconomies in transitionMemorandum items:aLow-income countries.bLower middle income countries.bUpper middle income countries.bdeveloping countries, it mostly holds that poorer people have a higher share of out-of-pocket expenses on health care than richer households (see world_bank, b). The lower public share of total health spending not only implies a heavier financial burden at the personal level, but also reflects the relatively lower revenue-raising capacity of poor countries and the lower level of the Governments health interventions to mitigate market failures in health-care and health insurance markets (see Schieber and Maeda, ).wess The case of the united_states demonstrates that the relationship between ageing and health expenditure is not clear-cutAgeing and the need for reform of health-care systemsTo meet the changes in health demands emanating from the unprecedented trend in population ageing, major adjustments will have to be made in every dimension of a health-care system. There will be important changes in the type of health-care services that are demanded, and in the required coverage of health insurance schemes, as well as in the direction of research agendas. The enhanced prevalence of chronic diseases and needs for long-term care will likely also have implications for the living arrangements of older persons and the relatives engaged in caring for them.The fact that in developed countries population ageing has been accompanied by substantial increases in medical expenditures has led to the widely held perception that it is population ageing in particular that is driving up health costs and that these costs may become unsustainable. This perception is based on the following simple reasoning: Since older persons have a higher risk of being affected by disease and thus of requiring more medical attention than younger people, an increase in their share of the total population would be expected to drive up medical expenditures. Even though the united_states lacks universal health coverage, unlike most other developed countries, health-care expenditure per capita (inflation-adjusted) has consistently outgrown gross national product (GNP) per capita since , pushing that countrys share in GNP from . per cent (Newhouse, , table ) to about per cent at present. The trends have been similar in other countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), although none has so far reached the level of healthcare expenditure as a share of GNP or of health-care expenditure per capita attained by the united_states. The question, however, is to what extent ageing has been a factor in these rising health costs. The answer to this question as supplied by the experience of the developed countries can help point the way for developing countries.Some studies show that the relationship between population ageing and health expenditure is not as close as it is perceived to be. Based on age differentials in spending on health care, the demographic change in the united_states for the period -can explain a mere per cent of the total increase (Lloyd-Sherlock, ). Similarly, changes in demographic structure over the period from -to -were also estimated to be responsible for per cent of the observed increases in health-care expenditure in Australia and for per cent in Canada (Gray, ). Apparently, non-demographic factors explain most of the rise in health expenditures in these countries. In contrast, over the same period, the comparable figure for Japan was per cent. The demographic structure of the country is becoming older at a faster pace than that of other developed countries, making population ageing a larger factor in explaining observed increases in health expenditures.Cross-country comparisons also indicate significant disparities in health spending among OECD countries and show that population ageing is not the main explanation thereof (see figure VI.A). While Turkey and, to a lesser extent, the united_kingdom have a younger age structure than that of Italy and Japan, the four countries spend similar shares of GDP on health care. Germany, in turn, has a share of older persons in the population similar to that of Japan and Italy but spends about percentage points more of GDP on health care. Among the developed countries, the united_states has a relatively young population but its health spending exceeds by far that of any other country. Also when looking at changes over time, no close correlation can be observed among developed countries between population ageing and health-care spending (see figure VI.B and C).A study on health expenditures for the period -in New Zealand (Bryant and Sonerson, ), points out two non-demographic mechanisms at work in affecting healthHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies Figure VI.A. Share of older persons in total population versus share of health expenditure in GDP, selected OECD countries, Percentageunited_statesTurkeyItaly JapanB. Average annual growth rate of older population versus average annual growth rate of per capita health expenditure, selected developed countries, -C. Change in share in total population of older population versus average annual growth rate of per capita health expenditure, selected developed countries, -PercentageNorwaySpainAustria united_kingdomCanada Swedenunited_statesAustralia GermanyJapanPercentageNorwayAustriaUnited Germany KingdomSwedenSpain united_statesJapanAustraliaCanada. . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Average annual growth rate of population aged years or over Change in share in total population of those aged years or over expenditure: the level of general revenues of the Government and pressure from the salaries and wages of health workers. The demographic structure of the country has become steadily older since while health expenditures have experienced large fluctuations. The study shows that it was government revenues and salaries and wages of health workers, rather than demographic changes, that moved with health expenditures.Technological progress (new scientific discoveries and new drugs and treatment) and changes in health policy have been other major drivers of health expenditures. Public and private health insurance schemes responded, in terms of the type and extent of coverage, to peoples greater desire to use new health-care services, as incomes rose and technological advances were achieved; and technological advances have transformed the health-care system, including the intensity and coverage of health services. At the same time, the interaction among technologyTechnological progress and changes in health policy have been major cost-driversAverage annual growth rate of per capita health expenditureAverage annual growth rate of per capita health expenditureShare of health expenditure in GDPWhile not the main driver of health costs, population ageing is expected to change the composition of overall health expenditures advance, policy change and demand for better health have often induced inflation of health-care services. A measure of technological advance is the fact that the majority of diagnostic capabilities, medical procedures, equipment and pharmaceuticals used today were developed in the past years and can effectively deal with diseases that were not curable in the past.Technological progress and health policy are closely related (Weisbrod, ). The pace and types of medical and pharmaceutical research and development are functions of expected monetary rewards for the pharmaceutical industry. These potential rewards are determined partly by the prevalence of diseases for which a cure or treatment is being sought, and partly by the possibility of reimbursement for research and development and product development which depends in turn on the comprehensiveness of public and private health insurance coverage and its accessibility by the general public. At the same time, the emergence of new technologies and medicine tends to place upward pressure on prices of health-care services and on the need for public or private health insurance. In other words, medical technologies and health-care expenditures are at least partly determined independent of population ageing.The analysis thus far suggests that population ageing is not the dominant factor in rising health costs. This does not imply, however, that health costs will remain low and that their distribution over different age groups will remain stable in coming decades in developing countries. Population ageing will change the composition of overall health expenditures, as older personshigh-cost medical usersconstitute a larger share of the population. Furthermore, rising income levels and increasing awareness by the public of the availability and effectiveness of new medical technologies and medicine will create greater demands for health-care services, irrespective of population ageing.Table VI. demonstrates the extent to which older persons expenditure on health care is different from that of younger persons by presenting information on per capita health expenditures in several age groups for selected countries.Relative health spending differs strongly by age group in these selected countries. In general, though, health spending directed at meeting the needs of older persons tends to be higher. This is very pronounced for Canada, for example, although it also tends to be the case for other OECD countries. In Canada, health expenditures are especially high for very old persons (aged years or over). Similarly, in developing countries, the cost of health care for older persons seems to be relatively higher than for other age cohorts. This has been observed, for instance, in Brazil and the State of Punjab in India. In other countries and other States in India, however, per capita relative health expenditures on older persons are significantly lower than in Canada.The different spending patterns reflect the types of health-care services provided at the end of life in developing and developed countries. While there has been little research on health-care services at end of life in developing countries, it is still possible to make some inferences based on demographic and sociological circumstances. In developing countries, a far smaller proportion of those over age live alone than in the developed countries (about per cent as against per cent), although in both regions this proportion has tended to increase over time. Those living alone tend to have significantly lower levels of well-being than people who live with others and in the poorest countries, older persons living alone tend to constitute an especially disadvantaged group. Surprisingly, perhaps, once controls for other variable have been put in place, the effects of urban or rural residence on older persons living arrangements are not significant. In the developed countries, those living alone face an elevated likelihood of entry into long-term institutional care and this is especially the case for those who have no children, siblings or relatives who can be the main providers of informal support (united_nations, b).wess In Canada, the use of hightech medical treatments and new drugs is a reason for high expenditures on older personsOver the long run, however, medical advances may help contain costsIn Canada, the major portion of the health expenditures on those aged years or over (about per cent) is related to the costs of long stays in residential care facilities (for example, nursing homes) and the use of beds for palliative care in hospitals providing long-term care. Out of a total per capita health expenditure of Can$ , per year for those aged years or over in -, $, was allocated to hospital care and $, to long-term care provided by other institutions. The high costs of health care are partly a result of the use of high-tech medical treatments and new drugs when the health status of a person deteriorates over an extended period of time owing to chronic illness (Mathiason, ).However, over time, medical advances can help to contain costs. In Canada, the total health expenditures consumed by those aged years or over had increased by per cent between -and -, during which period the population in this age group grew by per cent. The replacement of surgical procedures with drug therapy, wider use of one-day surgery, reductions in the duration of hospital stays and the greater use of community and homecare services made it possible for the Government to decelerate the escalation of health costs during the mid-s (Health Policy and Communications Branch, Health Canada, ).It should be noted that a persons calendar age is not necessarily a reliable indicator of health expenditures; instead, what determines in part the level of health needs and expenditures per person is proximity to death or (expected) remaining lifetime, according to various medical analyses conducted in several developed countries (Gray, ). This is largely because much of lifetime health-care expenditure is incurred during the last year of life regardless of a persons calendar age; in many cases, the patient stays, before dying, in high-cost facilities for a lengthy period of time. The concentration of medical expenditures at the end of life, independent of calendar age, is evident in some categories such as heart disease and cancer.The experience of Medicare in the united_states has been that medical expenditures in the last year of life decrease with age, particularly for those aged years or over. The pattern was found in different geographical areas (California and Massachusetts), for both sexes, for different races, irrespective of degree of co-morbidity, in hospices and hospitals, and regardless of cause or site of death. Moreover, the intensity of medical care in the last year of life decreases with increasing age: expenditures for hospital services decline, with reduced intensity of care of the older groups during hospitalization. Recently, similar patterns were observed in two out of the three States investigated in India, namely, Karnataka and Punjab (see Mahal and Berman, ).In summary, the evidence indicates that there does exist a relationship between ageing and health expenditures, but one that is weaker than is often thought. The pattern of end-of-life medical expenditures in many developing countries seems to differ from that in developed countries, owing to the lack of access to nursing and palliative care, and the lower intensity of medical interventions. As a result, the end of life may come with more suffering, but also more quickly. Low public-health coverage and relatively high out-of-pocket spending in many developing countries are likely to put such services as might prolong life in the developed countries out of reach of the majority of people in developing countries (Rannan-Eliya, Vidal and Nandakumar, ).monitors and of cardiac catheterization and dialysis.The relationship between ageing and health expenditure is weaker than is often thoughtHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesThe challenge for health policiesImprovements in health conditions do not depend solely upon the delivery of health or medical services. They are also the result of such factors as improvements in nutrition from the earliest ages, and improvements in education and sanitation, the amount of exercise being undertaken and reduction of tobacco and alcohol consumption, and of the risks of contracting infectious diseases, including HIV/AIDS. At the Second World Assembly on Ageing held in Madrid in April , WHO launched its life course approach to healthy ageing, which recommended that Governments address those factors that contributed to the onset of disease and disabilities (World Health Organization, e). These factors will help determine the courseand costsof the epidemiological transition.Two different transition scenarios are usually considered: one is referred to as the conventional wisdom or the failures of success, and the other as the compression of morbidity. Depending on which course prevails in the future, policymakers will face different sets of challenges.The first scenario projects an extended period of life spent in a state of chronic illness, such as heart disease, stroke or dementia, or with one or more functional disabilities. Each of these sets of factors will require large shifts in health-care inputs and the acquisition by healthcare workers of new skills. The country will have an ever-larger number of fragile persons and incur substantial increases in health expenditures, associated with new technologies and the need for new medical infrastructures. Care for older persons would be expanded as well. The increased expenses will have to be borne by private individuals and Governments. Healthy members of the societyyoung and old alikewill be required to make greater contributions. Insurance schemes and the securing of adequate public and private financing through tax increases in general and private financing supported by tax breaks for families caring for older persons, will be needed, entailing a wholesale rebuilding of the existing national health-care system. Because of this very success in achieving greater longevity, pressure on the health system becomes greater. Hence, the failures of success (Gnanasekaran, ).The second scenario paints a brighter picture, in which increases in the age of onset of chronic disease or disability are greater than increases in life expectancy, and morbidity is thereby compressed into the very late stage of the life of individuals. For this to happen, the Government, communities, families and individualsyoung and oldare required to take conscious and concerted actions, including various measures promoting health and healthier lifestyles at younger ages through proper nutrition, non-smoking, moderate alcohol consumption, regular exercise and educationthe very factors that WHO is promoting for healthy ageing.The health policy implications to be drawn from the two scenarios are not mutually exclusive. For many developing countries, providing care for acute episodic conditions or preventing infectious diseases are health policy priorities; at the same time, health education and promoting a healthier lifestyle can be seen as constituting a long-term health policy goal. Health policy derived from the first scenario, on the other hand, entails a warning to many Governments and the international community at large that, without a significant expansion and improvement of the existing health-care systems, developing countries will face large increases in health expenditures when they are still relatively poor.As the relative importance of communicable diseases decreases and that of non-communicable diseases and disabilities increases, a larger pool of geriatric and gerontology specialists and health workers will be required. Because older persons tend to develop multiple medical conditions (co-morbidity), their symptoms are often different from those of younger persons.Developing countries may face different epidemiological transition scenariosThe first scenario is pessimistic and depicts the extension of life as accompanied by an extension of the period of chronic illnessThe second scenario, depicts the extended period of life as accompanied by a shortening of the period of illnessNo matter which scenario becomes a reality, more geriatric and gerontology specialists and health workers will be neededwess Attitudes of family members towards caring for their parents can suddenly changeOngoing socio-economic changes will make it more difficult to maintain the current forms of traditional long-term careFigure VI..Trends in norms and expectations with respect to care for the elderly among married females under age , Japan, -aAt the same time, the expansion of hospital facilities and beds and the introduction of modern innovations are necessary not only for an ageing population, but also for the improvement of the health of the general population which faces severe shortages of necessary medical treatment.It is not unimaginable that an increase in disabled persons may also have a negative impact on the quality of life of caregivers who often provide unpaid care. Even in those countries where the Government has established formal arrangements for dependency care, the family and community are the main providers for older persons. However, when, as has historically been the case, the demographic transition is taking place in a period of accelerated economic growth, the combination can also induce unexpected changes in social values as they relate to care of aged parents and community members.For instance, a study on health care in Japan (Ogawa and others, ) showed a sudden shift in attitudes towards caring for elderly parents. In a series of nationwide surveys concerning family planning conducted since , a dramatic decline was observed between and a period of two yearsin the proportion of married female respondents under age who believed that providing care for old-age parents was either a good custom or a childs natural duty (see figure VI.). This drop has been part of an ongoing declining trend in perceived willingness to care for elderly parents; but according to the study, the indicated sudden decline in -corresponds to the period when the government shifted more of the burden of care for the elderly from the state to families, to which the middle-aged women responded negatively (ibid., p. ).The traditional family structure and the role of women are thus changing or will change, sometimes drastically. It will become more difficult for many countries to maintain the current forms of traditional arrangements for long-term care. As will be discussed later, every society needs to introduce a formal system that may serve as a complement to, but not a substitute for, the traditional arrangements.PercentageThose who believe care of elderly a good custom or natural dutyThose who expect to depend on children"YearHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesThe provision of long-term careThere is universal concern over how to provide long-term care for those whose health condition is irreversible. While most older persons remain active and relatively healthy, it is foreseen that there will be an increase in the need for long-term care, particularly for persons needing help in daily living (World Health Organization, b)a need to which every society should be able to respond in a manner that accords with its own traditions and the best interests of those needing such care.In general, the growing concern reflects two trends, namely, the increase in the prevalence of long-term disability in the population and the change in the capacity of the institutional and informal systems to provide support (World Health Organization, d). The rate of increase in the number of persons needing help in daily living and the rate of change of the institutional and informal capacity shape the framework of a nations system of long-term care as a whole.In developed countries, long-term care needs mainly results from population ageing, although the level and mix of services differ among them. On the whole, they are attempting to include home-based care service as part of a continuum of different types and levels of care, as called for by the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing (united_nations, a). Many of these countries are thinking of ways to put greater emphasis on bringing home-care services to the appropriate level and to support and build the skills of family caregivers. Home-based health care is being encouraged through the provision of several financial incentives and various healthcare and welfare services (see box VI.).In developing countries, however, population ageing is but one of the factors underlying the need for long-term care. Infectious diseases and injuries caused by armed conflicts and traffic accidents, which affect all age cohorts, also require such care. Demand for long-term care resulting from ageing is strongly increasing with the speed of the demographic transition in these countries. The focus of the remainder of the present section will be on the provision of long-term care to older persons.In many developing countries, institutionalized forms of long-term care services tend to be in poor supply. The extended family and networks of relatives, friends and neighbours remain the major sources of support and care. Even in cases where some forms of formal support are available, the health authorities often mainly concentrate on family guidance, counselling and education about health care. The care itself is then provided at home by family members. Yet the declining importance of the extended family in many developing countries, as discussed in chapter III, is making it more and more difficult to rely exclusively on this form of informal care.It is difficult, however, to draw an aggregate sketch of the coverage of long-term care because of widely differing country situations. Moreover, because the long-term care services are often provided not only to older persons, but also to the poor and the disabled within a single institutional or informal support system, separating the two components is not possible in many cases. To achieve a better understanding of existing realities and to learn from what already existed in developing and transition countries in terms of care services available also for older persons, WHO (b; c; d) chose a case-study approach to the subject.Developed countries are attempting to provide a continuum of different types and levels of services, putting greater emphasis on home-care servicesIn developing countries, family or networks of relatives and neighbours are the major sources of support and careBox VI.The ageing in place movement:the growing importance of home-based health careFamily caregiving and programmes for older persons have recently received much policy-related attention in many countries, owing to the recognition that most families around the world continue to provide some care in spite of changing living patterns. The ageing in place movement, designed to help older people stay at the family home or in a home-like environment, emphasizes the need for programmes that support family caregivers to help achieve this objective. In developed countries where formal care is in place, there is a growing emphasis on making it complementary to, rather than a substitute for, informal care.In some developed countries, there has been a rapid expansion of policies and programmes designed to support family caregivers. In Sweden, for example, municipal governments give priority attention to caregiver support policies and programmes (Herlitz, ; Sundstrom, ). These policies and programmes can be classified within three major categories: job support, financial support, and social services. Job support policies are designed to help working caregivers. They include a caregiver insurance programme which provides paid leave when a worker cannot report to work because of caregiving responsibilities, a family leave policy which guarantees job security without pay, and employment-based eldercare, which allows flexible work schedules and includes provision of counselling and referral services, adult day care in or near the workplace and other employee assistance programmes.Financial support policies encourage family caregivers to offer care at home. They take three forms: subsidies, salaries and tax credits. Subsidies that older persons receive from government can be used to pay family members who provide care for them at home. Salaries can also be paid by government directly to the family caregiver so that the person can afford to work at home full-time. Finally, tax credits or deductions to lower the tax burden can be given to family caregivers who may have to incur expenditures on items for home-based care.Social services, which are designed to assist the caregiver and provide relief from caring, include housekeeping and home maintenance services and day-care and sitter services for older persons. More recently, Governments in Scandinavian countries have started offering services to caregivers, including counselling, caregiver support groups, and information and referral services. Training programmes are designed to prepare caregivers for both the practical tasks of caregiving and the physical and emotional stress associated with care at home. The combination of these policies and programmes offers a multidimensional framework of support for family members providing care (Hokenstad and Johansson, ).Norway has historically placed more emphasis on a programme in which family membersusually daughters or daughters-in-laware paid part-time salaries to provide home help services for an elderly and/or disabled relative. Some provide care for elders of other families and so become full-time home helpers. About per cent of all home helpers in the country are relatives or neighbours of those for whom they provide care. From the perspective of the family, this programme provides additional income while allowing a family member to have a major caregiving role. This approach to government financial support of family caring is now being expanded to many countries as part of the consumer choice movement in eldercare. Consumer choice enables older people receiving long-term care in their homes to choose between receiving home care from government and private agencies and having family members subsidized to provide the care.Caregivers in the developing world have less access to both economic and service support, but such programmes are growing. Social development programmes in a number of countries help provide a source of income for older women, many of whom have primary caregiving responsibilities. An example of this type of programme is the Samridhi day-care centre set up in rural India, which helps elderly women learn traditional crafts that can assist them in earning a living, thereby supplementing the family living. Samridhi also helps by providing the women with raw materials and the infrastructure needed to earn an income through craft-making.aHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesThe WHO case studies show that developed countries typically offer a broad package of long-term services. In contrast, publicly funded long-term care is not available in the majority of the countries that were examined by WHO (c). Of these, only richer countries, such as the Republic of Korea, as well as Lithuania and Ukraine, offer a wider range of long-term care services.More generally, the sample countries with higher per capita income levels tend to provide a mixture of home-based long-term care services for those needing help for daily living, irrespective of age, and institutional long-term care. The broader package of services offered in Lithuania and Ukraine includes institutional care, home health care, personal care at home and homemaking. In these countries, personal care at home and homemaking services are targeted at the poor in all age cohorts and at older persons without families. Publicly funded personal care services are not available to the non-poor population in these countries, but home health care is offered based on health conditions and disability, irrespective of their income levels.In Lithuania, in , there were found to be institutional care facilities, of which were operated by non-governmental organizations, including the Red Cross Society and faith-based organizations. Until , the country had focused its social programmes on institutional care for older persons and the physically and mentally disabled. Since then, however, the number and variety of public institutions has grown, non-governmental organizations have become more active in providing long-term care for both older and younger persons, and the development of non-institutional (also called community-based) forms of care have gained in importance (World Health Organization, d). These government and non-government organizations offer a variety of types of care for disabled persons, both young and old, including personal care (grooming, bathing and provision of meals); household assistance (cleaning, laundry and shopping); remodelling of the home to meet the needs of disabled persons; provision of supplies, assistive devices, equipment and medicine; palliative care; and provision of information and guidance to the patients family.Non-governmental organizations in Lithuania were taking care of about per cent of the total number of residents living in institutions in , representing a doubling of the proportion in . Health-care workers under the community-based form of programmes provide home-care nursing, but also other services such as shopping and housekeeping as mentioned above. In , more than , workers and volunteers had been involved in care delivery, but WHO concluded that this number was insufficient to meet the current level of needs and also cautioned that the same conclusion applied to funding.The other countries studied provide smaller ranges of care services for older persons. Yet, even if these services are available, the number of people covered is relatively small. In Thailand, for example, the Department of Public Welfare provides services for older persons, particularly those who are socially isolated and vulnerable, that include prevention of homelessness, abuse and family neglect through, inter alia, residential care, the creation of service centres, the dispatch of mobile units and the provision of emergency shelters. The private sector and non-governmental organizations also have programmes designed for older persons, including the provision of a monthly subsistence allowance and service centres located in temples. The number of older persons covered by such public and private programmes is not known. Given that the number of older persons in public institutions throughout the nation that provide for disabled residents who have been abandoned or neglected was , in , it can be seen that the provision of public services is not yet satisfactory (World Health Organization, d).Publicly funded longterm care is not available in many parts of the developing worldIn most developing countries, long-term care services are limitedwess Older persons are also caregivers to their children and grandchildrenEfforts to sustain the home-based care system may encounter difficulties because of changes in family structures and in the role of womenMany countries envisage taking measures to develop formal community health care. This approach seems compatible with the development of home-based long-term care. As noted previously, Lithuania and Ukraine, where long-term care has been institutionalized, are now making community-based care part of their formal health-care system. The Republic of Korea, where the formal system is still in its infancy, also emphasizes the importance of creating formal long-term care within the framework of community-based care in order to lower the rates of utilization by patients of more expensive hospital services.The first and foremost challenge in home and long-term care for countries where large numbers of the populations are living in poverty, such as Cambodia, Haiti, Kenya, South Africa and Uganda, compared with the relatively rich countries considered above, is to provide, next to medical services, an adequate supply of food, decent housing, safe water and waste disposal, affordable soap and other basic supplies and medicines.Meanwhile, the role of older persons in caregiving, to their children, grandchildren and to the community at large, should be stressed; and as called for in the Madrid International Plan of Action, provisions should be made to assist older persons in their caregiving role. This has been especially important in families where the parents of children have been lost to HIV/AIDS and other diseases and grandparents are providing support. In more general terms, it would appear that the ageing of the population will be accompanied by the growth in the number of healthy older persons who will be willing and able to serve as professional caregivers or volunteers. In this respect, the importance of non-governmental organizations and volunteers in the delivery of long-term care has been recognized in many countries including China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Ukraine.Those countries that attempt to maintain their existing home-based, informal care system could encounter difficulties in the future, largely because the traditional family structure and the role of women are changing, sometimes faster than anticipated, as examined in chapter III.The case of Mexico illustrates how the traditional system of provision of home care by a family member, usually the daughter who works at home, is tending to break down (World Health Organization, c). Over the past few decades, the country experienced an improvement in its educational performance, with higher enrolment ratios and higher average number of school years attended, and an increase in labour participation rates among working age groups. The economic crises that hit the country during this period may also have contributed to higher labour-force participation, with women, youth and children entering the labour market. This reduced the time that family members had available to care for young children, older persons and the sick (Knaul and others, ). Generally, long-term factors are making traditional care arrangements more difficult, including the increase in female labour-force participation, often associated with migration, and the greater importance of the nuclear household in urban areas. Some of these factors have been observed in other countries, such as China, where the massive migration of individuals from rural to urban areas has left behind older persons and disabled relatives for whom the migrants were formerly expected to care (Hua and Di, ).Unfortunately, the extent of the provision by the State of alternative means of support, such as through social security institutions, has been insufficient to offset the effect of the diminishing role of the extended family. In the case of Mexico, for instance, about per cent of the population over age , as well as many who suffer from a disability or a chronic disease, have no access to social security benefits. Moreover, the financial deficit of the social security system limits the level of the social benefits that can be paid out to those who are covered.Health and long-term care systems for ageing societiesData on disability rates and morbidity are limited in many developing countries and thus the future need for long-term care services is difficult to predict. Moreover, studies on longterm care systemsboth institutional and informalare in their infancy. Even where such studies exist, the impacts of various long-term care measures on the welfare of older persons are not yet clearly understood. There is thus an urgent need for more studies on long-term care in developing countries which could facilitate a better-informed dialogue within and among countries.Implications for future health costsThe above analysis was necessary to place in context attempts to calculate the future publichealth costs of an ageing population. Many of the private and public actions aimed at improving overall health involve expenditure and lifestyle choices by individualsfactors that are not included in existing future health cost projections but they could play a major role in determining levels of health expenditure.The expected rise in expenditure on health and long-term care, while not necessarily a result of ageing per se, will put pressure on the national economy and government budgets in many developing countries, particularly if economic growth does not turn out to be as robust as expected. Pressing questions concern how much health and long-term care expenditure could grow as a result of the various factors examined previously and how such increases could be contained if the financial burden on the national economy and the government budget is forecast to be too great.Projections of the impact of ageing on health expendituresProjections of the impact of population ageing on future health-care costs are mostly available only for developed countries, owing not only to greater policy interest in the issue, but also to the wider availability of data. Developing countries, in general, have only limited health data, making it more difficult for researchers to make such projections for those countries.Actuarial and epidemiological approaches have been developed to project future health expenditure depending on the research objectives and policy/planning goals (see box VI.). As demonstrated above, the relationship between population ageing and health expenditures displays a complex pattern and understanding it requires identifying all the factors that influence health expenditures and building a framework that can capture the complexity of the underlying dynamics.In an actuarial framework, future expenditure requirements are calculated based on the existing age and sex profile of expenditure. Projected population changes and changes in projected per capita costs, which are often extrapolated from observed trends, can then produce estimates of future health expenditures. Implicitly, the projected per capita costs are assumed to include all growth factors and can be seen to constitute the composite effect of the non-demographic factors discussed above. A study on Sri Lanka (Rannan-Eliya, ) offers an insightful application of the actuarial framework for a developing country.The case of Sri LankaAlthough Sri Lanka is a low-income country, it has relatively good coverage of social services, which is also reflected in a relatively good performance in terms of human development indicators. The adult literacy rate is over per cent and life expectancy at birth was . years for men and .There is an urgent need for more studies on longterm care in developing countriesActuarial and epidemiological approaches have been applied to project future health costsThe health and demographic characteristics of Sri Lanka are in many respects similar to those of a developed countryBox VI.Projecting health-care expenditures into the futureaGrowth in health expenditures since the last quarter of the twentieth century and, more recently, increasing awareness of the potential impacts of population ageing on fiscal balance and on national economic vitality have ignited considerable interest among policymakers and the general public in the possible future health burden. Projecting health-care expenditures into the future is a useful tool in helping policymakers understand key factors that would influence expenditures and placing population ageing in a wider perspective. Among available projection methods, the actuarial and epidemiological approaches stand out.In the actuarial methods, the population is divided into several age-sex groups. Aggregate personal health expenditures (that is to say, those for health services delivered to individuals) are calculated as the sum of the products of the number of people in each age-sex group and the average expenditure for health care per capita used by persons in the same group. Persons in older age groups are likely to use health-care services more often than their younger counterparts (although not necessarily) and when they use them, they are likely to require more resources. Similarly, older women are likely to use health services more than their male contemporaries. Population ageing, by this construction, leads to higher aggregate health expenditures. The per capita average health expenditure in each age group can further be decomposed into the age-sex-specific use of medical services per capita (the utilization component) and the unit costs or price of delivering medical services or pharmaceuticals (the price component). Public expenditures on preventive and collective health, administrative costs and capital expenditures are added to the aggregate costs of services delivered to individuals.The epidemiological methods, as the name indicates, are based on epidemiological trends. Utilization of and expenditure for health services are linked to specific diseases or morbidity conditions. Aggregate health expenditures are calculated as the sum of the products of the number of persons in each age-sex group, the incidence of disease or morbidity in each group, the average volume of health-care services per capita used by persons in the group with a specific disease or morbidity condition, and the average price of the services. To undertake projections, the diseases or morbidity patterns have to be predicted based on current trends, and future expenditures per person in a specific age-sex group with a particular disease or morbidity condition must be estimated. The major difference between this and the actuarial approach is the inclusion of the prevalences of diseases or morbidities as cost-drivers.The epidemiological method has the ability to project the incidence of diseases or morbidities and their associated expenditures. By knowing what types of diseases or morbidities are to prevail in the future, the health authorities will be able to arrange necessary health facilities and services in advance (treatments and necessary facilities for patients with dementia or diabetes, for example, are different from those for patients with ischaemic heart disease). Public campaigns for a healthy lifestyleone that includes non-smoking, diet and moderate consumption of alcoholcan be cost-effective tools with which to reduce future costs if the incidence of such noncommunicable diseases is projected to grow considerably. Information requirements for undertaking such an epidemiological approach are greater, however, than for an actuarial one, thus making the former a more difficult and expensive undertaking for developing countries. While the actuarial approach in its calculations of per capita health spending is more likely to capture all the major cost elements, it is silent about the linkage between diseases/morbidity and age-sex-specific health costs. Because of the lesser information requirement, this approach has been more widely applied in both developed and developing countries.years for women according to the standard projection in -. The fertility rate in Sri Lanka is around replacement level, varying from . according to the low projection to . according to the high projection for -. The country has an extensive network of health institutions, and it is estimated that no one has to travel further than . kilometres to reach a fixed health facilHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies ity (Abeykoon, ). Sri Lanka thus shares many of the demographic and epidemiological characteristics of a developed country. Total expenditure on health in was . per cent of GDP and was split between the private sector (. per cent of GDP) and the public sector (. per cent).The proportion of the total population over age is projected to increase from . per cent in to between . and . per cent in , by which time life expectancy is expected to have increased by about nine years. Because the available data for Sri Lanka indicate that morbidity compression is not taking place, the Sri Lankan study assumes that there would be no change in the age-sex-specific health status of the Sri Lankan population in future decades. This would put an upward bias in the projections if, in fact, the compression of morbidity does take place.Health-seeking behaviour is one factor of importance in determining future health expenditure. Such behaviour refers to cases where individuals begin to visit the doctor or health facilities more often than before. The rate of outpatient visits is already relatively high in Sri Lanka (. per capita per annum in ), and according to the different assumptions, this figure could increase slowly to . visits per capita per annum in or more rapidly to . visits in (compared with, for instance, per capita per annum in Japan between and ). Little change is foreseen in the inpatient utilization rates over the period. In addition to the behavioural changes, productivity and price inflation are also expected to affect future expenditures on health-care services.Three scenarios for projected health-care expenditures by were analysed in the study of Sri Lanka. The baseline projection assumes that the cost-drivers follow historical trends and that there will be no change in the public-private mix of provision. In this case, total national health expenditure would increase from . per cent of GDP in to . per cent in . The low-cost projection envisages the Government acting to increase its role in the health sector. There would be high productivity gains from the public sector, a shift in patients from the private to the public sector and controls on price escalation in the private sector. In this case, expenditures would rise to . per cent of GDP in . In the high-cost projection, government policy would work to reduce the involvement of the Government in the health sector, encourage private sector responsibility, not actively seek to control prices in the private sector and invest less effort in achieving productivity gains in the public sector. In this scenario, total national health expenditures would rise to . per cent of GDP in and to . per cent of GDP in . In that year, public expenditure on health would amount to . per cent of GDP and private expenditure to . per cent of GDP. Figure VI. shows the impact of some of the different factors that, according to the baseline scenario, will help increase health expenditure as a percentage of GDP between and . Over the longer term, outpatient activity rates would play a more important role than demographic factors in driving up this proportion.This variance in projected health spending under different cost assumptions is in itself much higher than the impact of ageing on future health costs under the three scenarios. In fact, the demographic factor would raise health expenditures by a mere . to . per cent of GDP by . The conclusion therefore is that the key driver of increasing cost will in fact be not demographic change but the changing health awareness and increased propensity of Sri Lankans to use medical care when ill. According to Rannan-Eliya (, p.): It is possible to maintain current levels of provision, access and quality levels, with no substantial increase in national health spending as a proportion of GDP, that is to say, within the range of -per cent of GDP, if productivity improvements can keep pace with ageing.The results under three different scenarios show that ageing is an important driver of increasing health costs in Sri Lanka ...... but not necessarily the main driverFigure VI..Range in impacts, under three different scenarios, of key cost drivers on national health-care expenditure in Sri Lanka in and a(percentage of GDP)-.-.-.(percentage of GDP)-.-.-.-.AgeingOutpatient demandInpatient demandPublicprivate balancePublicPrivate sector sector costs costsAgeingOutpatient demandInpatient demandPublicprivate balancePublicsector costsPrivate sector costsNote: The values in the top and bottom boxes represent the maximum and minimum; the middle bar represents the median. a As measured by the change in health spending as a percentage of GDP from the level in .A study on Hong Kong SAR shows that innovation and higher-quality services will increase health costsA similar actuarial study for Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China (SAR) also found that population ageing and growth per se, without taking into account related technological innovation for chronic conditions that particularly afflict older adults, contributed relatively little to projected future health costs. Under the given assumptions of the study, total health spending is projected to increase to close to per cent of GDP in , up from . per cent of GDP in -. According to the projections, the share of public-health spending would gradually decline from per cent in -to somewhere between and per cent by (Leung, Tin and Chan, , p. ). The results were highly sensitive to the assumption about the expected future increase in unit costs for health-care delivery. The authors concluded that adaptation of new medical technology was the major long-term cost growth-driver and that, while measures of expenditure control could perhaps slow such growth in costs, in practice the imperative to innovate and deliver higher-quality care would almost always prevail over efforts to economize.Other actuarial health cost projectionsHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societiesAn OECD study (b), like the study on Sri Lanka, emphasizes the importance of the cost-push factors in health expenditures. In this study, changes in the cost of health and long-term care are determined as a result of technological progress and relative price movements in the supply of health-care services. Under a cost pressure scenario, health expenditures are assumed to grow at a rate that is percentage point faster than the growth of mean incomes. For given trends in demographic change, this scenario projects that public-health and long-term care spending across OECD countries would almost double from close to per cent of GDP in to about per cent in . Under a cost containment scenario, average expenditures would still reach per cent of GDP, an increase of . percentage points (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, b, p.). The study observes that non-demographic factorsthe effects of technology and movements in relative pricesare important in determining the degree of upward pressure on long-term care expenditures and, indeed, constitute the most important driver of the projected increase in health-care expenditures.The health status of older persons in future generations also affects the projected cost estimates of health-care delivery. According to the calculations of the European Commission, Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs (), public health care expenditures would rise from . to . per cent of GDP between and and further to . per cent of GDP in in the case of the member countries of the European Union prior to May (EU-). The more recent member States, EU-, which were poorer when entering EU and spent less on health, would have to increase health spending from . per cent of GDP in to . per cent in and to . per cent in (ibid, p. ). The above figures are for the pure ageing scenario, under which age-related expenditure per capita on health care in the base year would remain constant over time. This assumes that there would be no compression of morbidity. An alternative set of projections assumed the presence of the compression of morbidity. In this scenario, the number of years spent in bad health during a lifetime in would be identical to that in , even though people are expected to live longer. In this case, public spending on health would have to increase to . per cent of GDP in EU-by and to . per cent of GDP in EU-. The projections therefore show that if healthy life expectancy (falling morbidity rates) evolve broadly in line with change in age-specific life expectancy...then the expected increase in spending on health care due to ageing would be approximately halved (ibid, p. ).The epidemiological approach applied to AustraliaOne weakness of the actuarial approach is that it does not take into account the disease profile of the country and its future evolution and the cost of treating each disease. The data required for this are very difficult to obtain even in developed countries, let alone developing ones. If such data were available, an alternative method could be used, namely, the epidemiological approach, whereby disease rates and the costs of treatment are projected into the future. A study for Australia (Vos and others, ) derived a consistent set of five epidemiological parameters for each disease, with those parameters being incidence, prevalence, remission (that is to say, cure), average duration and excess mortality. The study found that total health expenditure is expected to increase by per cent in the period from -to -from A$ billion to A$ billion. The Australian Treasury forecasts that over the same period GDP in real terms would increase by per cent (or . per cent per annum); as a result, health expenditure is projected to increase from . per cent of GDP in -to . per cent in -. Of the total increase of $ billion, about $. billion would be on account of increased demand for residential long-term care (a cost increase of per cent), with neurologic cases accounting for per cent of long-term care expenditures in -.An OECD study emphasizes that non-demographic factors are the key to the future increase in health expendituresThe compression of morbidity will mitigate the rise in future health costsAn Australia case study used the epidemiological approach to projecting health expenditurewess About one third of the increase in Australian health expenditures is expected to result from the ageing of the populationDevelopments in health technologies and health service utilization could radically alter the picture, howeverChange in total expenditurePrice inflation Proportion of cases treated Volume per case Population Ageing Disease rateThe projected cost increase is largest for diabetes (by per cent), largely owing to expected growth in the prevalence of obesity, followed by that for neurologic disorders ( per cent), musculoskeletal conditions ( per cent) and dental services ( per cent). Expenditures on preventing cardiovascular disease through blood pressure lowering drugs and lipid lowering drugs are projected to increase by per cent, leading to an overall change in cardiovascular expenditure of per cent. Increases in cancer ( per cent), injuries ( per cent) and maternal and neonatal services ( and per cent) would be comparatively low.The study estimates that of the $ billion growth in total health expenditure, $ billion ( per cent of the increase) will be due to the ageing of the population and $ billion ( per cent) to normal overall population growth (Australias population is forecast to increase from . million in to . million in ) (see figure VI.). Excess price inflation ($ billion), changes in the number of health services provided per case ($ billion) and, to a lesser extent, the proportion of cases treated ($. billion) would account for smaller increases in overall expenditure. Projected health expenditures would be $. billion higher if disease trends were ignored. Favourable trends in the disease rates of cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cancers and injuries over the period would lead to a reduction in expenditure of $. billion, countered by the steep increase in the projected cases of diabetes and other diseases estimated, which would result in an expenditure increase of $. billion (see figure VI.).The study concedes that in most cases the changes into the future have been estimated according to what has happened with a particular disease in the past, but the future does not necessarily repeat the past. For instance, developments in health technologies and health service utilisation may drastically alter the outlook for some diseases (Vos and others, , p. ). Given the forces driving medical research and advances in medical technologies referred to earlier which now include considerable work on stem cells, it is highly likely that significant advances will be made over the next thirty years and that, indeed, the outlook for some diseasesFigure VI..Australia: decomposition of projected change in health expenditure for all projected disease patterns between the base year of -and -, -and -of Australian dollarsHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies could be completely different. Nevertheless, an increase in overall expenditure on health of . percentage points of GDP (from . to .) between -and -, especially when the size of the economy is expected to double in the same period, would seem quite manageable for a wealthy country like Australia.The epidemiological approach can help identify some areas where countries can make progress in combating disease. In Australia, almost all the gains in life expectancy in recent decades have occurred in just two areas: tobacco-related disease and cardiovascular health. Thus, measures to discourage tobacco use should be vigorously pursued in developing countries. In regard to cardiovascular health, the Disease Control Priorities Project in developing countries  indicated that in those countries the poly-pilla combination of aspirin and blood pressureand cholesterol-lowering agents produced cheaply as a generic drugwould be an affordable and cost-effective intervention with a sizeable impact on reducing the disease burden.Projections of the impact of ageing on future expenditures on long-term careIn the developed countries, the obligation of the Government to contribute towards long-term care has budgetary implications; and attempts have been made, using the actuarial or the epidemiological approach, to provide estimates for the future share of GDP that will be absorbed by public long-term care costs. As shown previously, Canada, for example, allocated about per cent of total per capita health expenditure for those aged years or over in -for institutions other than hospitals. Whereas health-care services aim at changing a health-care condition, long-term care aims at making the current condition of ill health bearable and so is treated separately.Vos and others () project that for Australia health expenditure (excluding aged long-term care) will increase by per cent between -and -, while that for residential aged care will grow by per cent during the same period. Neurologic-related expenditure associated with dementia is expected to dominate this large increase. In the EU-countries, it has been estimated that the costs of public long-term care will rise from . per cent of GDP in to . per cent in . In EU-, these costs are expected to increase from . to . per cent of GDP in the same period (European Commission, Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, , p. ). According to OECD estimates, these costs are expected to increase on average from . per cent of GDP in in member countries to between . and . per cent in , depending on the assumptions made (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, b, pp. -). The pure ageing effect is estimated to be . percentage points of GDP.Public spending on long-term health care varies greatly across countries. The Scandinavian Governments are among the highest spenders. Public spending on long-term care in Denmark, for instance, was . per cent of GDP in , well above the OECD average of . per cent (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, b, p. ). This public spending priority is part of extended social welfare provisioning. This system is sustained by high tax rates and high labour-force participation, both for men and for women, a relatively late retirement age and a higher rate of employment for those over age than the EU average. These high activity levels sustain the tax base, but also require high investment in services such as childcare and services for older persons. In a way, the services support the employment which supports the services (united_kingdom, , Research Vol. , chap. , p. ).The epidemiological approach helps countries identify areas where they can make progress in combating prevalent diseasesEstimates project substantial increases in future expenditure on long-term health care in developed countries ...... but much depends on the system in place in the individual countrywess Healthy ageing and preventive and rehabilitative medicine may reduce the need for longterm careIt should be noted that the Scandinavian countries are further into their demographic transition and thus the growth in demand for long-term care as a result of ageing between and is expected to be below the OECD average (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, b, p. ). In the Republic of Korea, in contrast, rapid ageing is projected to lead to a rise in the costs of long-term care from . to . per cent of GDP between and . For Mexico, where spending was . per cent of GDP in , the pure ageing effect has been calculated as adding . per cent of GDP to public long-term care costs. These figures are illustrative of the magnitudes of changes in the public cost of the provision of long-term care brought about by ageing, but these costs could be offset over time by reductions in the need for such care as a result of healthy ageing and advances in preventive and rehabilitative medicine.ConclusionsThe demographic transition towards ageing societies is almost universally accompanied by an epidemiological transition from the predominance of infectious diseases to the predominance of chronic diseases. Both transitions have been well under way in developed countries and are now under way in developing ones. Increased longevity in developing countries is the result of improved nutrition, sanitation and hygiene and, more recently, the rapid spread of medical knowledge and its application in medical practices. In the developed countries, increased longevity has been accompanied by longer healthy life expectancy and the compression of morbidity. However, a positive correlation between longevity and healthy life expectancy is not so clear in developing countries, where people are more likely to spend a greater portion of their totaland shorterlife in poor health.This chapter has demonstrated that population ageing challenges the existing national health systems in many parts of the world. Developed countries are concerned with the possibility of the future strain on national and budgetary resources as a consequence of increased demand for healthand long-term care services by an ageing population. The challenge for many developing countries is larger: they have not yet addressed adequately public-health goals such as sanitation, clean water, better nutrition, reproductive health education and mass vaccination whose achievement results, in particular, in the lowering of infant and maternal mortality rates and of the incidence of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. While grappling with these challenges, which largely impact upon the younger populations, developing countries are also confronting rapid population ageing, which is leading to greater demands for health-care services by older persons.In examining such developments, this chapter has argued that the challenge they pose is large, but not insurmountable. It has shown that population ageing contributes to rising health-care spending, but is not necessarily the most significant cost-driver: By itself, its impact would be reflected in no more than a few percentage points of GDP. Indeed, the experience of many countries suggests that changes in health-seeking behaviour, in productivity in the health sector, in prices of pharmaceuticals and medical care services and in health policies are other significant cost-drivers. In the past, new drugs and treatments exerted, on the whole, an upward pressure on the prices of health-care services. Public and private health insurance has, in turn, become more comprehensive in covering such new items, in response to the desire of the public to have access to better healthand medical-care services. Yet, such increased coverage is pushing up insurance costs, and some countries are now introducing mandatory insurance to cover the cost of long-term care. Germany established a new system of statutory long-term care insuranceAn ageing population challenges health care systems in developing countries......but in and of itself, this challenge is not insurmountableHealth and long-term care systems for ageing societies in -(united_kingdom, , Research Vol. , chap. , p. ) and Singapore formulated a family-based savings account scheme, called Medisave, in (Phua and Teng, ). The establishment of a medical savings account scheme to finance acute care for those over age has been proposed in Hong Kong SAR (Leung, Tin and Chang, , p. ).Despite the challenges, policymakers in developed and developing countries are finding that the existing health-care systems can be adapted to cope with population ageing. This chapter has cautioned that the increasing number of cases of chronic illness associated with ageing and disabilities will require significant changes in the composition of overall health expenditures and in the range of services provided. At the same time, rising income levels and increasing awareness by the public of the availability and effectiveness of new medical treatment and medicines will create greater demands for health-care services, particularly in developing countries, irrespective of population ageing. These factors are likely to push up medical expenditures.This chapter, looking beyond cost considerations, has argued that population ageing is most likely to affect the health-care system in two ways. First, the increase in the total number of cases of chronic illness and the larger number of persons with disabilities will require large shifts in health-care inputs and the acquisition by health-care professionals and workers of new skills. As noted here, per capita health expenditures on older persons in developing countries are significantly lower than those in developed countries, partly reflecting the shortage of access to the nursing, palliative care and more intensive medical treatment that are widely available to older persons in developed countries. It is suggested that developing countries need to expand such health-care services for older persons and to expand access through a combination of new tax sources and public pensions so as to cover high medical costs at older ages.Second, there is the concern over how to provide long-term care for those whose health conditions are irreversible. The challenge is to find solutions that preserve the dignity and independence of those who need care, while allowing them to maintain contact with a familiar environment and not to be fearful of the consequences of entering long-term care, such as the loss of their house or other assets. The traditional family structure and the role of women, who provided much informal care to older persons, especially family members, are changing and the number of children per family is declining in many parts of the world. It will thus become increasingly difficult for many developing countries to maintain the current forms of informal long-term care arrangements, which are mainly provided by the family or friends of older persons or by their community. While every society should build a long-term care system in a manner that accords with its own traditions and the best interests of those needing such care, the trend has been to seek to provide care to persons in their own home or community. Where home care is not possible, a home-like environment in which the number of residents is not so great as to break the personal bonds between caregivers and residents is considered to be desirable.However, it is of interest to policymakers and the general public to know how much the costs of health and long-term care could grow as a result of the various factors examined above. Projections are based on, among other things, the recent trends of epidemiological patterns and per capita health-care costs by age and sex, together with information on health cost inflation, public expenditures on preventive care and collective health. Several studies show that non-demographic factors have at least as significant an impact on future health expenditure as the demographic factors. The non-demographic factors include medical price inflation, the productivity of the health sector as a whole and new technologies and pharmaceuticals. It has been noted above, however, that these non-demographic factors are also sources of uncertainties in all the projections.Overall, these projections as well as the experience of many countries indicate that, although population ageing will definitely influence health-care expenditures, it need not conHealth-care systems must be adapted to deal with an ageing population ...... and with the expected increase in the number of people with chronic illnesses needing long-term careThe provision of long-term care becomes more difficult in the face of changes in family structuresNon-demographic factors are at least as important drivers of future health costs as population ageingwess Health-care financing is another large challenge sume an unsustainably large share of national income in the future. What the projections into the future and the recent trends show is that population ageing will not only alter the composition of health-care spending by age, but also require the health system to introduce or to strengthen, if they are already in place, certain types of medical and long-term care services so as to cope with the increasing number of cases of chronic illness and disabilities. Policymakers in developing countries need to upgrade the existing health-care systems to encompass preventive measures, such as those aimed at reducing smoking and excessive alcohol intake and encouraging exercise and rehabilitative regimens for chronic illness, as well as palliative treatment, while improving the provision of effective essential health care for all and of those public services that improve health and reduce infection.The demographic and epidemiological transitions will pose challenges to health-care financing for developing countries which have to deal with the double burden of disease that is the need to combat communicable diseases while at the same time meeting the rising health demand associated with non-communicable diseases and population ageing. To meet these challenges, developing countries need to pool the financial risks associated with poor health or morbidity by adopting better-organized schemes, including insurance schemes. At the present time, private payments account for a major share of total health expenditure in developing countries. Because the scope for private insurance schemes is still limited in many developing countries, Governments should initiate risk-pooling mechanisms. In middle-income developing countries, there may be greater scope for combining social health insurance with private health insurance schemes to provide universal coverage for all, including older persons who have never been insured previously. For low-income developing countries, however, the expansion of health-care systems also needs a combination of different private and public mechanisms; but if financing this expansion risks crowding out other social goals, external financing could be needed for the formation of an ultimately self-sustaining health-care system.With population ageing, the demand for medical practitioners in developed countries is set to rise. This demand must not be met through the brain drain of skilled medical staff from the developing countries. Developing countries need to strengthen their own health delivery systems, including a sufficient growth in the supply of qualified health-care personnel. This will require action in both the developed countries and the developing countries to increase the resources available for the training of medical personnel. The developed countries should expand their teaching facilities in order to train domestic medical students and also students from developing countries. They can also take steps like those taken by the united_kingdom through the Commonwealth Code of Practice for the International Recruitment of Health Workers to encourage increase domestic health-care training and eliminate recruitment in poor countries without the full approval of the host Government (Garrett, , p. ). The developing countries, too, need to expand their medical training programmes to meet present unmet needs and the new and rising demands that population ageing is already creating.International cooperation is essential to ensuring a necessary increase in the number of medical practitioners