
This Note examines the extent of health inequalities within and between countries and analyses ways in which global health partnerships (GHPs) an innovative and important vehicle for international cooperation can alleviate health inequality so as to support developing countries in achieving internationally agreed goals in health, including the healthrelated mdgs (mdg).
Health inequalities affect the implementation of the health mdg directly and that of other mdg indirectly. Where inequalities are wide and increasing, it is more difficult to achieve the mdg. In many situations, efforts to achieve the mdg may increase inequalities, with the betteroff in a society benefiting disproportionately.
Although aimed at eradicating specific diseases and mitigating their negative impact in developing countries, GHPs approaches in recipient countries may not addressand can even worsenexisting inequalities in health. Most GHPs claim to be propoor, but they do not appear to have specific indicators for their equity aims. In fact, there are concerns about whether antipoverty and genderequality approaches are sufficiently integrated into the GHP practices.
International assistance, including GHPs, should be designed to promote equitable progress in health because assuring equitable health outcomes is an effective way of achieving progress in public health at the national and global levels. The main diseases targeted by GHPs are among those suffered primarily by the less welloff, but the impact of the interventions on the disadvantaged depends on the way the GHPs operate and on the social and economic context.
To ensure that benefits reach all, interventions should strengthen the healthcare system and be appropriate to the specific social and cultural conditions of each group. Corrective action needs to be taken with respect to the social factors which determine peoples health conditions, as emphasized in the report by the WHO Commission on the Social Determinants of viii
Health. To measure progress, the aggregate health goal for each country should include explicit health goals in terms of health outcomes for groups defined by income group, region, ethnicity/race, age and gender.
At the same time, GHPs should not ignore the main killer diseases in most poor countriesthat is, respiratory and intestinal diseases leading to millions of child deaths. It is thus essential that GHPs do not divert resources from other urgent needs, but do bring additional resources to combat neglected diseases.
The international community, including the traditional official donors as well as nontraditional donors, has an important role to play in assisting developing countries in improving the health status of their populations. In this regard, international cooperation for development should, among other things: (i) further facilitate essential access to lowcost medicines and treatments in developing countries, and (ii) improve coordination between diseasespecific interventions and general health services to reduce conflicts over human and financial resources.
of daily living, it is necessary to address inequities...in the way society is organized.A relatively recent approach to international cooperation, global health partnerships (GHPs)alliances among public and private entities have multiplied recently and become an important presence in implementing internationally agreed goals on public health. Accordingly, actions by GHPs have an impact on health inequalities. Yet there are concerns about whether antipoverty and genderequality approaches are sufficiently integrated into GHP practices.
After indicating how inequalities affect the implementation of internationally agreed development goals, and briefly discussing the conceptual considerations taken into account in the analysis, this Note will identify the factors underlining the persistence of inequalities in health. It will then assess the impact of health policies on the internationally agreed healthrelated goals, including the mdgs (mdg), through the inequality lens. Then it will examine whether and how new approaches to development cooperation embodied in the GHPs may have an impact on health inequalities. Finally, it will recommend ways in which GHPs or other approaches of international cooperation can help reduce health inequalities and further assist developing countries to improve the health status of their populations.
Why do health inequalities matter for achieving the internationally agreed healthrelated goals?
First, good health is arguably the most important precondition of all other capabilities; consequently, health inequalities matter more than most other inequalities: where health inequalities are large, the poor are likely to experience other types of inequalitiesfor example, low labour productivity and
 Commission on the Social Determinants of Health, Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Through Action on the Social Determinants of Health (Geneva: World Health Organization, ), p.  (available at  ).
income, low educational attainment and poor access to safe drinking water. Moreover, good health is an intrinsic component of human security.
Secondly, the inequalities in health that exist between the developing and developed worlds demonstrate that health attainments in developing countries remain unsatisfactory, despite successes in terms of national averages. Even in those developing countries with mortality and morbidity patterns similar to those of developed countries, health outcomes remain below those attained in the developed world. A significant share of the population in many developing countries suffers from preventable and/or easily treatable diseases. Gaps in health outcomes also indicate how far the international community still has to go to provide adequate health services for all.
Thirdly, it will be much more difficult to achieve the health mdg (reducing child mortality, improving maternal health and combating HIV/ AIDS, malaria and other diseases) without reducing health inequalities and in some cases it may not be possible to do so, since it is among poorer groups that there is the most need and greatest potential for improvements. Health inequalities within nationsin developing and developed countries alikeare often as great as, or even greater than, inequalities across countries. In the absence of welltargeted efforts to provide necessary health care services for worseoff groups (such as the poor, people living in remote areas, or a particular gender or ethnic group), achieving a particular average target does not necessarily indicate that living conditions of all have improved. It should be recalled that investing in the health of children has lifelong significance for production and incomes. Early interventions can also prevent permanent disabilities, providing major social and economic advantages for individuals and society over the long term.
Finally, health inequalities reflect an interplay of cultural, political and economic forces, including the frequency, length and depth of conflicts as well as other severe adverse shocks (natural disaster, for instance) that a country or a region experiences. Development partners need to ensure that
 For example, life expectancy in a part of Glasgow, Scotland, at , is below the average life expectancy in India; in the united_states, equalizing deaths between AfricanAmericans and white Americans in the s would have averted five times more deaths in the united_states than were achieved by medical advances over that period.
their programmes take account of and address existing inequalities. When aggravated, inequalitiesnot only in health, but also on other frontscan become a source of social unrest or conflict, which can, in turn, have a serious adverse impact on health. Such considerations go beyond the narrowly focused efficiency or effectiveness objectives of aid policies.
Conceptual considerations
Health incorporates many aspects of the life of the individual and the structure of society. People and communities have diverse ideas and aspirations about what desirable health outcomes should be at the societal level. Healthrelated and other relevant concepts and definitions employed in this Note are discussed below.
Equality or equity?
Although sometimes used interchangeably, inequality and inequity are different concepts. Inequality implies disparities in status, opportunity or treatment, while inequity incorporates an assessment of fairness. This distinction is particularly important in health, where equality among individuals or groups does not necessarily mean achieving the same state of health. There are natural inequalities in health that may not be considered unfair. For example, as people ageboth males and femalestheir health tends to deteriorate, and it would be unreasonable to expect individuals of all ages to have equal health. Additionally, some people are prone to specific diseases, while other illnesses are particular to a specific gender (haemophilia in males, for instance). There are a variety of genetic advantages or disadvantages that need to be taken into account when deciding what an equitable distribution of health is. Equity is, thus, the most relevant concept for determining health policies, rather than equality per se.
Achieving complete equality of outcomes in health, therefore, may not be a possible or desirable policy objective: equity in health seems to be a more relevant objective. Equity in health could be interpreted as consisting of equality in outcomes among groups or individuals who are similar from a genetic/age/sex perspective. Yet, this is not a sufficient requirement for achieving health equity in a given society, because it can allow large disparities in health outcomes between different groups. For instance, after controlling for certain idiosyncratic individual genetic determinants (such as a higher propensity to having cancer in some families than in others) one could end up with all women equally having poor health, while all men equally have good health. Thus it may be considered desirable to take into account the particular factors pertaining to some people or some groups by designing and implementing the necessary policies to facilitate better health outcomes in groups that are disadvantaged, so as to reduce the disadvantage. In this regard, it is up to each society or nation to define what it considers as desirable with respect to the distribution of health and what people expect from their governments in terms of achieving those goals. Further examination of these issues is beyond the scope of this Note. Simply put, this Note argues that large inequalities in health outcomes, such as exist in many countries and across countries, are generally undesirable.
Health is multidimensional
A second point of clarification relates to the outcomes with which the Note is concerned. Health is a multidimensional concept incorporating many aspects which may be differently affected by structures and policy. Dimensions of health may include the quantity of life (i.e., life expectancy and mortality rates at different ages), as well as factors related to the quality of life, such as morbidity, nutrition, and psychological and social wellbeing. Common measures of health outcomes include mortality rates; the prevalence or incidence of particular diseases; anthropometry; indicators of selfrated health; process indicators such as child immunization coverage; data on the availability or accessibility of healthcare services; measures of health behaviours such as smoking, diet and physical activity, and measures of mental health.
The presence of inequities in one dimension does not necessarily correspond to the existence of inequities in another. For example, a community may have an inequitable prevalence of heart disease across different ethnic groups, despite equitable access to healthcare services. Depending on which aspect of health is being examined, one may reach different conclusions. It is thus important to be explicit about what outcomes or processes are (or are not) being assessed.
Horizontal inequalities
Thirdly, there is the question of the unit among which inequality is being measured, e.g., among individuals or groups within nations, or among nations. The most common measures of inequality with respect to health are of vertical inequality, or inequality among individuals or households, while horizontal inequality is concerned with inequalities that may exist among groupswith the relevant groupings depending on the historical, social and economic context. The literature on health inequalities spans inequalities between racial/ethnic groups, or by class (as determined by occupational type), education, income, religion, or geographic area (rural/ urban, nations, North/South, etc.). There are often considerable overlaps between these classifications since individuals generally belong to more than one group at any one time. There are also natural (as opposed to social) groupings, such as gender and age, which may be associated with differential biological characteristics. Of most concern are those systematic disparities in health outcomes among socially constructed groups which do not have any biological basis and imply inequity as well as inequality.
Evidence of health inequalities
The current state of data collection on health, particularly in developing countries, is not adequate. Analysis, therefore, faces severe limitations. Many countries do not have adequate capacity for collecting data on health. Owing to financial and administrative constraints, only a few lowincome countries are able to maintain death, birth and disease registries. Censuses and vital registration systems are nonexistent in many countries. Even when survey data are available, their validityi.e., measuring what they are supposed to measureis sometimes questionable, due to the crude tools and methodological approaches employed.Because of the problem of the lack of availability and reliability of data on health, the data presented here should be considered preliminary. Despite these limitations, the available data do provide enough information on the health status of the population. Monitoring changes in health status and inequalities within a population over time allows policy makers to devise health policies to advance public health status and to enhance equity.
Defining the appropriate groups within a given country is an important consideration when examining health inequalities. Groups should be established according to the objectives of the analysis being made. Yet, as mentioned before, groupings interact and overlap with each other, making it difficult to single out the impact of a given intervention on the health status of a particular group. Geographic location is a case in point. Geography is often considered as a factor underlining inequality, but it can also be a proxy for differences across ethnic or religious groups in some countries. In such cases, the concentration of people sharing the same ethnic or religious background in a given region may be a factor contributing to inequality (between that region and the rest of the country), besides location and/or difficulty of access. Additional information is thus needed to distinguish the effect of each factor on the outcome, in order to identify what additional policies or interventions should be introduced to increase equality.
The health status of the population reflects many aspects of the social and natural environment in which people grow, live, work and age. Some aspects can be local, such as traditional social norms and hierarchy, while others are global. In general, socioeconomic inequalities, such as in economic status and educational achievements, are critical determinants of health inequalities. Climate changechanges in atmospheric environment at the global levelhas also recently been recognized as a significant and emerging threat to health. Equity (or inequity) in health is fundamentally determined by the global and national structures of social and economic hierarchy and the socially created conditions that dictate health as well as geographic factors.
As mentioned in the previous section, a single indicator cannot capture the multidimensionality of health, and an array of information about health status and health system inputs must be analysed carefully to assess health inequalities and their trends over time. Moreover, different indicators often lead to differenteven contradictoryassessments when monitoring changes in inequality status over time.
In addition, it is important to select appropriate statistical methods to measure the extent of inequality and to assess changes over time. The magnitude of health inequality across different social groups can be summarized by, for example, calculating ratios or rate differences (e.g., between the average or top quintile and lowest quintile), or more complex numerical manipulation of data to characterize the degree of inequality of health status (e.g., the Gini coefficient and generalized entropy). Choices are numerous, and there may not be an objective criterion a priori that can be used to select a particular approach or a specific indicator for a specific purpose.
Health inequalities across countries
Large inequalities in health exist between the developing and developed countries, not only in health outcomes, but also in the supply of healthcare services and how such services are financed by public and private agents (see table ). It is well known that disparities in health outcomes, such as differences in underfive mortality rates and life expectancy at birth, are wide between these two groups of countries. Disparities are also considerable in the amount of resources devoted to healthboth in absolute and relative terms
 Confalonieri, Ulisses et al., Human Health, in M. L. Parry et al. (eds.), climate_change : Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: Working Group II Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on climate_change, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, , pp. .
 The Gini coefficient is a measure of statistical dispersion, commonly used as a measure of inequality of income or wealth distribution. See box , below.
as well as in terms of the share of health expenditures that are financed by individuals. Lowincome countries can only afford to spend a small portion of their total income on health, and their populations have to cover a large share of their medical expenses out of their own pockets. These facts demonstrate that health attainments and services in developing countries remain unsatisfactory, despite successes achieved on many fronts.
Inequalities within countries are considerable, and are frequently associated with inequalities in income (see box ). Table  shows the range of inequalities in underfive mortality rates in developing countries. In virtually every country, children born in poorer families are facing a higher probability of dying before reaching age . Not surprisingly, a similar pattern is observed across different levels of educational attainment of the mother because wealth and education levels are positively correlated. Children whose mothers have lower educational attainment are less likely to survive to age .
Developed countries also show health inequalities across different levels of educational attainment. In Europe, health inequalities vary considerably across educational attainments; in all countries education levels are statistically significant in explaining health inequalities. For example, in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, the ratio of death rate (i.e., the ratio of total deaths to total population in a group or community) between
Box a Correlation coefficient is .. If Peru, an outlier, is removed from the sample, it becomes ..
Linkage between health and income inequalities
The scattered diagram below depicts relationships between the Gini coefficient of income distribution (the horizontal axis) and the ratio of underfive mortality rates (UMRs) between lowest and highest wealth quintile (the vertical axis). The higher the Gini coefficient, the more unequal the income distribution becomes, while the higher the ratio of the two UMRs, the more unequal the health outcomes are.
The diagram shows a weak positive correlation between the two measures, indicating that when income distribution becomes more unequal, health inequality worsens.a A similar relationship between income and health inequality can be observed when employing other measures of income inequality, such as the share of income held by the bottom deciles in total income. In this case, however, the correlation is negative: the lower the share the higher the UMR.
The existence of a correlation between income and health outcomes indicatesto some extentthat, on the one hand, reducing the income gap cannot
Gini coefficient and ratio of under mortality rates between lowest and highest wealth quintile be achieved without improved distribution of (and better) health outcomes, and, on the other hand, that health inequality relates to income inequality. Lower disposable income restricts discretionary (and sometimes necessary) spending on health care (and other social items), leading to ill health or disability for various durations of time and, consequently, lower labour income.
This correlation between income and health suggests the need for a comprehensive socioeconomic policy package to reduce inequalities. Investment in human capital through education, and healthcare provision by government can help to enable people, particularly the poor lacking adequate access to services, to realize their full productive potential.
Box  (contd)
Table Distribution of ratio of under mortality rate between two different socioeconomic groups in developing countries the lowest and highest quintiles of educational attainment of the mother is more than , while in Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Spain and Sweden the ratio is under .
Health inequalities are also present between males and females across countries. It is well known that females have a higher life expectancy at birth, irrespective of income levels (see table ). Nevertheless, differences of life expectancy between the sexes become less pronounced when healthadjusted life expectancy is estimated, because women are prone to be unhealthy for longer periods of time before they die. However, genderbased health gaps can also be observed owing to the strong preference for sons in some countries (see table ). The preference for sons is deeply rooted in
(iii) exclusion is where the majority of the population has reasonable access to services, but a poor minority of the population is deprived, relative to other groups.Figure  shows patterns in the distribution of underfive mor tality (UM) rates in four developing countries. Niger appears to fit the mass deprivation pattern. Queuing characterizes patterns in Namibia and Uganda (although at different levels of overall UM), while Cambodias pattern is mixed, showing that richer groups enjoy lower mortality rates, but the rates among poorer groups are not as extremely high as those observed in Niger.
Admittedly, these are simplistic characterizations of the distribution of health outcomes in a given country and may not exhaust patterns existing in all countries. When such graphic representation is available over time, it does provide useful information on how health interventions affect different socioeconomic groups differently, and points out the effectiveness of certain interventions on the health of the poor and disadvantaged.
Thus far, aspects of health inequalities across countries at a given point in time have been discussed. What about the trends in health inequalities over time? Trend analysis requires at least two different data points, and only a handful of developing countries have conducted health surveys whose results are comparable at two or more different points in time.
Figure  shows the coverage of three doses of vaccine against diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) in urban and rural areas for the period  in six developing countries. Overall DPT coverage improved in four out of the six countries, while inequality trends varied across countries. Countries such as Bangladesh, Egypt and Senegal not only improved immunization levels in both urban and rural areas, but also narrowed the urbanrural gap, with the latter two countries having achieved parity between the two areas. Tanzania appears to have shown positive trends, improving levels in both urban and rural areas, but the gap between the areas remained. In Colombia, immunization levels remained flat over time, with no obvious trends in the urbanrural gap. While the coverage declined in both urban and rural areas in Indonesia between  and , the urbanrural gap improved slightly simply because the rate of decline in the urban area was larger.
Figure , in turn, depicts trends in the nutritional measure of stunting, comparing families whose mothers have no education and those with secondary education. While stunting ratios declined for both groups in four of the six countries, only the Dominican Republic has been successful in significantly narrowing the health gap associated with educational attainment. Overall, however, comparing stunting ratios between the two groups in these countries shows mixed results. In two countries, the ratio widened; three countries experienced improvement, and one country presented no clear trend. Disparity between the two groups has been more persistent in the case of stunting.
In fact, stunting is considered to be a comprehensive indicator of health outcomes because it measures the combined effects of different parameters in the health systems. Malnutrition, one factor in stunting, reflects chronic problems and hence the deficiency of ongoing efforts related to health systems. Nutrition is not only about food intake, but also reflects health care, life styles and the environment in which people live and work. Immunization coverage, on the other hand, can be improved by discrete interventions. Overall improvement in immunization coverage in the sample countries in figure , on the other hand, can be attributed to some extent to the implementation of global health programmes and partnerships (discussed below) introduced to achieve the healthrelated goals and targets of the mdgs.
Health inequalities and the mdgs
How do changes in health inequalities among different socioeconomic groups relate to progress towards achieving the healthrelated goals and targets in the mdg? Healthrelated targets are generally linked to the overall achievement of a nation, thus reflecting only the national average. Overall progress towards the healthrelated targets can be made even while health inequalities among different socioeconomic groups persist, or deteriorate, as some groups may be left behind or may not necessarily benefit to the same extent as the relatively more affluent or privileged.
As an illustration, table  presents data on UMR for  developing countries according to an index of household assets. The countries encompass high and low mortality situations and account for about  per cent of the worlds population. Despite the wide variation in UMR across countries, mortality is always higher in the poorest quintile than in the richest. The ratio of the UMR in the poorest to richest quartiles of wealth distribution varies between . (Tanzania, ) and . (Peru, ), and most ratios are within . and ., meaning that a child born in the poorest family is  to  per cent more likely to die before reaching age  than a child born in a better off family.
Among the  countries,  reduced overall UMRs between the two surveys in a statistically significant way, but in only four countries (Colombia, Egypt, Guatemala and Turkey), did the gap between the richest and poorest quintiles decline (although not statistically significantly). In five countries the gap widened. In the remaining four countries out of the , reductions in the national UMR had a neutral impact on health distribution.
As Moser, et al. () noted, ...improvements in national under  mortality, in line with the MDG[s], do not necessarily bring about decreasing inequalities in mortality between the poorest and least poor in society. Indeed, such societywide improvements seem as likely to be accompanied by increasing as decreasing inequalities. In fact, it has been suggested that efforts to achieve the mdg are likely to increase inequalities, with the betteroff benefiting disproportionately more than their disadvantaged counterparts, in the absence of a concerted effort to ensure that disadvantaged groups benefit from health service delivery. This is in part because it is often more difficult for the health authorities to extend services to the worseoff, who more likely live in distant or hardtoreach areas. Moreover, reaching some groups requires efforts in other areas such as improving communications between local authorities and targeted groups, facilitating increased participation by local communities, and greater access to education and information so as to increase peoples awareness of health issues, among others.
Evidence of the linkage between policies to achieve the healthrelated goals in the mdg and their impact on health inequalities is admittedly scarce. But where available, it indicates the importance of paying attention to health inequalities and their social determinants, as well as the need for additional concerted efforts in the implementation of health interventions and other social policies so as to reach the poor and the disadvantaged. Accordingly, efforts by official donors and global health partnerships to transfer resources to improve health in developing countries would be more efficient and better attuned to the spirit of the Millennium Declaration if programmes and projects explicitly incorporated into their objectives the reduction of inequalities in health and other pertinent areas.
Determinants of health inequalities
The poor health conditions of the worseoff or the socially disadvantaged are, in a broad sense, caused by the unequal distribution of power, income, goods and services, globally and nationally...This unequal distribution of healthdamaging experiences is not in any sense a natural phenomenon... . Social (dis)advantages are associated with differences in socioeconomic status, gender, ethnicity and geographical area. Social advantages are often the result of socioeconomic development, and are related to cultural, political and historical factors, natural and builtin environments as well as public policies. Together, the structural determinants and conditions of daily life constitute the social determinants of health and are responsible for a major part of health inequalities between and within countries.Health and socioeconomic status, ethnicity and geography
Socioeconomic status reflects economic resources (income and wealth), education and occupation. Household wealth is a significant measure of economic resources available for health care and, as seen in figure , there is a correlation between greater household assets and better health outcomes. Similarly, education is also positively correlated with health outcomes. As
 Commission on Social Determinants of Health (), op. cit., p. .
 The Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH), for instance, considers four sets of issues in examining the production of health inequalities in a framework designed to facilitate the description, analysis and monitoring of social determinants of health, and the consideration of entry points for action: (i) socioeconomic political context, (ii) social stratification, (iii) differential exposures, vulnerabilities, and consequences; and (iv) differential outcomes in health. See CSDH, op. cit., p. .
seen above, the likelihood of stunting in childhood is higher among children whose parents have limited educational attainment.
The type of occupation is another factor affecting health outcomes (and is itself the result of access to education, wealth of parents, gender considerations, among other factors). Occupational hazards vary, and health outcomes also differ according to employment grade or rank. For example, in the united_kingdom civil service, the higher the hierarchical grade the lower the mortality rate. Furthermore, there is a strong inverse relationship between the grade of employment and absenteeism due to health issues. The type and quality of jobs can have direct effects on health through occupational hazards, or may affect health indirectly through income security or through psychological and social mechanisms. In the russian_federation, the increase in mortality among working age adults between  and  has been attributed to unemployment, alcohol consumption and social stress.Discrimination against specific racial, ethnic or religious groups is also known to have serious health and social consequences. In Central and Eastern Europe, the Roma people routinely suffer deprivation. In Bulgaria, for example, their life expectancy at any age is five to six years below the rest of the population, while their infant mortality rate is six times the national average. In Hungary, infant mortality among the Roma is nearly four times the average for the country, while in Romania it is two and a half times greater. In Indonesia in , mortality among nonJavanese children was  per cent higher than among Javanese, while nonChinese children had mortality rates nearly four times higher than the rate observed among Chinese children (whose parents are likely to be wealthier). Child mortality rates among the nonTagalog speaking population of the Philippines were  per cent above those of Tagalog speakers, and the rates for nonChristians were  per cent above those of Christians (who are, again, more likely to be wealthier). In latin_america, the prevalence of child diarrhoea and maternal mortality is significantly higher among indigenous people than among nonindigenous.
Discrimination is also often observed in developed countries. In the case of the united_states, there is abundant evidence of health disparities along racial lines, while such factors as place of residence, occupation, education, and income are considered to be secondary to ethnicity. The life expectancy of AfricanAmericans in the District of Columbia is  years, compared with  years for whites in neighbouring Montgomery County (Maryland). A life expectancy of  years is below the average found in a large number of developing countries, including the Philippines, Egypt and all latin_american countries. In the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland, the ratio of people of Bangladeshi and Pakistani origin who reported not good health in a survey was around . times higher than the average for all of England and Wales. Moreover, official statistics show that infant mortality rates for Pakistani and Caribbean groups in the united_kingdom were . and . per , live births, respectively in , compared with a UMR rate of . for white British and  for the united_kingdom as a whole.Health inequalities also occur across geographical area, partly owing to natural differences in the risks and exposures in different geographic contexts, as well as to differences in the availability and quality of healthcare services. In South Africa, the Eastern Cape and the Northern Province have the highest prevalence of stunting; these are also the two provinces with the highest rates of incidence of poverty in the country. In the Chandigarh
 UK Office of National Statistics, Large differences in infant mortality by ethnic group, news release,  June  (statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/ imeth.pdf ); UK national statistics from united_nations Childrens Fund, The State of the Worlds Children , UNICEF, New York, .
 Zere, Eyob and Diane McIntyre, Inequities in underfive child malnutrition in South Africa, International Journal for Equity in Health, no. :, BioMed Central Ltd.,  (available at pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?artid =&blobtype=pdf ), quoting South African Government statistics.
Union Territory in India, about  per cent of birth deliveries were not assisted by a skilled attendant (such as a nurse, midwife or doctor) in the slums, compared with  per cent and  per cent in rural and nonslum urban areas, respectively.
Health inequalities between women and men
Although females generally have a genetic advantage manifested in higher life expectancy, they frequently face disadvantages in access to health care, in health research and in the quality and kinds of health services provided. Moreover, gender inequities work in a manner that interacts with other types of inequalities arising from the factors examined above (education, income, etc.). These elements persist in the more affluent societies. The costs of not attending to the effects of gender are immense. They include:
 Neglect of diseases and health problems facing women, e.g. numerous physical and emotional illhealth problems arising from socially normalized genderrelated practices such as sexual abuse and violence against women and girls, female genital mutilation, illicit abortions, child marriage, sex trafficking, etc.
 Slow diagnoses and treatment of diseases and conditions that specifically affect women, e.g. breast and cervical cancer, sexually transmitted diseases, endometriosis and others.
 Inattention to social factors causing women ill healthoccupational hazards in the various places where women work, overwork and stress, inequalities in remuneration and economic insecurity, as well as insecurity arising from sexual harassment, etc.
Apart from the fact that men generally have a lower life expectancy, gender inequities are also noticeable for men in some particular circumstances. For example, the decline in average life expectancy in the russian_federation in the s was sharper among men than women. Between  and , life expectancy for Russian men declined from . to . years (a decline of . years) and for Russian women from to . years (. years). Tobacco and alcohol abuse and psychological depressionprobably related to job losseswere among the many factors that accounted for the disparities in life expectancy between men and women during that period.
Gender inequalities in health reflect a complex interaction of social and biological variables. Yet because they tend to be dismissed as biological differences, social responsibility is denied, and gender differences in health are therefore often not treated seriously in social policy. A gender approach to health distinguishes between biological and social factors, and examines their interactions. When it comes to social factors, a gender approach to health does not just address the ascribed gender roles of women, but also addresses the structural inequalities between women and men in access to money, education, resources, jobs, and servicesincluding health services.
Genderrelated health inequalities and the mdg
The international development agenda pays particular attention to issues of gender inequality and empowerment of women. MDG  specifically commits to achieving gender equality in many socioeconomic, political and cultural areas. Reflecting the linkages among these elements, other of the mdg have specific genderrelated targetsin education and health, for instance. But much more needs to be done to mainstream gender into global health policy. For example, reducing infant mortality requires attending to the factors that lead to significantly higher mortality rates among girls than among boys in some countries, despite the greater biological vulnerability of boys at birth. Meeting MDG  (improving maternal health), which addresses one particular aspect of women health, also has significant implications for MDG . Maternal mortality is strongly correlated with women unequal access to adequate education and nutrition, as well as inadequate health facilities, exacerbated by curbs on women mobility that limit access to antenatal and obstetric emergency treatment. WHO further observes that vulnerability to genderbased violence by partners during pregnancy is a causal factor in maternal mortality (see box ).
MDG  (combating HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases) demands particular attention to the extent that gender inequalities are implicated in the epidemiology of HIV/AIDS and to policy responses and services, in addition to the burden on women and girls generated by widespread sickness and fatalities brought on by the pandemic. The gender dynamics of HIV/AIDS mean that women are often unable to exercise choice and control their physical integrity in the context of war and conflict, and of extreme poverty in many societies. In such situations, the abstain, be faithful, condomise (ABC) approach has little practical value.
Box Spousal violence: a serious health concern
One of the most hidden, pernicious, and yet widely prevalent health risks women face globally stems from violence within the home from spouses and other intimate partners. Although it is still underreported, estimates show that worldwide  to  per cent of evermarried women, cutting across countries and economic groups, face physical violence from husbands.a Marital violence is found to devastate the women who suffer it, scar the children who witness it, and dehumanize the men who perpetrate it. It adversely affects not only individuals but their families, future generations and entire societies. Indeed, the World Health Organization has identified marital violence as a major health concern.b
Marital violence is found to cause serious physical and mental injury to women. Violence during pregnancy is linked to miscarriages, low birth weight infants, maternal morbidity, and even foetal and maternal deaths.c The term battered woman syndrome describes a situation where a womans sense of self is so damaged that she believes she deserves to be abused.
Physical or mental injury can adversely affect a womans job prospects, productivity, work regularity, and upward mobility. Even the fear of injury can undermine a womans ability to earn a living, by making her fearful of reprisal if she goes to work, or to upgrade her skills, or to explore job options. A womans inability to obtain or hold a job due to marital violence reduces her income. This can reduce not only her own healthcare prospects but also her childrens, given that mothers incomes tend to benefit child nutrition and health care more than fathers incomes.d Moreover, it erodes her social relationships by keeping away neighbours and friends and by making her withdraw from social contact. Accordingly, it reduces women ability to seek help during illhealth or pregnancy, and can even affect their life expectancy.
Marital violence also carries direct intergenerational costs, such as foetus damage and psychological damage to children witnessing violence. Such children tend to have greater emotional and behavioural problems than other children and carryover effects into adulthood.e Having seen their fathers beat their mothers, girls in adulthood are more likely to accept a husbands abuse and boys are more likely to beat their wives. Marital violence thus undermines the physical and mental capabilities of all family members.
Overall the global health policy context is one in which the mainstream remains largely inattentive to gender as a major determinant of health. Moreover, women inherit the care burden when public services are eroded, as happened when economic structural reforms were introduced in the s.
Health inequalities and environmental factors
In addition, environmental factors can also contribute to health risks for women, thus widening health disparities between women and men. A case in point is the health implications for women of widespread dependence on traditional biomass fuels for domestic energy.Women are found to suffer disproportionately more than men from acute respiratory infections (ARI) and acute lower respiratory infections (ALRI), in addition to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). They also face greater risk of lung cancer and cataracts leading to blindness. The mortality risk to women from smokerelated infections is assessed to be  per cent higher than for men. Sixty per cent of the . million deaths reported annually due to inhaling fuel smoke from cooking indoors are of women. Pregnant women also risk having still births and low birth weight babies, with associated intergenerational effects on the childs life chances and future health (see box ). In addition, fuel collection is primarily women responsibility in many countries, and fuel shortagesbesides having negative implications for good nutritionadd to women already long working days. This again can have adverse health
 Most traditional biofuels are unprocessed organic material used in their natural, primary form. The term solid fuel is used to include both unprocessed biofuels and coal.
 One study in India found a  per cent adjusted excess risk of stillbirth among women using biomass fuels during pregnancy (cited in Smith, K.R., S. Mehta and M. MaeusezahlFeuz, Indoor air pollution from household use of solid fuels, in M. Ezzati, A. Lopez, A. Rodgers and C. Murray (eds.), Comparative Quantification of Health Risks, vol. , WHO, Geneva, , p. ).
women health and the environment: indoor air pollution
Half the population of the developing worldabout . billion householdsstill depend on conventional biofuels for cooking and heating. These traditional biofuelsin particular firewood, charcoal, cattle dung and crop wasteare used by over  per cent of rural households in subSaharan Africa,  per cent in India, and  per cent in China, and the numbers relying on such fuels is projected to increase to . million by  (see table below), with the highest numbers and percentages living in Africa and South Asia. Although this reliance is greatest among the poorest households, many welloff households also use traditional biofuels to a substantial extent, even as they move to modern fuels for additional energy needs.a
Cooking with traditional biofuels using inefficient stoves in poorly ventilated conditions is found to produce serious health ill effects. The smoke produced during the combustion of traditional biofuels contains pollutants such as particulates, carbon monoxide, nitrogen and sulphur oxide, formaldehyde, and benzopyrene. In Africa and South Asia, around  to  per cent of the population is exposed to such smoke from the fuels they use domestically. Indoor smoke from solid fuels (unprocessed biofuels plus coal) is globally responsible for . per cent of lower
Population relying on traditional biomass for cooking and heating,  (millions)
a In an analysis of ,rural households in Pakistan, even the richest quintile of households used wood and dung to a substantial degree. See Chaudhuri, S. and A. Pfaff, Does Indoor Air Quality Fall or Rise as Household Incomes Increase?, Working paper no. , School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University, New York, USA, .
respiratory infections,  per cent of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and . per cent of trachea, bronchus and lung cancer.b It is also linked with a higher incidence of tuberculosis, cataracts and asthma. The WHO notes that indoor air pollution is responsible for . per cent of the global burden of disease.c An estimated . million deaths a year in developing countries are associated with inhaling smoke from indoor cooking from such fuels, making indoor air pollution the fourth leading cause of premature deaths in developing countries.d Those at greatest risk from these diseases are women who do most of the cooking, and young children playing near or in their mothers laps or carried on their backs.
Children are even more at risk directly. The WHO estimates that acute respiratory infections account for  per cent of child deaths each year (. million out of  million).e Of these, a very large percentage is due to cookingfuelrelated indoor air pollution. In India alone almost two thirds of the children under  months live in households using only unprocessed biomass fuels for cooking and an estimated , to , Indian children died due to acute lower respiratory infection mortality linked with biomass fuels in .f Children being carried on the mothers back while she is cooking (as is common in rural Africa) are often at greatest risk, and this can have gender implications according to which gender tends to be carried more. Similarly, in South Asia, girls inducted at a very early age to help their mothers cook are at higher risk than boys who are sent out to play.
The provision of clean, adequate and affordable domestic energy thus needs priority attention by governments. The solutions will need to be not only technical but also financial and institutional in nature. Improved stoves with chimneys and greater fuel efficiency can also help. Policies in these directions can, however, complement but not substitute for cleaner fuels. A shift to cleaner fuels is possible in the short and medium term, and at a fairly low cost, even with known technologies. A case in point is biogas plants which produce methane gas by anaerobic fermentation of biomass.
Shortand longterm solutions will require not just adaptation of technology to local needs and appropriate pricing and credit support policies, but also additional institutional inputs. In particular, more participatory and collective approaches are needed for ensuring community involvementespecially women participationin the process of adapting and adopting the cleaner fuels and associated technologies.
effects directly for women, but also indirectly for children left behind for long periods without the main caregiver. Domestic energy shortages are not confined to poor households, since in many regions much of the cooking fuel is gathered, even among the welloff.Culture and gender inequality in health
Specific groups may face additional health risks because the particular socioeconomic environments they face are often in part determined by dominant cultural values, which in turn can contribute to the perpetuation of conditions such as marginalization, stigmatization and lack of access to culturally appropriate health care and services. The cultural environment can strongly constrain the behaviour of men and women through powerful cultural components that closely regulate the lives of both men and women.
For example, in traditional Moroccan society, there are specific social norms and roles assigned to men and women, and these tend to shape the structure and functioning of society. The father is traditionally the absolute head of the family, and his authority over his wife (or wives) and children is culturally sanctioned. As a result, a gender hierarchy, whereby males have authority over females, is established at the level of the basic cell of society: the family.
There is a direct relationship between how a culture manifests itself in its norms and legal instruments and in unequal access to goods and services, opportunities and rights. This can contribute to inequalities in health care and health outcomes. For example, the maledominated culture influences male and female behaviours alike with regard to reproductive health education and services, and this can translate to resistance to government family planning initiatives.
 In rural India in the mids,  per cent of cooking fuel was gathered and not purchased.
The macroeconomic environment: adjustment and health inequalities
The provision of healthcare services for all is a goal shared by the international community. But common problems may prevent realization of this goal in many of developing countries. These include the inadequacy of available human and financial resources and the inequitable allocation of such resources among different groups of the populationnot only in health but also in other sectors such as education and economic and social infrastructure. The poor and other disadvantaged groups are most likely to be adversely affected by these shortcomings, despite their greater need.
Many developing countries faced significant reversals in social welfare policies during the s when implementing internationally mandated structural adjustment programmes (SAPs). SAPs consisted of a set of components, such as balance of payments adjustments, trade liberalization, privatization, monetary discipline and fiscal austerity. The last component, in many cases, led to reductions in public spending on social services and subsidies, accompanied by costrecovery measures such as the introduction of user fees (officially charged fees) for services.
Because of the complex relationships between the macroeconomic environment and health outcomes, no outright conclusion on the impact of SAPs on health is possible. The WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, which reviewed  articles on the impact of macroeconomic adjustment policies, including SAPs, found both positive and negative consequences on health outcomes. In subSaharan Africa, however, it found mostly negative consequences. Largely owing to the lack of data, particularly across different socioeconomic groups, the report failed to analyse the impact of SAPs on health inequalities.  WHO, World Health Report , op. cit.
More recently, the greater availability of health indicators has made it possible to come to a broad consensus. Accordingly user fees, many of which were introduced during the s, have been found to be a barrier to access to health services, particularly for the poor, thus exacerbating health inequalities between poor and rich. But user fees appear to be only one of the several barriers that the poor face. Other direct costs have been identified as preventing the poor from accessing healthcare servicessuch as informal fees (including inkind transactions) and the costs of drugs and other health supplies, often imported in lowincome countries and made more expensive by the currency devaluations that also often result from structural adjustment programmes. To be sure, other types of indirect costs and nonmonetary factors can influence health service access and outcomes: these include travel costs; the quality of health services for the poor; the supply of properly trained health workers; the availability of essential drugs on a daily basis; and lack of information on health services.Several countries, however, have recently introduced health policy initiatives to address the problems mentioned above, largely within the framework of two international development initiativesthe mdg and the World Bankled Reaching the Poor Program. One such initiative was to remove user fees as in the case of Uganda (see box ).
The current global economic crisis threatens to stymie progress for many developing countries. Any shortfall in fiscal revenues (including donor grants) due to the economic slowdown could have major repercussions on health through pressures on health budgets, thus limiting the
 New WHO research carried out in  countries in Africa shows a critical shortage of health workers: in  of the  countries studied, current preservice training is insufficient to maintain the existing density of health workers once all causes of attrition are taken into account. It estimates that with current training patterns and only involuntary attrition, it would take  years for doctors and  years for nurses to reach the WHO target of . health workers per , of the population, and some countries would never reach it. Kinfu, Yohannes, et al., The health worker shortage in Africa: are enough physicians and nurses being trained?, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. , no. , , pp. .
Box a The case reported here is based on Burnham, Gilbert M., et al., Discontinuation of cost sharing in Uganda, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. , no. , March , pp. . b It should be noted that at the beginning of the present century, a little less than  per cent of the population earned less than US$ a day, and  per cent US$ per month.
Abolition of user fees in Uganda
After two decades of upheaval, at the end of the s Uganda emerged with an underequipped and understaffed health care system.a Cost sharingin the form of user feeswas introduced to cover public health workers salaries, alleviate drug shortages and strengthen community management of facilities. User fees and managed revenues were determined at the local level, but often were in the range of US$.. per visit.b After the introduction of the user fees, outpatient attendance dropped by more than  per cent in some districts, while the opposite happened in some remote areas. For health employees and communitylevel health facilities, revenues from user fees became a relatively secure source of income, and provided for purchases of medical and other supplies.
In March , as there was some evidence that they were leading to unnecessary suffering and even death, user fees were abolished. The major objective of this policy change was to improve access to health services for the poor. The Ministry of Health introduced a supplemental fund of US$. million to buffer the loss of revenue and to counter a potential shortage of drugs. The fund was financed by the World Banksponsored district health services project.
Utilization rates increased. In public referral facilitiesheads of the subdistrict healthcare systems, typically larger hospitals with doctors available and relatively well equipped medical facilitiesutilization rates increased by  per cent in  when the fees were abolished and  per cent in . The equivalent rates in public centres (lower level than the referral facilities) were  and  per cent, respectively.c When examining outpatient utilization at health centres among different wealth groups, the poorest (defined as a group of households below the bottom quartile in a wealth ranking) recorded the highest rate at . in  (i.e., an average person in the poorest category visited centres . times a year) and almost . in .d The other groups reached around . in  and between . and . in  showing that the abolition of fees induced other groups who also benefited from the measure. Females consistently utilized health facilities more than males before and after the abolition of user fees in , and there is no evidence of a change in this pattern after the elimination of the fees.e
The abolition of user fees did not seem to have implied deterioration in the quality of services renderedone of the reasons commonly evoked in support of user fees. For example, there was no significant increase in average stockout daysdays when a health centre is out of stock of drugsper month after the c Nabyonga, J., et al., Abolition of costsharing is propoor: evidence from Uganda, Health Policy and Planning, vol. , no. , , pp. . d The outpatient utilization rate is calculated as the ratio between the total number of visits in all health centres in the region and the number of people living in the region.
Utilization rates by wealth group are not reported in the paper.
abolition; average drug stockout appeared to increase in  immediately after the abolition, but it declined in . Other quality aspects of health services, such as staff attitude and availability and health unit cleanliness and maintenance, reported no deterioration.
The debate on whether abolishing user fees ispropoorwill continue. For countries like Uganda, where the significant portion of the population is poor, the imposition of user fees, however small, puts even basic healthcare services out of reach.
availability of publicly supplied health services. This was well documented in the cases of Central and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) during the s, when economic difficulties led to a reduction of employment in the health sector and a shrinking of government expenditure for health. Partly as a result of this, some CIS countries experienced declines in life expectancy at birth, and Armenia, Moldova and some Central Asian countries saw increased incidence of tuberculosis. (Other causes included rising stress due to unemployment and greater general insecurities.)
In developing countries, much of the population, including the poor, rely on public provision or assistance for essential health services such as primary health care and immunizations. Recession and falling tax revenues may reduce funding for these services. In addition, falling remittances, increasing unemployment and lower wages imply fewer resources available to cover health costs, while formal sector employees may lose access to health insurance provided through employment. As reported in table , a large share of health costs is covered by outofpocket private expenditure in lowincome countries. Countries which depend on foreign assistance for the delivery of basic health care are likely to suffer if official development assistance (ODA) flows are not sustained.
Public health may also be expected to be affected by the consequences of rising food prices, which reduce incomes as well as imperilling nutrition. From  to , between  and  million people are
estimated to have fallen below the $aday poverty line due to increased food prices. Moreover, recent declines in food prices alone do not seem to be fully reversing the trend, as the current level of food prices is still historically high. In view of the current global crisis, health interventions should be complemented by strengthening development financing in the agricultural sector to secure resources for food, as a contribution to health for all.
Global health partnerships
Global health partnerships have been designed to assist recipient countries to advance public health in general and to achieve the mdg in particular. The emergence of GHPs has had both positive and negative effects on the capacity of developing countries to make effective advances in tackling health problems. This section examines the role of international cooperation, with particular emphasis on GHPs, in advancing public health in developing countries and reducing health inequalities. The impact of the GHPs on the international aid framework is examined in detail in the Appendix.
International development assistance for health has accelerated since the launching of the mdgs in  and amounted to a total of $. billion worth of commitments in  by both bilateral and multilateral donors of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD/DAC). Disbursements reached $ billion, on average, in the period  and corresponded to  per cent of donors total disbursementsup from  per cent in . SubSaharan Africa is the largest recipient region of health aid.
There have been significant changes in the pattern of resource allocation within the health sector. While HIV/AIDS and infectious disease control absorbed about  per cent of ODA commitments in the s ( and  per cent, respectively), these programmes accounted for  per cent of all commitments in  ( and  per cent, respectively).
 united_nations Department of Social and Economic Affairs, Dont forget the food crisis: New policy directions needed, UNDESA Policy Brief, no.  (October ).
On the other hand, the share of general health (health policy, training and research) declined from  to  per cent during the period.The health sector has also witnessed a proliferation of new actors and new institutional arrangements: between  and  international alliances, also called GHPs, have been created to attain the international development goals and to enhance the efficiency of aid and its traditional channels of allocation and management. According to WHO, publicprivate alliances are understood as those partnerships which bring together a set of actors for the common goal of improving the health of a population through mutually agreed roles and principles and are a key for achieving significant improvements in health on an international scale.There are four main reasons that justify the creation of GHPs. Firstly, fighting against certain diseases (especially contagious diseases) is a global public good, and it therefore requires global and effective responses. Secondly, focusing on a specific disease can mobilize public opinion and resources in a more effective way. Thirdly, there are reasonable doubts about the levels of efficiency and effectiveness of traditional aid channels. And finally, certain diseases have high externalities that demand a concentrated and massive effort to fight them.
Available assessments suggest that the partnerships function acceptably well, especially in terms of overall improved access to treatments, therapies and medicines. At the same time, there are concerns about the role of GHPs in addressing health inequality, their impact on national health systems and on the coherence of the international aid architecture. It seems that approaches adopted by the GHPs in their country operations can have implications for national health care systems by affecting the delivery of services and the allocation of resources among socioeconomic groups and geographical areas.
Scope of GHPs
In terms of the scope of their activities, GHPs generally focus on at least one of the following areas and, in many cases, target some of them simultaneously:
(i) Research and development: Dedicating resources to the discovery and development of new treatments, products and vaccines.
(ii) Technical assistance and service support: Directing resources and technical support towards the definition of policies and the improvement of access to pharmaceutical products and medical services.
(iii) Advocacy: Improving the response capacity (both national and international response) to specific diseases, promoting the participation and resources to tackle them.
(iv) Financing/funding: Promoting resources for specific programmes.
GHPs that aim at research and development are designed to in crease investment and research efforts in new medicines, vaccines or diagnostic tests for diseases which disproportionately affect the developing world. This type of partnership typically involves the pharmaceutical industry as well as philanthropic foundations. The Global Alliance for TB Drug Development, which involves Glaxo Smith Kline, among others, and the Medicines for Malaria Venture, which brings together Hoffmann La Roche, Basilea Pharmaceutica and Fulcrum Pharma, are cases in point.
Multilateral organizations are frequent participants in GHPs. As expected, the WHO takes part in most initiatives ( out of around  studied), followed by UNICEF () and the world_bank (). Wellknown financing partnerships that have the largest funding and international impact are the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (the Global Fund) and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI).
Most GHPs have multiple objectives. They aim at the development of new products and treatments through research and development, as well as at increasing access of the poorest people to products and treatments. Additionally, most of them take a diseasespecific or conditionspecific approach in their health programmes. In fact, around  per cent of GHPs target three diseasesnamely HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. There are also GHPs devoted to the eradication of diseases that affect a smaller share of the population, and to infections which are less well known and about which the general public is less aware, such as dengue fever, Chagas, Guinea worm, and others. Only a small number of GHPs are designed to strengthen national health services.
GHPs and the promotion of equality
The objectives of global health partnerships are, among other things, to eradicate specific diseases and mitigate their adverse impact in developing countries, as well as to expand actions and resources with the aim of attaining the internationally agreed development goals in health. Despite most GHPs claim to be propoor, their workings in recipient countries may in fact worsen existing inequalities in health. Indeed there are concerns about whether issues of inequalities in health, including gender inequality and poverty reduction, are sufficiently integrated into GHP practices. The united_kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) concluded in  that GHPs are in practice only as propoor or gendersensitive as the policy environment and health systems they operate within.In principle, there are four channels through which the relationship between GHPs and the issue of equality may be considered. Firstly, through the relationship between poverty and diseases; secondly, through the selection of beneficiary countries; thirdly, through the impact on national health services; and, fourthly, through the working procedures followed by GHPs in the countries in which they operate.
Tackling the poverty disease nexus
Poor people tend to suffer higher rates of mortality and morbidity than those who have a higher income; and, despite the fact that their needs are greater, they attend to health services less frequently than betteroff people. These inequalities are not the consequence of differing points among social groups, but rather of unequal restrictions faced by them. Improving the access to health services is an important aspect of reducing social and gender inequalities. Thus, it is important to analyse the specific barriers that affect poor and vulnerable people in each situation and country. Furthermore, it is necessary to go beyond having a diseasespecific focus. For instance, AIDS treatment cannot be provided in isolation from national health systems, and it is impossible to fight malaria without the support of primary health care.
There are clear interlinkages among the incidence of poverty, other types of inequalities and a large share of the diseases and areas targeted by GHPs. For example, it is recognized that social and gender inequality increases the risk of HIV infection and, once a person is infected, the same inequality acts as a barrier against proper treatment. In this case, then, the action of the GHP on diseases should have a positive effect on the living conditions of the poorest sectors. This conclusion could be generalized to a large part of the diseases that the GHPs target, especially the socalled neglected diseases that devastate the most marginalized sectors of society in the developing world. However, this positive effect is limited by the small amount of attention which GHPs have dedicated to strengthening national health systems, and by the unintended adverse impact that they may have on those systems, as discussed below.
Health specialists recognize that individuals have different capacities for benefiting from health care, even if services are provided equitably. In addition, the provision of services does not reflect the actual use of those services by different sectors of society. There is ample evidence that improvements in access to antiretroviral treatments in Africa, for example, do not necessarily lead to the actual use of those treatments by many people, especially among the poor. In order to ensure that provision benefits all, it is necessary to address the social conditions within which people live and work. To achieve this requires strengthening national structures of primary health care, aiming at providing rational, evidencebased and anticipatory responses to health needs and to social expectations. By starting with the existing health structures, the treatments can also be adapted to the specific conditions (both social and cultural) of each group. As has been pointed out, attaining good health cannot therefore be effectively promoted through partnerships that focus narrowly on improving drug access; rather, it must to be pursued as part of a broader reform to strengthen health systems.Additionally, there is no guarantee that the investment in health care is targeted to poor people, even if the intervention is focused on the diseases that mainly affect poor people. In fact, there is evidence that the rates of use of standard primary healthcare interventions for immunization, oral rehydration therapy, medical treatment of diarrhoea and acute respiratory infection and attended deliveries are higher in upper socioeconomic groups than in lower groups. It requires great effort to reach disadvantaged groups, due to their limited resources and limited ability to use even heavily subsidized health services.
Allocation of resources: poor countries, diseases of the poor
GHPs can also promote equity and reduce the inequality of health outcomes across countries by focusing on the poorest countries. GHPs are oriented mainly to fight against infectious diseases,  per cent of which are reported in developing countries, whereas these countries account for only  per cent of global expenditure on health. In fact, the activities and resources of GHPs are mainly oriented to poorer areas or groupings, especially subSaharan countries. For example,  per cent of approved funds in Rounds  of the Global Fund are for subSaharan Africa. Eligibility for GAVI funds is restricted to countries whose per capita gross national income (GNI) was below US$, in .
In this regard, GHP aid allocation seems to be in line with the objectives of reducing international inequalities. While this is encouraging and can contribute to reducing gaps across countries, it does not guaranteeexcept in the case of massive campaigns reaching a significantly large share of the populationthat inequality within given countries will be reduced and that the most disadvantaged groups will be reached.
As highlighted in the Appendix, many poor countries need proper technical assistance in order to access fully the benefits of GHPs, and here, too, significant shortcomings have been found. This is largely due to the limited attention which GHPs have given to support activities and technical assistance in beneficiary countries, which has made it difficult for the poorest countries to maximize benefits from the GHPs programmes.
More important, however, is whether these initiatives are addressing the major diseases that affect the poor and other disadvantaged groups in particular. In spite of the important achievements accomplished on HIV/ AIDS, it should be recalled that today the top killer diseases in most poor countries are respiratory and intestinal diseases leading to child deaths from pulmonary failure or diarrhoea (see table ). Yet there is very little advocacy for addressing these problems, and there is no GHP to support them.
In some countries, very large GHPs emphasizing a single disease (such as those focusing on HIV/AIDS) may unintentionally be addressing the needs of small groups to the detriment of the majority. For instance, the world_bank reports that in Mozambique the epidemic and endemic risks for malaria are high ( and  per cent respectively), while child mortality is also high at  per , live births. Meanwhile, the AIDS prevalence rate reaches  per cent but funds allocated for the disease are . times larger than for malaria and  times the allocation for the integrated management of childhood illness. In Uganda, the very rapid increase in allocations to address HIV/AIDS has pulled medical personnel from other parts of the health sector, compromising delivery of services.Impact on national health services
GHPs have often channelled resources towards the support of a particular disease programme. Problems emerge from this vertical approach. The first problem is related to the potential conflict between the horizontal approach of national health systems and the vertical approach of the GHPs. The horizontal approach seeks to tackle overall health problems on a wide front and on a longterm basis, while the vertical approach calls for solution of a given health problem by means of singlepurpose machinery.
General health services, based on the horizontal approach, have the advantage of being more comprehensive and more embedded in the community. In that sense, they are more likely to reach the deeper causes of an illness (frequently conditioned by social factors). On the other hand, vertical approaches can be justified when trying to combat a disease that affects a high proportion of a population. When the treatment has important dynamic externalities and the disease has specific causes, making a big investment effort through a vertical approach is recommended in order to produce irreversible achievements. Nevertheless, it is clear that in the long run, organized and efficient healthservice systems are what countries need most.
Therefore, it is not a question of making a mutually exclusive choice between these two approaches, but rather of carefully defining the circumstances in which a massive effort is the best answer against a disease, and striving to achieve adequate coordination between general health services and vertical funds. More precisely, it is necessary to use explicit intervention priorities to drive the required improvements into the health system. It is best to avoid both undesirable extremes: creating isolated islands of sufficiency in a sea of underprovision on the one hand (if only a vertical approach is supported), and maintaining a generalized insufficiency, without improvements in severe diseases on the other (if only a horizontal approach is supported). It would be better to build certain areas of sufficiency amidst a system in the process of improvement, and trying to connect these areas gradually. This calls for greater integration and coordination between diseasespecific initiatives and the underlying healthcare delivery system.
Improved coordination will, however, require that the number of vertical initiatives is limited. In fact, the present situation seems to be characterized by runaway proliferation of vertical funds. As a consequence, it is very difficult for the fragile national health systems of poor countries to coordinate the activities of the GHPs. Nevertheless, the efficient treatment of any of the diseases targeted by GHPs seems conditioned by the capacity of the national health system to integrate preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic measures in a holistic, comprehensive approach.
In general, GHPs do not place sufficient attention on strengthening national health systems. Moreover, GHP operations have severe implications for existing local capacities, both in terms of human and technical resources, with important consequences for the provision of primary health care and the health of those that depend on it the most: the poor and disadvantaged.
While some GHPs have committed resources to strengthening local health services, resources are often earmarked for services and institutions related to a specific disease targeted by the GHP. From an
 See for example, The Global Fund, Fact Sheet: The Global Funds approach to health systems strengthening, Global Fund Fact Sheet Series,  of ,  March  (theglobalfund.org/documents/rounds//rhss_factsheet_en.pdf ).
operational perspective, a government may receive funds from GHPs to support a specific programme, but may have limited financial capacity to deliver basic health care outside the scope of the GHPs.
In other instances, GHPs have affected national health services and the supply of basic healthcare services by attracting health professionals away from the public sectoralready facing considerable shortages of skillsto higherpaid positions within the GHPs. The vertical nature of their approach creates a new type of frontline healthcare worker with very specific skills, which may not correspond to the overall needs of the country. In general, people living in remote areas, urban slums or particular geographical areas with high concentrations of ethnic minorities depend heavily on such basic primary care services. As observed elsewhere, there is a serious risk that weak human resource and systems capacity at central and local levels can be overwhelmed by the growing proliferation of GHPand other HIV/AIDS initiativeswith separate demands. Even if vertical funds invest resources in strengthening national capacities or improving their harmonization and alignment, difficulties will persist because each initiative has its own governance structures and decisionmaking process.
Adjusting working procedures
Progress on health equity is only possible when achieving health equity is incorporated as an explicit objective into the definition and design of interventions. The united_states Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), for instance, has indicated that it targets children and orphans particularly. The share of children receiving PEPFARsupported treatment grew from  per cent of total beneficiaries in fiscal year (FY)  to  per cent in FY. Through FY, PEPFAR plans to work with host nations to support care for  million people,  million of whom are orphans and vulnerable children. PEPFAR acknowledges inequalities between genders which perpetuate women vulnerability to HIV and  per cent of those receiving antiretroviral treatment in its programmes are women (HIV/ AIDS prevalence is higher among women than men in targeted countries). Meanwhile, the Global Funds guidelines are seen as encouraging countries to consider social and gender inequalities in their applications. Yet, it is not clear whether or not this recommendation has been followed in all cases, or how such considerations address existing inequities.
Notwithstanding the above, the use by GHPs of generalized proceduresthe one size fits all approachwith no particular consideration given to the institutional and cultural environment of diverse communities, has not helped to develop grassroots approaches that are sensitive to the conditions of the poorest. In this regard, GHPs should analyse the specific factors that limit the access of poor people to health services, and ensure that their interventions help to overcome these limits. As Hanefeld () points out: GHIs [global health initiatives] need to consider social inequities, including gender inequities, in designing contextspecific programmes, to ensure that these are equally accessible to women and men. GHP policies and programmes should be checked for their potential longterm impact on social and gender inequities before they are implemented.
Moreover, there are inconsistencies in the approaches of GHPs that affect their potential contribution to addressing equity issues effectively. For instance, the participation of pharmaceutical companies may have negative implications for equity, as there may be conflicts of interest. A case in point is the constraints facing developing countries in making use of the flexibilities allowed under the World Trade Organizations international agreement of  on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights and public health, known as TRIPS. These constraints affect the ability of countries to improve the access of their populations to essential medicines through the supply of generic products or by overriding patent rights (see box ). Some partnerships (PEPFAR, for example) may insist on the use of specific drugs, bypassing the less expensive generic alternatives. Additionally, although national governments participate in the partnerships, objectives need to be clearly established and shared among stakeholders, so as to prevent public funds from being used to benefit any companies involved, instead of improving health outcomes of a given population.
TRIPS and public health: improving access to cheaper medicines for the poor?
Access to essential medicines and treatments is fundamental for better health. Despite progress, partly owing to the involvement of GHPs, access to essential medicines by the poor and other disadvantaged groups in developing countries is not yet adequate. This has become a major public health concern, as patented drugs are often very costly, making treatments unaffordable and therefore unreachable for the poor.a A patent grants the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale or selling a product or inventionb, allowing its holder to control the price of, say, a medicine or treatment for a specific period of time. For example, the cost of HIV/AIDS treatment with patented medicines is between $, and $, per patient per year in developed countries, compared to $ if generic drugs by producers in developing countries are used.c
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has been the main forum where international intellectual property negotiations and standard setting took place before the creation of the world_trade_organization (WTO). The TradeRelated Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement of the WTO, which went into effect in , introduced significant changes in the overall framework of the international intellectual property system.d WIPO presided over an international intellectual property regime of rule diversity, which permitted developing countries to tailor their intellectual property regimes to meet their development objectives. In contrast, TRIPS introduced the principle of minimum intellectual property standards.
In this regard, the TRIPS agreement represents an attempt to narrow the gaps in the ways these [intellectual property] rights are protected around the world, and to bring them under common international rules.e Moreover, the approach implies that, in practice, any international intellectual property agreement negotiated thereafter can only create higher standards (often known as TRIPSplus). At the same time, shifting the regulatory focus from WIPO to the WTO permits the use of trade remedies to enforce property standards.
However, WTO members are allowed to use exemptions and amendments called flexibilitiesto some of the provisions in the Agreement. For instance, if patented medicines are unaffordable and essential for public health, a government can take remedial measures, such as compulsory licensing and parallel imports.f
Compulsory licensing is the granting of permission to an agency or a company to produce the patented product or to reproduce a patented process without the consent of the patent owner. A licence may be granted in an unusual situation (for example, a public health emergency) but that requires domestic manufacturing capacity. Alternatively, a country may, without the consent of the patent owner, import cheaper drugs from a manufacturer that holds a parallel patent. It can also import the generic version of the drug (patentexpired or voluntarily licensed). It may not, however, import from a manufacturer that was issued a compulsory licence by its government. In the latter case, production shall be predominantly for the supply of the domestic market and thus there is a de facto restriction on exports.
By recognizing the public health aspects of this problem, particularly concerning drugs for use against HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases, WTO member States adopted the Doha Declaration of the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health in November  (and later revised in ) to clarify the existing flexibilities. Since the adoption of the Doha Declaration, there have been cases of compulsory licensing and parallel imports incorporated in the TRIPS Agreement at the country level, including for Brazil, Ghana, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mozambique, Thailand, Zambia and Zimbabwe.g At the same time, the WTO dispute settlement mechanism has confirmed these flexibilities.h
Exporting generic medicines produced under compulsory licence to countries without manufacturing capacity became legally possible with the adoption of the  Decision on Implementation of Paragraph  of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (often called the Paragraph  System), an interim waiver which is supposed to last until the WTO agreement is amended. Under the System, total production of a country may be exported to meet health needs of importing countries.
A series of requirements have to be fulfilled. Importing countries, among other things, have to notify the TRIPS Council of the name and quantities of medicines to be imported, and confirm eligibility to import; that is to say, if the country is not a least developed country (LDC), it has to establish that it has insufficient or no manufacturing capacity. Notifications are also required from the exporting countries on details of the compulsory licence being issued besides specific labelling and marketing requirements.i
In , The WTO General Council adopted a decision to amend the TRIPS Agreement so that the waiver on the export restriction could become a permanent feature of the agreement. That however requires two thirds of the WTOs members to accept the change. The originally deadline ( December ) had been extended to  December . As of early May ,  out of the  WTO members have accepted the amendment. The regime has been criticized for being cumbersome, challenging for the limited administrative and technical capacities of many developing countries, and providing limited flexibility for the countries concerned. In fact, the System was used for the first time (and the single time to date) only in September  by Rwanda (an LDC) to import from Canada, after the latter changed its national intellectual property laws accordingly.
The Paragraph  System is a step forward towards creating more flexible legal procedures within the TRIPS Agreement to allow better access to essential medicines by developing countries. But it is certainly not enough. The overall framework of the TRIPS Agreement needs to be reviewed and made more development friendly so as to contribute further to improved access to medicines and better health for all.
a It should be noted that price is only one of the factors influencing access to medicines. Access to medicines is defined as having medicines continuously available and affordable at public or private health facilities or medicine outlets that are within one hours walk from the homes of the population. See united_nations Development Group, Indicators for Monitoring the mdgs: Definitions, Rationale, Concepts and Sources, united_nations, New York, sales publication E..XVII., , p. .
Without strong links to povertyreduction processes (and adherence to the Paris principles of aid effectiveness), scaling up aid may not have strong positive impacts on health equality. This applies to GHPs as well. One approach would be for GHPs to be more explicitly linked to the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) and funds to be channelled through government budgets (see Appendix). At the same time, the PRSPs should also take into account the need to create additional fiscal space for healthi.e., space in the public budget to scale up health. In the case of Rwanda, for example, where the government is accountable for delivering the goals in its PRSP, much of the assistance in the health sector was channelled through GHPs and other vertical programmes. Only  per cent of the aid for health that the government received passed through the budget. The difficulty for a government is that if it misses the PRSP goals, it may face aid suspension and other negative reactions from donors, even though it does not exercise much control over the financial resources received. Additionally, macroeconomic stability still dominates PRSPs concerns, which constrains expenditure increases in health and in other social sectors.
Conclusions and recommendations
The health status of a given population is the result of the complex interaction of a wide range of factors which go beyond the jurisdiction of health authorities. Inequalities in socioeconomic status in particular tend to influence health inequalities. Addressing health challenges requires policy makers to have a comprehensive approach. Improving health outcomes in a sustained and equitable manner goes beyond the simple provision of treatments and medicines.
Inequality matters for achieving goals of global public health: numerical targets can be mechanically met while many are left behind, thus affecting overall health achievement. Without specific effort and targets, the less privileged members of society can be often bypassed.
While health needs to be mainstreamed into overall development strategies, it is also necessary to integrate social and gender considerations and to address existing inequities in making health care available and accessed by those who need it. It demands corrective action to be taken towards the social factors which determine peoples health conditions, as emphasized in the report by the WHO Commission on the Social Determinants of Health. In this regard, the Commission puts forward three main recommendations, which CDP fully supports:
. Improve living conditions, emphasizing especially the wellbeing of girls and women, the circumstances in which children are born, improving living and working conditions, providing social protection for all.
. Tackle the inequitable distribution of power, money and resources.
This fundamental requirement assumes a strong public sector and commitment to governance for equity at all levels, from community to national to global.
. Measure and understand the problem and assess the impact of action. The Commission notes the need for surveillance systems to report on equity.
In order to ensure that the development partners and interna tional cooperation in particular addresses existing health inequality, the
Committee further recommends that monitoring activities on performance on the MDG health goals be enhanced by including an indicator on achieving the targets among the poor and disadvantaged.
In this regard, the aggregate health goal for each country should be adjusted to include explicit health goals in terms of health outcomes for groups defined by income group, region, ethnic/race, age and gender, so as to advance the promotion of health for all. At the global level, a small set of key indicators of health inequalities for monitoring should be selected: for example, healthy life expectancy (male, female), underfive mortality (urban, rural), and infant mortality ratios (by wealth quintiles), among others. Additionally, inequality impact assessments for interventions in the health sector need to be introduced. This would draw attention to the inequality implications of proposed actions by local authorities and through international cooperation, including those of GHPs.
The international community, including the traditional official donors as well as nontraditional donors, has an important role to play in assisting developing countries in improving the health status of their populations. To promote the achievement of the MDG health goals and to reduce health inequalities, the Committee also recommends the following international actions:
 Essential access to lowcost medicines and treatments should be further facilitated by allowing more flexibility and less complex legal procedures to grant exemptions to intellectual property rights with regard to medicines and medical treatments. Access, particularly under the Paragraph  System, should be further reviewed and amended so that the current patent and property rights regime is truly development friendly and, more importantly, improves access to essential medicines for the poor. Since agreement on and implementation of reforms is likely to be protracted, in the meantime, the provision of technical assistance to improve countries capacities to comply with the provisions of the TRIPS amendment is recommended.
 Adjustment policies in reaction to the global financial crisis should be designed so as to sustain expenditure on health and education, especially basic services benefiting disadvantaged groups. In this regard, the international community should sustain development assistance specifically supporting health and education.
 The effectiveness of interventions by GHPs needs to be improved. Better coordination is required to reduce conflicts between diseasespecific interventions and general health services. Recipients and donors need to keep an integral view of the health system, giving priority to primary attention and the strengthening the institutional and technical capacities of the system. GHPs should adhere to that logic, mainly local, taking care that their action does not weaken (or fragment) the national health system.
 GHPs need to go beyond having a diseasespecific focus and to ensure that the causes of social and gender inequities that determine access to health are accurately addressed. Furthermore, GHPs should include measures sensitive to social and gender inequities when establishing their own operational targets. It is essential to ensure that access to health services does not become less equitable as a result of GHP interventions. New GHPS should be introduced only where they support these objectives.
 GHPs should implement the following actions: (a) adoption of the principles of the Paris Declaration (especially the ones related to alignment and coordination); (b) subordination to the recipient countries health system, preserving the leadership of host governments in addressing health issues at the local level; (c) enhancing their structures of governance, and (c) increased technical assistance, as a means to correct the existing inequalities within countries and improve the efficiency of their own programmes.
 Regarding bilateral official development assistance delivered in the traditional way, donors need to review their criteria of resource allocation to guarantee that recipient countries are able to integrate GHP efforts in a coordinated way with their own actions in the field of health. In this way, GHP interventions can respond to the specific characteristics of domestic health systems and their respective needs. In some cases, this could mean a review of the contributions donor countries give to GHPs in the benefit of a greater support of recipient countries budgets, thus reinforcing sectorwide approaches (SWAps, see box A., below) and/or povertyreduction strategies.
The responsibility for improving the health of the population and reducing inequalities lies primarily with national governments. The CDP recommends that national governments take the following measures in the health sector, supported by aid:
 Assure universal access to health services of a satisfactory quality, including:
 Eliminating all sources of discrimination within the health service itself and in relevant sectors of society, including racial, ethnic, gender and age discrimination.
 Redesigning training and task allocation to improve the supply and distribution of health personnel and services across regions and groups. The critical shortage of healthcare workers needs to be addressed. Securing a sufficient number of medical doctors and nurses, together with physical infrastructure, requires not only longterm solutions but also shorterterm responses. One such measure is to provide incentives to existing and potential health workers by offering better remuneration and working conditions.
 Removinguserchargesforbasichealthfacilities.Thismeasure would contribute to lowering barriers to access for the poor. As noted above, however, this is only the first step. Providing financial support to cover other costs of using health services (such as transport and related opportunity costs) is also necessary. Cash transfers to households whose members attend health centres/clinics or health education programmes at school appears to encourage attendance at clinics and to benefit the poor, although the very poorest are sometimes excluded.
 Improve the balance between primary and secondary health care, as the poor benefit more from the supply of primary health care than from care extended by hospitals and/or made available through expensive treatments. Achieving an improved balance may also involve restructuring the education and training of medical personnel as suggested above.
 Emphasize the provision of preventive health education and health services. Health education should become a major component of the educational curriculum. Additionally, female education should be promoted not only for advancing gender equality but also to promote better health outcomes for women and their families.
 Promote a healthier physical environment, including the use of less polluting and damaging cooking stoves and fuels.
 Tax and regulate items that cause ill health, and use the revenue to support the health sector. Taxing and regulation should extend to tobacco, alcohol, junk food and soft drinks and luxury health services, such as cosmetic surgery.
Finally, the Committee recommends that efforts should be di rected towards improving the availability and quality of the existing data on health indicators. Action against social inequity in general, and health inequality in particular, will be more effective if the systems, including vital registration and regular monitoring of health outcomes and inequality, are in place. In this regard, there is a need to measure a smaller number of indicators that bear direct relevance to decisionmaking and highpriority health issues as those suggested above. Interagency activities on the mdg are a good basis for providing guidance and building databases of indicators on health inequalities. Strengthening statistical capacity in lowincome countries will need a concerted effort from governments, from donors, and from multilateral institutions.
Appendix
Assessing global health partnerships: additional considerations
The proliferation of GHPs has had both positive and negative effects on the capacities of developing countries in tackling health problems. One of the most visible contributions of the GHPs has been the integration of agents and resources from various spheres (public and private) into a common and discrete goal. The GHPs thus set a framework within which different perspectives come together to establish formulas for consensus based on the experience and knowledge of all participants. On the negative side, the partnerships have imposed a toll on the coherence of the overall international aid system.
I. Positiveaspects
The positive contribution of GHPs to advance health goals can be expressed in terms of:
Operative efficiency
The GHPs have functioned acceptably well, especially in terms of improved access to treatments, therapies and medicines. For instance, by December , the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria had provided AIDS treatment for  million people and TB treatment for . million people under directly observed treatment, shortcourse (DOTS), and distributed  million insecticidetreated mosquito nets to protect families from malaria. These initiatives are estimated to have contributed to saving the lives of some . million people.
GHPs have stimulated the research and development of new markets and new products and helped to reduce the production costs and risks associated with new product development. Due to increased demand, additional markets have been secured for the eventual products coming from innovation and research efforts. At the same time, a significant reduction in the price of some pharmaceutical products has been achieved in developing countries. For example, HIV treatment in the poorest countries now costs close to a tenth of what it costs in developed countries.
Additionally, there are indications that the GHPs have promoted better policies for the treatment of the diseases concerned in the beneficiary countries by giving national systems better means of planning their goals and determining their future needs. Improvements have also been noted in monitoring practices, transparency in procedures and, even, in some cases, the participation of many agents, including NGOs, in defining health policies. Nevertheless, these results coexist, in some cases, with inefficiencies in access to less costly medicines such as generic drugs, delays in the release of payments, and in the implementation of programmes, or even the limited capacity of funds to impact on certain types of diseases.
Increased resource mobilization
The emergence of GHPs has led to a significant mobilization of efforts and resources to tackle goals in the field of health. This increased capacity to mobilize funds is largely owing to the fact that in this type of framework, private agentssuch as foundations and companieshave found a suitable means of joining these initiatives. Yet, the availability of resources is still below what is needed to achieve the mdg in health.
It is important to note, however, that official donors have frequently redirected a part of their international aid in health to new activities related to supporting GHPs. For instance, during the period , official bilateral donors provided $. billion to GAVI, which corresponds to  per cent of all resources donated to that partnership. Additionally $. billion has been raised through the International Financial Facility for Immunisations (IFFIm), a financing mechanism that aims at
 The approach of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria to international health financing is discussed on the Global Fund website, at  partnership/?lang=en (accessed on  June ).
accelerating the availability and predictability of funds for immunizations used in GAVI. Official bilateral donors also take part in the financing of the Global Fund, contributing over $ billionor  per cent of total funds contributedover the period . Thus, only part of the resources mobilized by the GHPs is actually new money for health.
II. Risks and inefficiencies
The proliferation of GHPs is not without problems and risks. Most of those risks come from the effect that GHPs have on national health systems (discussed in the main text of this chapter), on the one hand, and on the coherence and efficiency of the international framework for cooperation for development, on the other.
The sustainability of interventions, resource predictability and effects on financial stability
The way in which GHPs operate can have undesirable effects on the recipient countries ability to manage their budgets. The problems are diverse. First, there may be problems regarding absorption of the funds and initiatives in the recipient countries, especially when national administrationsoften facing severe technical and institutional constraintshave to be involved in the management of such funds and programmes. Second, the limited predictability of activities and funds to be released is a cause of concern. The fact that part of the funding is sometimes made outside the budget and with the participation of other agents outside the public system (such as NGOs) only compounds the problem. The dynamics of decision making and resource management is thus superimposed on the budgetary cycle of the recipient country, making it difficult to integrate these resources properly into the countrys budgetary processes. Third, financial stability can be compromised as, in some cases, the sums involved amount to an injection of resources large enough to affect macroeconomic stability. A fourth problem refers to the sustainability of interventions, since the GHPs may increase the level of operations far above the administrative capacity of the government.
With respect to aid predictability, there is increasing concern at present about the implications of the current economic crisis for health outcomes in recipient countries. Past economic crises, such as those in Norway and Sweden in the early s, have shown declines in aid in the subsequent years with their eventual return. In the case of Finland and Japan, which also faced economic crises in the s, their aid flows have not yet returned to their peak values. A decrease in aid for these already poor countries would have devastating effects on the progress that has already been made in matters of immunization and access to treatment and care against deadly infectious diseases if partnerships are forced to lower their support for these countries.
System coherence and transaction costs
Another type of risk associated with the proliferation of GHPs concerns their impact on the functioning of the entire international aid architecture, on one hand, and on the effectiveness of interventions on the other. Due to the support granted by the new agents involved in global initiatives, the social sectors have absorbed a larger share of aid, to the detriment of the productive sectors. However, these latter sectors are crucial for development, not only because the living conditions of the poor depend on them, but also because they constitute the basis on which achievements made in social issues (including those related to health) can be made sustainable.
The proliferation of vertical initiatives, when uncoordinated, creates a serious problem in terms of harmonization among donors and the alignment of those initiatives with the priorities and procedures of the recipient country, as discussed earlier. There is a need to clearly define roles and responsibilities of the partners to avoid duplication among the different programmes, as well as minimize possible competition between the different programmes. One recurrent problem is the lack of country presence of some partners, who operate with little administrative staff or do not have incountry workers at all, complicating communication and coordination efforts.
Additionally, a high burden is placed on the recipients national administration as it deals with numerous agents with diversified procedures, demands and work dynamics. This problem is exacerbated if the GHPs vertical nature is taken into accountthat is, their highly specialized areas of action (issuespecific) aiming to accomplish immediate results (quickresults oriented). This approach implies that the partnerships have tended to consider each activity (disease or task) as issuespecific, with its own international response, thereby presenting a more global or wideranging vision of the components of health.
Integration of the GHPs in the sectorwide approach (see box A.), which strictly adheres to a working application of the Paris Declaration, could correct some of these shortcomings. The principles of the Declaration are entirely pertinent to GHPs, but it has to be said that the degree to which those principles have been implemented by these funds is very low (see box A.). Neither one of these alternatives is generalized practice among GHPs.
SWAp: sectorwide approach
The sectorwide approach (SWAp) initiative emerged from the Sector Investment Programme (SIP), a concept promoted by the world_bank in the mids and now utilized by bilateral and UN agencies.a The SWAp has as its purpose to foster ownership, improve donor harmonization and aid predictability and align policy behind a healthreform program agreed between government and donors.b The approach has contributed to increasing healthsector coordination, enhancing national leadership and ownership and strengthening management in the countries as well as the delivery systems.
The approach implies that the ministry of health takes leadership in the coordination of aid and the direction of activities. Donors are also to be responsible for synchronizing their planning, review and monitoring systems with those of the government, as well as providing longterm projections of their contributions.c
The SWAp programme requires consensus among stakeholders in the direction of health system strategy, as well as the responsibility of the partners for carefully monitoring of programme implementation. The world_bank participates in approximately  healthrelated SWAps in  countries.
There can be a number of main constraints to the implementation of a SWAp: the limited capacity of the health ministry to direct the programmes due to lack of experience; poor relationships or coordination with the other sectors, and a slow a Larsen, Bjarne, Sector Wide Approachhistory and some theoretical considerations, paper presented for Chief Advisors at Danida Seminar, June  (devass.dk/uploads/ pubsectorwideapproach.pdf ). b Working Party on Aid Effectiveness and Donor Practice, World Health Organization, world_bank and the OECD/DAC, Proposal to use health as a tracer sector for tracking progress on the Paris Declaration, .
shift of ownership to the ministry. Furthermore, donors may not adequately take into account the national development framework and national particularities when implementing programmes or setting targets. Additionally, implementing a SWAp depends on concrete agreement on a single strategy among all of the partnersincluding the government, funding agencies and other stakeholders. If these conditions are not in place, then the SWAp is not likely to be successful. But if they are, SWAps can contribute to improving the health of the population in a country, while strengthening the national health system.
Box A.a Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness: Ownership, Harmonisation, Alignment, Results and Mutual Accountability, adopted at the High Level Forum, held in Paris,  February March , available at oecd.org/ dataoecd///.pdf (accessed on  June ).
The Paris Declaration and global health partnerships
The principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectivenessa are highly relevant for aid in health:
Ownership should be applied to the health system, at least on two counts. First, a strategy on health should be originated and developed from national foundations. The GHPs, like other donors, should integrate themselves into these strategies, strengthen their design and facilitate their implementation. Second, health ministries should engage in framing upstream development strategies, improving the budgetary conditions in which the sector operates.
Health aid should be aligned with national systems, including systems which provide healthrelated services, the mechanisms related to information, monitoring and evaluation of public policies, and the national procurement systems. In this regard, it is necessary to operate through a multiannual plan so as to allow for increased predictability of resources and for the country to develop its institutional capability.
Enhanced harmonization of GHPs procedures is needed to reduce operational costs. There are many different kinds of agents operating in the health sector (bilateral and multilateral, public and private), and their activities are very diverse (different diseases, research, treatment, strengthening of institutions, etc.) Harmonization is also a prerequisite for engaging in better coordination between agents.
It is necessary to manage the programme by results. This requires reaching a consensus among stakeholders on the procedures for monitoring and evaluating interventions. Additionally, improved information systems should be in place.
Finally, it is necessary to implement systems of mutual accountability between donors and recipients. In this regard, the GHPs must adopt more flexible stances and maintain open dialogue with national authorities and improve their systems of governance in health.
Box A. (contd)
Necessity to combine resources and technical assistance
Many studies point out that GHPs do not have adequate technical support components in their programmes aimed at helping the recipient countries access the funds, adequately absorb resources and manage health interventions or aid programmes. Recipient countries, especially the poorest ones, have limited capacity to judge which of the many available funds is the most appropriate for their needs, or which programmes they can participate in with some certainty of success.
Technical assistance is necessary to allow recipient countries to benefit fully from a GHP. Assistance is especially relevant in the areas of planning, budgeting, and monitoring and evaluation, in training and in the implementation of initiatives. Although there are initiatives to finance technical assistance within the GHP framework, the majority of them are ad hoc proposals, granted on request.
Systems of governance
GHPs also suffer from governance issues. Some GHPs (such as the Global Fund, for example) have their own, independent, legal frameworks, while others are hosted by another institution (for instance WHO in the case of GAVI, the Stop TB Partnership and the Roll Back Malaria Partnership). Independent institutions carry higher operating costs. Meanwhile, when hosted by other organizations, a GHP and its host may face coordination issues with regard to the governing structures and operating procedures of both. It is difficult for a partnership to take place if the roles and responsibilities of the partners involved are not agreed and properly aligned.
Issues of representation in GHPs arise when one partner overly dominates the other partners, when some partners have only a limited presence (as with NGOs) or when developing countries are not adequately represented. Problems of accountability for GHPs may arise not only with their partners, but also with beneficiaries and with public opinion in general. In fact, recipient countries may feel that decisions come from the top to the bottom in a large proportion of GHPs, and that there is limited transparency in decisionmaking processes. As Asante and Zwi () point out, referring to the operative procedures of the GHPs, the process of selecting private partners, the setting of targets to be achieved and the formulation of management guidelines are anything but transparent.
