
Why youth and climate change now?
Climate change is one of the defining challenges of the twenty-first century. It is a challenge that is global in both its impact and its solutions but one that is not shared equally, as developing countries are likely to be among the most seriously affected by and the least able to address the consequences of climate change. Climate change touches every aspect of life and impinges on development efforts, with consequences ranging from immediate to long term. Major adjustments are required to promote more sustainable patterns of production and consumption at both the collective and individual levels. Solid evidence exists that climate change will have a more serious impact than initially anticipated and that adaptation and mitigation will entail significantly higher costs if action is deferred than if the problem is addressed now.
Addressing and adjusting to the challenge of climate change is certain to be a defining feature of the future of todays youth. It is therefore critical that young people educate themselves and become more actively involved in combating this threat. The present Report is designed to assist youth and youth organizations in such an endeavour. It is also meant to affirm the status of young people as key stakeholders in the fight against climate change. The publication comes at a time when efforts to address climate change are receiving unparalleled attention in the international arena, offering youth a unique opportunity for their voice to be heard in the debate.
Youth have long been involved in environmental protection activities at the school and community levels, but the time has come for them to participate more actively in shaping global decisions relating to climate change. Young people must contribute to the process of addressing this critical challenge, as they will feel its impact most acutely throughout their lives.
Young advocates for the environment are becoming more insistent that their voices be heard. In recent years, youth have been recognized as a constituency, albeit with probationary status, at the annual sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the worlds most important intergovernmental forum dealing with international efforts and commitments to combat climate change. Young people must continue to move forward, strengthening their position until they occupy a secure place in the decisionmaking process. To that end, the current World Youth Report provides an assessment of youth participation today and identifies steps that can be taken at the local and international levels to facilitate wider and more effective participation among youth in addressing climate change.
Overview of the Report
Chapter I provides basic information on climate change as well as an overview of the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, the relevant international legal and policy framework recognized by most countries. The chapter concludes with a brief outline of the aims of the upcoming united_nations Conference on Sustainable Development, Rio +20.
Chapter II focuses on the consequences of climate change, exploring how the threat it poses to health and safety, food security, and livelihood sustainability may directly affect youth development in developing countries. The chapter also addresses the possibility of ensuing tensions and conflicts over the control of basic natural resources and livelihood opportunitiesand their potential outcomes, including migration.
In chapters III and IV, the focus shifts from how young people are likely to be affected by climate change to how they can contribute to remedying the situation. Chapter III identifies trends in young peoples consumption behaviours and lifestyles. Youth, especially those in developed countries, constitute a critical mass of present and future consumers, and their consumption decisions could become a key factor in reducing or aggravating climate change and its consequences.
An overwhelming majority of youth indicate that world leaders should do all they can to stop climate change, but do young people take their own responsibilities in this context just as seriously? Education has been identified as a crucial tool in raising environmental awareness and promoting behaviour change among youth. Chapter III highlights education for sustainable development and the role of education in preparing young people to take advantage of green job opportunities. It also includes brief mention of additional measures that might be taken to promote green employment options for youth.
Chapter IV showcases existing youth mobiliXVII zation efforts and initiatives to combat climate change. Youth-led environmental organiza tions constitute a highly successful model of self-mobilization among young people, and such bodies are likely to play a critical role in tackling climate change challenges. The chapter concludes with an assessment of where youth currently stand in terms of involvement, celebrating recent political developments acknowledging young people as legitimate stakeholders in intergovernmental negotiations on climate change but also identifying barriers to effective youth participation.
The first three chapters end with a short annotated list of references for readers interested in more in-depth information on climate change.
Ultimately, the present World Youth Report is intended to highlight the important role played by youth in addressing climate change and to offer suggestions on how young people might be more effectively integrated as individual and collective agents of change within the realm of climate change adaptation and mitigation.
The facts about climate change
Climate change is happening, and it is happening quickly. Although the issue has been a source of controversy among scientists and policymakers, there is growing evidence that the earths temperature is rising and that polar ice caps and glaciers are melting. For many key parameters, the climate system is already moving beyond the patterns of natural variability (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a).
Over the past hundred years, the average temperature of the earths surface has increased by 0.74 C (see figure I.1) (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a). The most compelling evidence of climate change has emerged over the past couple of decades, with 11 of the 12 warmest years on record occurring between 1995 and 2006 (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b).
Figure I.1
Global warming is also leading to a rise in sea levels through thermal expansion of the oceans, glacier retreat, and the melting of ice sheets. Between 1993 and 2003, the global average sea level increased by approximately 3.1 millimetres. The extent of Arctic sea ice has shrunk by 2.7 per cent per decade over the past 30 years (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b). During the summers of 2007 and 2008, seasonal melting created an ice-free channel in the Northwest Passage, a water route through the islands of northern Canada separating the Atlantic and Pacific oceans (united_nations Environment Programme, 2009). Antarctica is also losing ice at an unprecedented rate; it is estimated that ice loss from the West Antarctic ice sheet increased by 60 per cent between 1996 and 2006. If this ice sheet were to melt completely, sea levels could rise by as much as 5 metres (united_nations Environment Programme, 2009).
Figure I.1
Trends in global average surface temperature
Estimated actual global mean temperature Mean value, oC
14.6 14.4
14.2 14.0
13.8
13.6
-13.4 1985 2005
Differences in temperature from 1885-1990
Mean value, oC
0.6 0.4 0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6 1885
1905
1925
1945
1965
Figure I.2
In addition to affecting global mean surface temperature, sea level, and ice sheet dynamics, climate change brings about ocean acidification, which inhibits the development of many marine organisms.
Climate change may be a key factor contributing to the increased incidence and intensity of extreme weather events such as droughts, heatwaves, floods, and tropical storms (see figure I.2). Over the past 50 years, heatwaves and heavy precipitation events have occurred with greater frequency, and there is evidence that tropical cyclone activity has been rising steadily since 1970 (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b).
Figure I.2
Extreme weather events, 1970-2005
According to the united_nations Environment Programme (UNEP), there is a significant possibility that many of the present trends will accelerate, leading to a higher risk of abrupt and/ or irreversible climatic shifts and an even more pronounced increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. If the tipping point is reached, the world may witness the disruption of seasonal weather patterns that support the agricultural activities of half the human population, the diminution of carbon sinks in the oceans and on land, and the destabilization of major ice sheets, leading to unanticipated rates of sea level rise in the twenty-first century (united_nations Environment Programme, n.d.).
There is almost unanimous agreement among scientists and policymakers that human behaviour has contributed to the escalation of climate change through increased emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), especially carbon dioxide (CO2). Global GHG emissions linked to human activities have increased considerably since pre-industrial times but have accelerated dramatically in recent decades, rising 70 per cent between 1970 and 2004predominantly owing to the burning of fossil fuels and land-use change (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b). By 2004, the energy supply sector accounted for about a quarter of all anthropogenic GHG emissions, while the industry, forestry, agriculture, and transport sectors each contributed between 13 and 19 per cent to the overall total (see figure I.3).
All over the world, ecosystems and livelihoods are being drastically affected by climate change (see figure I.5). The environmental shifts brought about by this phenomenon could have serious
Figure I.5
Projected impacts of climate change direct and indirect consequences, especially for vulnerable groups (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a; World Health Organization, 2008). Developing countries are most at risk because they lack the social, technological, and financial resources required for climate change adaptation and mitigation (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007a). Their heavy reliance on agriculture further heightens their vulnerability to threats posed by climatic instability.
A high degree of uncertainty exists with regard to the speed of climate change and the scale of its impact. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has projected that the average global temperature will increase by 1.1 C to 6.4 C over the course of the twenty-first century, with potentially dire consequences for humanity (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b). By 2020, between 75 million and 250 million residents of Africa may experience increased water stress as a result of climate change (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a), with yields from rain-fed agriculture in some African countries declining by up to 50 per cent. By 2050, more than 1 billion people in Asia could be affected by reduced freshwater availability. Individuals living in and around the Andes and the Himalayas will face increased risk of flooding, followed by water scarcity and drought, as glacial sys tems in these mountain ranges continue to recede. In Small Island Developing States (SIDS) in the Caribbean and Pacific regions, sea level rise and increasing sea temperatures are already having a negative impact on freshwater resources, fisheries, and coastal ecosystems.
Increased exposure to aggravated environmental stress linked to longer or more intense droughts, storms, floods, or other major weather events has already begun to interfere with the efforts of some of the worlds most vulnerable to build a better life for themselves and their families. If climate change continues at its present pace, the health, shelter, and livelihood situations of a significant proportion of the global population will be seriously affected, which could trigger large-scale reversals in human development. Failure to address climate change today will result in diminished opportunities and a widening of the inequality gap within and between countries.
Efforts to combat climate change at the local, national, and international levels have focused on mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation refers to measures that seek to reduce GHG emissions and thereby slow the progression of climate change. Mitigation measures include not only using renewable energy and developing new technologies for transportation and industry, but also protecting and expanding forests, which play a crucial role in absorbing greenhouse gases. Adaptation refers to measures to protect people and ecosystems from the effects of climate change. Since climate change is a transnational issue, effective mitigation and adaptation require international cooperation and coordination.
The international framework for combating climate change
At the united_nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, 178 Governments agreed that climate change should be addressed from a sustainable development perspective. Section 9.3 of Agenda 21 (1993) states that relevant efforts should be coordinated with social and economic development in an integrated manner with a view to avoiding adverse impacts on the latter, taking into full account the legitimate priority needs of developing countries for the achievement of sustained economic growth and the eradication of poverty.
The united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was also adopted in 1992 and entered into effect in 1994; most countries have since become signatories. The Framework Convention and its Kyoto Protocol are at the core of international efforts to address climate change.
Box I.1
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established by the united_nations Environment Programme and World Meteorological Organization in 1988 to help Governments better understand changes in the worlds climate from a scientific perspective. The IPCC is an expert body that reviews and assesses the most recent scientific, technical, and socio-economic information produced worldwide relevant to the understanding of climate change.
The IPCC comprises three working groups that address different aspects of the climate change issue. Working Group I assesses the physical scientific aspects of the climate system and climate change, focusing on variations in temperature, rainfall, sea level, and ice sheets, on climate models and projections, and on the causes and attribution of climate change. Working Group II assesses the vulnerability of socio-economic and natural systems to climate change, negative and positive consequences of climate change, and options for adapting to it. Working Group III assesses options for mitigating climate change through limiting or preventing greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing activities that remove them from the atmosphere. Technical support units administer and organize the activities of the working groups.
The IPCC is made up of thousands of scientists from around the world who contribute to the Panels work on a voluntary basis as authors, contributors,
and reviewers. The efforts of these scientists are supported by the IPCC secretariat, which plans, coordinates, and oversees the Panels activities.
The major output of the IPCC is its assessment reports, which comprise separate publications from each working group and, since 1995, a synthesis report. These scientific reports provide the worlds most comprehensive coverage of climate change. The First Assessment Report, published in 1990, identified climate change as an issue requiring an international political platform. The Report served as a catalyst leading to the establishment of the Framework Convention, the landmark international treaty created to reduce global warming and compel countries to deal with the consequences of climate change. The Second Assessment Report: Climate Change 1995 contributed key input to the process leading to the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention in 1997. The third and fourth assessment reports were published in 2001 and 2007 respectively. The participation of the scientific community in the work of the IPCC has grown substantially in terms of both the number of authors and contributors involved in the writing and reviewing of the reports and the geographic distribution and topics covered in the publications.
Along with the assessment reports, the IPCC produces special reports, methodology reports, technical papers, and supporting materials. Through these and other means the Panel provides the united_nations Climate Change secretariat, the Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention, and other environmental conventions with information on technical and scientific matters.
The united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
The Framework Convention is an international treaty that establishes broad goals and rules for addressing climate change. Its ultimate objective is to ensure that GHG emissions linked to human activity remain below the level at which the climate system is adversely affected. The Convention is general and flexible in character; its importance derives not from the provision of detailed environmental protection guidelines, but rather from its role in securing global recognition of climate change as a major challenge. The Convention has laid the groundwork for more focused action, including the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2009c).
The Conference of the Parties (COP) is the supreme body of the Framework Convention. It comprises all countries that are Parties to the Convention and usually meets annually for a period of about two weeks within the larger context of the united_nations Climate Change Conference. The yearly sessions, which are attended by several thousand government delegates, observer organizations, and journalists, provide the COP with an opportunity to evaluate the status of climate change and the effectiveness of the treaty (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2009a; 2009b).
The fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 15) was held in Copenhagen from 7 to 18 December 2009. The meeting was attended by 120 heads of State and Government, highlighting the growing importance and urgency attached to climate change by the international community. Country leaders and other high-ranking Government officials and delegates present at the united_nations Climate Change Conference adopted the Copenhagen Accord, through which they committed to significant emission reductions and to the establishment of the Copenhagen Green Climate Fund to support action on climate change in developing countries. Following COP 15, 55 countries that together account for 78 per cent of global emissions pledged to cut and limit greenhouse gases by 2020 (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2010), and developed countries agreed to provide approximately US$ 30 billion for Climate
Fund activities during the period 2010-2012 (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2009c). Throughout 2010, negotiations will continue as Member States engage in sustained efforts to convert the Copenhagen Accord into a legally binding instrument.
At COP 15 for the first time, youth were officially recognized as a formal constituency (albeit on probationary terms), legitimizing their status as stakeholders. Over a thousand young environmental activists from approximately 100 countries attended COP 15 (UNFCCC Youth Constituency, 2009a), participating not only in formal interventions but also in activities such as workshops, media events, and silent demonstrations. On 10 December a youth day with the theme Young and Future Generations was held. A more detailed description of youth involvement in the activities surrounding COP 15 is provided in chapter IV of the present Report.
The Kyoto Protocol to the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted on 11 December 1997 after two and a half years of intensive negotiations, and entered into force on 16 February 2005. The Protocol established legally binding emissions targets for developed countries and incorporated innovative mechanisms to assist those countries in meeting the targets.
Under the terms of the Kyoto Protocol, 37 industrialized countries and the European Union as a whole are required to reduce GHG emissions by an average of 5 per cent relative to 1990 levels over the five-year period 20082012. While the Framework Convention encourages industrialized countries to stabilize GHG emissions, the Protocol commits them to doing so. In recognition of the fact that the current high levels of GHG emissions are a result of more than 150 years of industrial activity, the Protocol places a heavier burden on developed nations.
The Kyoto Protocol introduces three mechanisms that provide countries with flexible options for meeting their commitments. The first is emissions trading, which allows countries with spare emission units to sell this excess capacity to countries that have exceeded their targets. Since carbon dioxide is the principal GHG, this mechanism is often referred to as the carbon market. Second is the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), which allows a country with an emission-reduction or emission-limitation commitment ... to implement an emission-reduction project in developing countries. Such projects can earn saleable certified emission reduction (CER) credits, each equivalent to one ton of CO2, which can be counted towards meeting Kyoto targets (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, n.d.). An example of a CDM project might be a rural electrification project using solar panels or the installation of more energy-efficient boilers. The CDM, operational since the beginning of 2006, has registered more than 1,650 projects to date (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, n.d.). The third mechanism is joint implementation, which allows a country with an emission reduction or limitation commitment ... to earn emission reduction units (ERUs) from an emission-reduction or emission removal project in another country with lower emission-reduction or emission-limitation targets (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, n.d.).
The CDM and joint implementation mechanism allow developed countries to transfer some of their technologies for reducing GHG emissions to countries that are expected to become more industrialized. As stipulated in the Protocol, countries actual emissions, as well as their transactions, are monitored and recorded by the united_nations Climate Change secretariat, based in Bonn, Germany.
The Kyoto Protocol is generally regarded as an important first step towards the establishment of a truly global emission reduction regime that will stabilize GHG emissions, providing the essential architecture for international climate change agreements yet to come (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, n.d.).
Almost two decades after the adoption of the Framework Convention and more than a decade after the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol, there is a growing consensus that addressing climate change requires both stronger emission reduction efforts among developed countries and the active participation of developing countries, in particular the large emerging economies. Requiring developing countries to reduce emissions rests on the premise that these countries are set to pursue rapid and sustained economic growth. It also presumes that all developing countries have access to affordable technological solutions that will facilitate the shift to new sources of energy and the adoption of low-emission patterns of production, consumption and development. In order to reach this point, most developing countries will require financial and technical assistance from the more industrialized nations as well as access to mitigation technology at affordable cost.
Against this background, youth and youth organizations have an important role to play in helping to stem the tide of unsustainable development and in harnessing the political will to meet existing emission reduction commitments. In particular, young people can support and contribute to efforts aimed at ensuring that new mechanisms and financial facilities are put in place for transferring and providing access to green technologies. Youth can also play a role in monitoring the implementation and impact of specific initiatives within this framework.
Youth and Rio+20
In 2012, the united_nations Conference on Sustainable Development  or, Rio+20  will take place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The overall aims of the Conference are to: (i) follow-up to the united_nations Conference on Environment and Development by assessing progress made in achieving the goals set out in Agenda 21; (ii) consider strategies to implement sustainable and equitable green economies; (iii) strengthen the institutional framework for sustainable development governance, and (iv) secure renewed political commitment for sustainable development. Rio+20 provides an opportunity for Governments to address emerging challenges and establish a new framework for advancing the implementation of the sustainable development agenda through international cooperation.
At the united_nations Conference on Environment and Development held in 1992, also in Rio de Janeiro, the international community recognized the significance of integrating youth into decision-making and implementation pro cesses as a means to support the achievement of sustainable development goals. A comprehensive programme of action was adopted  referred to as Agenda 21  and included the following youth-focused objectives:
Promoting dialogue between youth and decision-makers at all levels and the provision of mechanisms to permit youth access to information and the opportunity to present their views on sustainable development policy, particularly those directly impacting youth;
Providing improved access to secondary education as well as vocational and practical skills training programmes, while ensuring that education reflects the economic and social needs of youth and incorporates the concepts of environmental awareness and sustainable development, and prepares them adequately to meet the technological advances in industry and the labour market;
Developing and implementing awareness raising programmes specifically targeted to the youth population on critical issues pertaining to youth;
Implementing strategies to improve employment opportunities for youth;
Supporting mechanisms which facilitate youth representation in national, regional and international processes.
Despite good intentions and an ambitious programme of action, implementation of Agenda 21 is considered lacking. The less than desirable progress is partly attributed to fragmented global environmental and development governance as well as a lack of adequate national legal frameworks for addressing sustainable development. In addition, the onset of multiple socio-economic challenges over the past several years  financial crisis, food crisis, volatile oil prices, increase in climate variability, etc.  have also contributed to delayed action. Rio +20 marks an occasion for Governments, the united_nations system and Civil Society to review these challenges with a view to mitigating the effects and catalyzing progress.
Box I.2
Growing Green Globally: A snapshot on the Green Growth model for development
De-linking economic progress from environmental degradation is the premise underpinning the Green Growth model for development. It aims to build upon the sustainable development concept by strengthening the environmental component of economic recovery and growth patterns. As the paradigm evolves, demand for greener development models grows.
In 2005, at the 5th Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development, 52 Member States of the united_nations Economic and Social Commission of Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) adopted Green Growth as a policy focus, identifying a common path for ecologically sustainable economic progress to foster low-carbon, socially inclusive development.
Then, in 2009, all 30 countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) plus an additional 4 signed the Declaration on Green Growth, tasking the OECD with developing a Green Growth strategy to boost economic recovery and build a sustainable growth path for the future.
Some key objectives of the Green Growth model include:
the needs of the global population and eliminating inequality logical scarcities
green economies by addressing policy barriers
industries, technologies and jobs including renewable energy and the production of energy efficient materials.
Climate change is a real phenomenon, and its effects are apparent. There are important tipping points that may already have been reached or passed, causing irreversible damage to many human and ecological systems.
As highlighted in chapter I, the warming temperatures driving climate change can have a direct impact on human activities, and their negative effects can be compounded by existing ecological and social situations. The impact of climate change is, and will continue to be, exacerbated by a variety of interlinked and overlapping factors, undermining the health and safety of populations, compromising food security, threatening livelihoods, and eroding economic security (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a).
Although climate change affects individuals of all ages, young people can expect to bear a particularly heavy burden because they will live longer and will face this challenge throughout their lifetimes. The situation of youth in less developed countries is especially tenuous. The combination of geography, geology, and uneven social and economic development has made those living in certain areas of Africa, Asia, and the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) more vulnerable than others to climate change and its consequences. In some of the countries within these regions, youth make up as much as one third of the population (united_nations, 2009c), and many of them are already facing a difficult transition to adulthood owing to social and economic instability and widespread poverty. Should climate change continue unabated, existing deficits and limitations could deepen. Such a situation would have immediate and short-term effects on youth and their communities, but it could also pose a major threat within the long-term trajectory of global development. As noted in chapter I, the young women and men living in Africa and Asia represent the vast majority of the worlds youth. Failing to address climate-related challenges that can undermine their successful integration into society could ultimately perpetuate or even exacerbate widespread poverty and inequality.
In this chapter the relationship between youth development and the impact of climate change is examined. Particular attention is given to the development of young people in those contexts most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, including health and safety, food security, and livelihood stability. Migration and conflict are also explored as possible consequences of climatic instability. The chapter raises the question of compromised futures: Will climate change hinder the ability of young women and men to participate fully in society, and can addressing climate change bring about a better future?
The compound effects of climate change on health and safety
Good health constitutes an essential asset, as it lies at the core of human capacity to function effectively in any society. Unless timely and effective action is taken, extreme weather events, water scarcity, higher sustained temperatures, and other phenomena associated with climate change are likely to pose a serious threat to human health and safety.
Extreme weather events increase health hazards...
Extreme weather events constitute a serious natural hazard and can affect human health and safety both directly and indirectly. They are often responsible for physical injury and loss of life, and they may exacerbate already sub standard living conditions, increasing the expo sure of vulnerable residents to many types of disease (Abatzoglou and others, 2007; United 15 Nations Development Programme, Bureau for
Crisis Prevention and Recovery, 2004). The incidence of extreme weather is expected to grow with climate change. In fact, the frequency and intensity of many natural hazards have already increased. Since 1980 the number of people affected by extreme weather events has doubled, and by 2015 it could increase by another 50 per cent. Between 1980 and 2007, 98 per cent of those affected by natural disasters were the victims of climate-related events (Ganeshan and Diamond, 2009).
Many young people live in areas where extreme weather events tend to hit hardest. In parts of sub-Saharan Africa, the risk of drought is relatively high, while in the coastal areas of this subregion and in South Asia, Central America, and the Caribbean and Pacific islands, serious flooding poses the greatest threat (united_nations Development Programme, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, 2004). The intensification of extreme weather events is likely to be a major factor affecting the health and safety of many youth living in these areas, especially those residing in South Asia, Central America, and the small island developing States of the Caribbean and Pacific regions
(united_nations Development Programme, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, 2004; Center for Hazards and Risk Research at Columbia University, 2005).
While extreme weather events are more likely to affect the subregions mentioned above, other parts of the world are vulnerable as well, as climate change is a truly global phenomenon. Populations unaccustomed to particular natural hazards often do not have adequate response mechanisms in place. An upsurge in demand for emergency services and supplies following a natural disaster may put a severe strain on institutions, creating a force multiplier effect whereby health concerns are elevated to a health and safety crisis.
...particularly where sanitation is poor and wastewater management insufficient
In many of these contexts, the higher incidence of extreme weather events combined with poor sanitation can give rise to pervasive health threats. Climate change is often associated with periods of excessive or insufficient precipitation. Where flooding occurs the water can become contaminated with human and animal excrement, while extended drought can reduce the amount of water available for washing and sanitation. Under such circumstances, cholera, typhoid and diarrhoeal diseases can flourish (McMichael and others, 2003; Pruss-Ustun, Bos, and Gore, 2008).
More than a quarter of the worlds youth live in countries where at least two thirds of the population does not have access to adequate sanitation (World Health Organization and united_nations Childrens Fund, 2006). All of these countries are in Africa, Asia, or Oceania. According to the Townsend Centre for International Poverty Research, some 30-50 per cent of youth in most African countries are deprived of adequate sanitation, and the situation is the same for at least 30 per cent of young people in six Asian countries (united_nations, 2007b). Health conditions can deteriorate rapidly under circumstances such as these. At present, the incidence of diarrhoeal diseases potentially attributable to climate change is highest in South-east_asia, where more than 100 million young women and men reside (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007a; united_nations, 2009c).
Even in countries with adequate sanitation and water treatment facilities, extreme weather events may disrupt water supplies as systems are overloaded during and after intense storm activity. Water contaminated with biological and chemical toxins (wastewater) may spill over into bodies of water and agricultural lands. Wastewater exposure and consumption not only threatens human health but may also devastate ecosystems.
Reduced access to clean water compromises health
Climate change has a direct impact on water quality, with negative implications for health. Clean water is essential for survival (PrussUstun, Bos and Gore, 2008). However, potable supplies will come under growing pressure as the warming temperatures associated with climate change increase water pollution from bacterial growth and algal blooms (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b), leading to a rise in the transmission of diarrhoeal diseases and bacterial infectionsoften with deadly consequences. Already, more than 560 million African youth do not have access to safe drinking water (united_nations, 2007b).
Extended periods of drought expected in some areas as a result of climate change could further limit access to clean water for many, leading to health consequences associated with malnutrition, dehydration, and inadequate sanitation.
Higher temperatures increase exposure to disease...
Not all of the manifestations of climate change with implications for health are as dramatic as the extreme weather events and water scarcity issues addressed above. The fact is that the warming temperatures alone can increase youth exposure to health risks, including vector-borne diseases. A prime example is dengue fever, which has been identified by the World Health Organization as one of the endemic diseases to which a significant proportion of the global population will be exposed. The geography of this disease is related to consistently warm temperatures and adequate precipitation.
With the warming effect of climate change, the areas where the disease and its host can survive are expected to grow, and in many of the areas in which dengue fever is presently found, its virulence is likely to increase (McMichael and others, 2003).
Dengue is one of the worlds most important vector-borne diseases, affecting more than 2.5 million people worldwide (see box II.1). Most of the reported fatalities from this disease have been among children and young adults (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Vector-Borne and Infectious Diseases, 2008; World Health Organization, 2009). More than 600 million young men and women live in areas infested with the Aedes aegypti mosquito, which transmits dengue, and both the mosquito and the incidence of the disease have experienced a dramatic resurgence since the 1970s (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Vector-Borne and Infectious Diseases, 2008).
cific, with the last two regions being the most seriously affected.
The past six years have seen unusually high rates of dengue infection in South-east_asia and the Western Pacific, and climate change may be partly to blame. The Aedes aegypti mosquito, which transmits the virus, does better in warm, wet weather, and with climate change, these regions have experienced rising temperatures and longer rainy seasons.
Climate change is not the only factor influencing the resurgence of dengue. Increased urban migration and poor sanitation and water storage are also significant contributors, especially in developing countries. Even in the more developed countries of a vulnerable region, however, the problem has grown more acute. For example, Singapore, a model of dengue control, saw a major outbreak in 2005 and, following a 2006 decline, increased incidence in 2007.
As temperatures continue to rise it will become more difficult to prevent the spread of the disease, even with improved fumigation and prevention methods.
There is no specific treatment for dengue fever.
Box II.1
Dengue: a resurgent virus
Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection that causes a severe flu-like illness, and in some cases a potentially lethal complication called dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) may develop. Dengue occurs in tropical and subtropical regions, typically in and around urban areas, and in recent years has become a major international public health concern.
Over the past few decades the incidence of dengue has grown dramatically. According to World Health Organization estimates, some 50 million people may be infected with the virus each year. In 2007 alone there were more than 890,000 cases of dengue reported in the Americas, and 26,000 of these were DHF.
Today, dengue is endemic in more than a hundred countries in Africa, the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean, South-east_asia, and the Western Pa-
...and increase the threat of heat stress
The rising temperatures climate change brings can increase the incidence of heat stress and heat-related mortality, and those without adequate housing or health services are most vulnerable to this threat (McMichael and others, 2003). According to figures compiled by the Townsend Centre for International Poverty Research, more than half of all African youth lack adequate shelter, and the same is true for more than one third of young people in some countries in Asia and in latin_america and the Caribbean (united_nations, 2007b). It is these youth who are most likely to feel the heat.
The food security dilemma
Food security is already being threatened by climatic shifts. This issue raises important concerns about hunger, poverty, health, and productivityand therefore about broader prospects for human development. Food availability and access constitute one of the most basic and essential requirements for maintaining healthy and productive lives. At present, hunger and malnutrition combined comprise the number-one threat to human health (World Food Programme, 2009). Climate change will continue to affect all aspects of food security, especially in Africa, Asia, and latin_america and the Caribbean (Bates and others, 2008; Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b), where more than 1 billion young men and women live (united_nations, 2009c).
Food insecurity is likely to be particularly challenging for developing countries that are vulnerable to extreme weather events and that have low incomes and a high incidence of hunger and poverty (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b; Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b). Residents of these areas are already at risk and will find it hard to overcome the food production and income losses resulting from extreme weather events. Such a situation could mean short-term and long-term losses in food availability and access. Short-term infrastructural damage from extreme weather events of growing intensity may also make food distribution difficult.
Young women are likely to be the most seriously affected by compromised food security. The results of research carried out in India indicate that nutritional deficits are greater among girls than among boys when food is scarce and/or when food prices are high. The research also shows that rainfall shortages, which serve to reduce food availability, are more strongly correlated with death among girls than among boys (Stern, 2007). Distinct social and cultural preferences and customs affecting girls and boys translate into different gender-specific vulnerabilities within and across regions. In most cases, these norms work to the detriment of young females (united_nations Childrens Fund, Innocenti Research Centre, 2008).
Much of the potential threat to food security comes from the negative effect climate change could have on agriculture. Agricultural productivity could decline between 9 and 21 per cent in developing countries as a result of climate change (Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b). It is likely that such a decrease would derive largely from shifts in hydrological patterns and compromised water availability, as agriculture accounts for 70 per cent of global water use (Bates and others, 2008; Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009a).
Projections indicate that with the combination of climate change, population growth, and the consequent increase in demand for food, energy, and biofuels, almost half of the global population could be living in areas of high water stress by 2030 (united_nations World Water Assessment Programme, 2009). The anticipated rise in temperatures and sea levels owing to climate change will affect the availability of freshwater sources, with a negative impact on both quantity and quality. In addition, the rate of glacier and snow-cover retreat is likely to increase throughout the twenty-first century, reducing water availability and hydropower potential and changing the seasonality of meltwater flows in regions where major mountain ranges are key water supply sources (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b).
Rice, wheat, and maize production has declined in some parts of Asia because of the increase in water stress brought about by climate change. At present, the worlds highest rates of malnutrition attributable to climate change are found in South-east_asia (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007a; Bates and others, 2008). Communities in China, India, and Pakistan, which together account for more than 40 per cent of the worlds youth, will be especially hard hit by the reduction in meltwater flows from the Himalayas and other high, mountainous areas. In fact, India is expected to be in a state of water stress before 2025 (united_nations Environment Programme/
GRID-Arendal, 2007; Bates and others, 2008).
Hardest hit by compromised food security will be the rural areas of Africa (Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b), where more than half of the regions young people live (united_nations, 2008). The greatest challenge within this context will arise from the impact of climate change on water resources. In rural Africa, groundwater and rainfall are essential inputs for food production and are the main sources of potable water. One area currently experiencing a serious water deficit is the Sahel region, where longer and more intense droughts constitute one of the most dramatic climatic changes recorded in any region. The situation is expected to worsen in the coming years, affecting more than 60 million young women and men (Bates and others, 2008). Outside the Sahel, groundwater supplies are expected to decrease by as much as 10 per cent, even with a 1oC increase in temperature (Bates and others, 2008).
Although the less developed nations are like20 ly to face the greatest threat to food security, developed countries may be affected as well. In northern Australia and the southern united_states, for example, food production could decline as a result of drier surface conditions (Cline, 2007). These countries are much better prepared to deal with such a challenge, however, as any projected losses are buffered by the relative strength and stability of their economies (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, 2007a).
Climate change mitigation and food security: an added challenge?
Ironically, some climate change mitigation efforts may themselves undermine food security, especially in less developed areas. The production of biofuels and other forms of bioenergy presents one of the greatest challenges in this regard (Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009a). Bioenergy is the largest new source of agricultural demand in recent years, and this has important implications for food production and availability in areas where agricultural capacity is diminishing. It takes a lot more grain to power the world than to feed it; the corn equivalent of the en ergy used for a few minutes of driving would feed a person for an entire day, and that same person could be fed for a year with the equivalent energy burned from a full tank of ethanol in a four-wheel-drive sports utility vehicle (Nelleman and others, 2009). As noted above, the growing prevalence of this type of agricultural production will also contribute to increased water stress (united_nations World Water Assessment Programme, 2009).
With the rising demand for biofuel the commodity value of feedstock grains will increase, making the production of corn and other source crops more profitable. However, this will pose a problem for areas lacking economic security, as the added value means higher food prices in the short and long terms and therefore reduced access to food (Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009a). Such pressures are already being felt: increased biofuel production was identified as one of the factors contributing to the food crisis in early 2008, which led to food riots in some countries. By 2016, food prices are expected to rise by 20 to 50 per cent (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2008).
Climate change is likely to affect employment patterns in different ways. Rates of unemployment are already higher among youth than among adults, and with most of the worlds young people living in areas where dependence on natural resources and persistent poverty intersect, climate change could pose a serious threat to youth livelihood patterns and economic stability. On a more positive note, adaptation and mitigation efforts are opening the door to a new category of employment green jobsacross a multitude of sectors, and young people could be the segment of the labour market best positioned to access them. However, as previously indicated, this new type of employment may be linked to other development challenges.
Negative consequences
As is the case in many of the other contexts described thus far, youth in developing countriesespecially those in rural areasare likely to feel the impact of climate change on their livelihoods sooner and more directly than will their peers in developed countries (see box II.2). The more socio-economically vulnerable regions include many communities that depend on the natural environment for their livelihoods, with employment concentrated in sectors such as agriculture, forestry, and fisheries. The effects of climate change on these sectors will vary, but the outlook is largely negative for the developing world as a whole (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a; Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b; 2009c). Agriculture is one of the largest and most important employment sectors, but it is also extremely vulnerable to climaterelated damage. In the short term, agricultural production is threatened by soil degradation and erosion, crop damage, and reduced harvests resulting from extreme weather events such as droughts, heatwaves, severe storms, and floodsall of which are expected to occur with greater frequency and intensity. The situation may be exacerbated in the long term by the higher sustained temperatures and systemic water scarcity linked to climate change. (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007b; International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development, 2009).
The pressure climate change is exerting on traditional livelihood patterns will intensify throughout the lives of todays young women and men if the agriculture sector continues to be the major source of employment in the developing world. At present, agriculture accounts for almost half of all employment in less developed countries (united_nations Development Programme, 2007). In Africa the majority of young people live in rural areas, where agriculture accounts for 65 per cent of total employment (world_bank, 2008a). In several Asian countries youth employment has largely shifted to industry or services, but agriculture remains a significant source of employment for young workers (Asian Development Bank, 2008).
Box II.2
Marjories story: a Filipina shell fisher in warm waters
Climate change is affecting marine ecosystems, threatening the livelihoods of many young people who live in coastal and island environments in the developing world. Marjories story is a prime example.
Marjorie lives on the island of Zaragoza, just off the coast of Southern Cebu in the Philippines. The small island is inhabited by 300 families whose main occupation is fishing. As a result of rising water temperatures, fishermen on the island have had to work longer hours and go further out to sea in order to make ends meet. Some have had to resort to asking their children to help out. This is how Marjorie started fishing when she was in her early teens:
One day, when I was 13, my mother asked me if I could start fishing more seriously, as if it were a job. ... I was happy, because I had noticed the hard times we were going through, and I knew I could help to catch more fish. The problem was one year later, when my mother told me that things were worse and I had to leave school, so I could work more and save the costs of studying. ... I really wanted to go [to school], because once I graduate I will be able to help my parents send my other siblings to school.
Marjorie was able to convince her family that her work would not suffer if she were allowed to resume her education. She is back in school now, about to begin her second-to-last year of secondary studies, but she still has to work in order to help her family out and finance her education, often fishing through the night before sailing out to school at seven in the morning.
Im just so excited at the thought of finishing school. I was supposed to graduate two years ago, and now
Im afraid that I wont be able to make it. ... If I dont [graduate], people will assume that I dont know anything and I wont be able to work in the city. ... If here on the island there were fish like before, I would stay, because people lived well here. But now, with the climate change, its impossible to make a living here.
For youth in developed countries the impact of climate change on employment opportunities may not be as negative. In industrialized nations young people tend to be overrepresented in the service sector, which is less likely to be affected by changing weather trends. Statistics for 2007 indicate that in New Zealand, 25 per cent of youth aged 15-24 years were employed in the retail industry and another 12 per cent worked in the accommodation, cafes, and restaurants sector, compared with respective rates of 13 and 5 per cent for all workers (New Zealand Department of Labour, 2007). A similar picture emerges from youth employment data in the united_states; in 2008, 18 per cent of young people between the ages of 16 and 24 were employed in retail trade, and 23 per cent worked in the leisure and hospitality industry (united_states Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2008). Although the service sector appears to be less vulnerable than many other sectors to the consequences of climate change, there may be some negative long-term effects, especially in the hospitality industry, as the impact of climate change on snowcaps, waterways, and coastal environments may reduce the appeal of many popular tourist destinations.
Potential positive consequences including green jobs
Shifting perspectives on sustainable development, including concerns over climate change, have created a growing market for green jobs across many sectors including energy supply, recycling, agriculture, and transportation. Green jobs represent an opportunity to make development truly sustainable, as they are spe cifically geared towards reducing the ecological footprint of economic activities. Simultaneously, they can play an important role in efforts to address rising unemployment. Green jobs will be explored in greater detail in chapter III.
The nature and extent of the impact of climate change on human population distribution remains unclear. Historically, migration has been an important coping strategy for dealing with climate stress (Brown, 2008; Raleigh, Jordan and Salehyan, 2008). In Africa, droughts and floods have led to increased reliance on migration as an adaptation measure (Bates and others, 2008); over the past 20 years more than 10 million people in the region have been displaced owing to environmental degradation and desertification (International Organization for Migration, 2009). In the Sahel, reduced agricultural yields have been a key factor driving migration for roughly 30 years (Brown, 2008); climate change will continue to undermine agricultural productivity in the area and may be responsible for prolonged periods of drought (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007a), further threatening the livelihoods of the nearly 60 million young women and men living there.
Analysing climate-induced migration can be difficult. There is no consensus on the definition or measurement of this phenomenon, and very little relevant data are available. Moreover, migration flows in general have proven hard to predict. Nevertheless, it is reasonably safe to assert that over the next few decades more people may chooseor be forcedto move in response to the impact of climate change (International Organization for Migration, 2009). The nature and extent of climate-induced migration in the years to come will depend on a number of factors, including GHG emission levels, local population growth and distribution rates, the effects of climate change on weather patterns, and the success or failure of efforts undertaken by local and national communities to adapt to the changes. The motivation to migrate will be strongest among those whose economic security is seriously threatened or compromised by extreme weather events, water scarcity, and/or higher temperatures. It is virtually impossible to predict how many might end up as environmental migrants in the coming decades. Projections are highly speculative and range from 25 million to 1 billion by 2050 (Brown, 2008), with 200 million being the most commonly cited figure (Myers, 2005; Stern, 2007).
Most climate-induced migration occurs within countries, and this trend is likely to continue (Boano, Zetter and Morris, 2008; Warner and others, 2009). As landlessness, poverty, and displacement continue to increase as a result of natural hazards, movement from rural areas to cities is likely to accelerate (Islam, 1996), leading to the expansion of urban slums (Raleigh, Jordan and Salehyan, 2008). Agricultural workers may continue to pursue a rural livelihood, becoming migrant farmers, but in the face of drought and soil degradation jobs may be increasingly hard to find (Warner and others, 2009). Where small countries are affected, some international migration will probably be necessary (International Organization for Migration, 2009). For residents of low-lying SIDS the impact of climate change may be dramatic, which could potentially translate into high rates of climate-induced migration (see box II.3).
island. Life on the island is easygoing and simple. We go fishing or go to the bush to check the banana plantation or just relax. But only one thing is wrong. The sea is eating our Han Island and shrinking it. We never realized the king tides could destroy our island. We may not have an island in the future. When the tide is high, the sea rises up one to two metres and flows further inland. The sea walls arent enough to stop the sea from coming in like a river. Areas where the sea never reached are washed over now. The invading king tides left a swamp where mosquitoes are now breeding. Now there are many more mosquitoes, and our children are sick with malaria. This is the middle of the island. The sea recently passed through here and continued, almost to the other side. It destroyed everything in peoples gardens. After this happened, our people were starving. We were hungry and ate only fish and coconut. [There is only one] boat that provides supplies and services to us when in need. Often it comes twice a year. It is supposed to come four times a year. When the children are hungry, it distracts them from their education. When the school bell rings, they dont want to turn up. There is nothing in their homes, and in their stomachs, so they refuse to go to school. Our Government has provided food aid, but this is a short-term service of food supply and is not sustainable.
Islanders are thinking about relocating to the Bougainville mainland, where we can produce for ourselves. Recently, we held community meetings to decide on ways to sustain ourselves. An office was set up in Buka to get things done quickly. This is because the Government has not found a solution to assist us. It has not found land to save our people on the Carterets. This situation is bad because the only solution is to relocate. If you dont, there will be no food here and one would die. We conducted a survey and came up with a relocation program. After experiencing the recent king tides, m o s t
Box II.3
Permanent inundation and forced migration
The rising sea levels and hydrological shifts expected with climate change could lead to the permanent inundation of low-lying coastal environments. The results could be devastating for many indigenous islanders and for coastal and small island populations as a whole. The story below illustrates how one community has had to deal with the threats and realities of climate-induced displacement. If something is not done to address climatic shifts, many more will have similar tales to tell.
The Carterets Islands, Papua New Guinea
The Carterets is a group of islands, and Han is one of them. My name is Nicholas Hakata. I am from the Carterets Islands. It is a holiday paradise islanders want to relocate and very quickly. We are also learning which skills and resources we can take to the mainland. We need to relocate 120 families. But we need finances to do this. We need 6 million kina [US$ 2 million] to build houses and other facilities for housing 120 families on the main island of Bougainville. In the future, we plan to come back to these reefs and manage them as our fishing ground. Our reefs will be a source of income, and our children will come back and connect with their ancestral homeland.
It is difficult to predict the extent to which young people will take part in environmental migration. On the one hand, research on famine relief has shown that in situations of induced migration those without dependants usually leave first, followed by older men and then families (Raleigh, Jordan and Salehyan, 2008). This pattern implies that a first wave of climate-induced migration may involve mostly male youth. On the other hand, the ability to migrate is a function of mobility, and prospects for success are heavily influenced by factors such as access to money, family networks, and contacts at the destination (Brown, 2008)a reality that could limit the migratory flows of young men and women who are just beginning the process of integration into productive society.
A higher probability of conflict may also be linked to climate change and migration. The relationship between these three factors is difficult to define, as it involves many causal pathways and interlinkages. Essentially, though, it revolves around disputes over scarce resourcesa situation that could both lead to and arise from migrant flows (Boano, Zetter and Morris, 2008). Whatever the causes, increased conflict of any kind could significantly undermine youth development.
Climate, conflict, and youth
The relationship between climate change and conflict is complex but derives primarily from reduced economic security, increased resource scarcity (especially in areas economically dependent on natural resources), and the circumstances surrounding displacement (Ohlsson, 2000; united_nations Environment Programme, 2009). These three factors are likely to have a significant impact on the worlds largest youth cohorts in Africa and Asia, where rural livelihoods and natural resource dependence are dominant.
As figure II.1 illustrates, many of the factors that push youth into situations of conflictincluding economic instability, social and political exclusion, unemployment, dissatisfaction with public services, and the breakdown of traditional family and social networks (united_states Agency for International Development, 2005)may be exacerbated by the effects of climate change.
Environmental stress has already been responsible for numerous internal conflicts, and climate change will only increase the strain on the environment, especially in developing regions (Raleigh, Jordan and Salehyan, 2008). Water scarcity is an example of such a threat, a case in point being the ongoing conflict in Darfur, which has been partially attributed to the persistent, worsening drought and the consequent shortage of fertile land (united_nations Environment Programme, 2009). Throughout Africa, almost all major river basins are transboundary in nature, and any reduction in these water resources could raise tensions on the continent (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007a). Many countries in Central and Southern Asia that depend on water originating outside their boundaries could be similarly affected (united_nations Environment Programme, 2008a). The picture painted by figure II.2 suggests that the potential for conflict linked to water resource availability is quite high in some regions.
Figure II.1
The complex relationship between conflict over natural resources and climate change
Note: The dependency ratio in renewable water represents the percentage of total renewable water resources originating outside of a country. This serves as a good indicator of the potential for tension and conflict over water-sharing.
Figure II.2
Dependency ratio in renewable water
Ongoing conflict can exacerbate the consequences of climate change in affected areas. Many young people in the developing world reside in areas that have endured extended periods of armed conflict, resulting in serious resource depletion and reduced adaptive capacity (Harbom, Melander and Wallensteen, 2008). Prolonged conflict has direct and indirect health consequences relating to displacement, the breakdown of health and social services, and the heightened risk of disease transmission. Any threat climate change poses to youth development is likely to be aggravated by drawn-out conflicts.
Climate change potentially represents a major threat to the health and socio-economic stability of youthparticularly in developing countries, where the vast majority of young people live. Certain groups, such as indigenous youth, are especially vulnerable and are likely to encounter even greater obstacles within the contexts highlighted in this chapter (see box II.4). Unless the causes and consequences of climate change are addressed very soon, the youth of today and tomorrow may effectively be prevented from participating fully and productively in society, which could have a serious impact on national development in the long term.
Box II.4
Climate change and indigenous youth
Regardless of where they live in the world, indigenous youth are among the most vulnerable to the threats posed by climate change. In some cases, they are also among those who stand to lose the most as a result of inter national mitigation efforts. Ironically, indigenous communities are at risk partly because of their sustainable, carbon-neutral, or even carbon-negative lifestyles.
To understand how and why indigenous youth will be affected by climate change, it is first necessary to recognize the unique, sacred relationship that exists between indigenous peoples and their environment. It is equally important to recognize that indigenous youth cannot be isolated from their cultural context. They are an integral part of their families and communities.
Indigenous peoples coexist with what have become some of the most fragile elements of the ecosystem. Many of them can be found in or around the majority of existing forest tracts, which are home to 80 per cent of the worlds biodiversity. Others are long-term inhabitants of the melting ice caps in the Arctic region, the diminishing landforms of low-lying island atolls, and coastal areas (Salick and Byj, 2007). Indigenous peoples do not see land and water as commodities; for them, the earth is a living and sacred entity that provides food, medicine, shelter, and clothing (Borrows, 2006; LaDuke and Alexander, 2004). Their relationship with these elements is often a spiritual one. Once this is understood, it is easy to see why many indigenous peoples view climate change as a human rights issue (Carmen, 2008). For the worlds indigenous groups, the impact of climate change on the environment and biodiversity represents a threat not only to their physical survival, but also to their cultures, languages, and world views.
Indigenous youth live an already fragile existence. In several countries, this manifests itself in alarmingly high rates of depression and suicide (Pan American Health Organization, 2007; Health Canada, 2006; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission of
Australia, 2003). These young people are part of the growing phenomenon of forced displacement, violence, social exclusion, and the erosion of cultural and linguistic traditions. With climate change, some of these problems could become much worse.
Indigenous youth living in the Arctic, in semi-arid regions, or on small, low-lying islands may see their self-determination compromised if their communities are forced to relocate. Permanent displacement would a have profound physical and psychological impact, as they would lose access to nutritional inputs that make up their traditional diets and to traditional economic activities such as agriculture, hunting, and fishing. There would also be a gradual loss of the long-standing cultural traditions and location-specific language associated with their territories.
With a major disruption of their livelihood patterns, young displaced people with the least transferable skills and education run the highest risk of poverty. As they move to urban centres to seek employment, they may encounter discrimination while also experiencing a loss of identity and, for perhaps the first time, a lack of family and community support.
Indigenous children and youth are also susceptible to certain health risks associated with climate change, including plant and animal contamination, asthma and other respiratory diseases linked to declining air quality, and the increase in vector-borne diseases.
Indigenous youth and their communities are likely to be affected not only by the problems stemming from climate change but also by some of the proposed solutions. Biofuel production often involves the large-scale cultivation of single crops, which reduces biodiversity. The clearing of land for this purpose can lead to the forced displacement of indigenous communities,
which violates the provisions of the united_nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the united_nations General Assembly on 13 September 2007. This is already occurring in some areas and in certain instances has led to conflict. Disputes may also arise over water, wood, or other dwindling resources in indigenous lands and territories.
This policy brief provides a general introduction to the dynamic relationship between migration, climate change, and the environment and describes the Organizations perspectives and involvement in this field.
Addressing climate change at its roots
Climate change is a global challenge, with discussions tending to focus on the greenhouse gas emissions of countries or regions. Governments must impose solutions, but it is also essential that climate change be addressed sustainably at the human level. Developing a sense of ownership and accountability begins with explicit acknowledgement that it is the behaviour and lifestyles of individuals and the societies in which they live that are ultimately responsible for the emissions that drive climate change.
Chapter III examines how young peoples choices are affecting the environment. Many youth do not fully understand the environmental impact of their lifestyles. Education can play a key role in helping them make the connection between their consumption behaviour and ecological concerns. It can also help prepare young people to take advantage of environmental advocacy opportunities and the growing number of green jobs available, providing them with opportunities to effect change in the workplace and the world.
Human consumption is a major contributor to climate change. What people consume and how they consume it affects the natural environment. A significant amount of energy is required for the production, transportation, use, and disposal of the goods consumed, resulting in substantial GHG emissions. Moreover, the extraction of natural resources, the use of water, and the creation of pollution associated with the various stages of the consumption process contribute to environmental degradation in general. Across the spectrumfrom the desperate struggle to meet basic needs to the excessive use of resources to satisfy wants consumption puts enormous stress on the environment. The present chapter will focus on the latter end of the spectrum.
The human race has consumed more natural resources in the past 50 years than in all of the previous years of human history combined (Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004). In many developed and emerging economies, the growth of the market-based system has been paralleled by the emergence of a consumer society. In such a society, the quality of life of individualsand even the definition of happinessis increasingly associated with the expansion of ownership of material goods (Clover, 2001).
What, exactly, is consumption? The term is generally associated with the use of goods and services, including food or energy. However, that is just one aspect of the consumption process. As illustrated in figure III.1, consumption actually involves the selection and purchase of products, their use, and their disposal. Each of these three stages has an effect on the environment.
Consumption and energy-intensive lifestyles are not equally distributed around the world. It is estimated that the 12 per cent of the worlds population living in North America and West ern Europe account for 60 per cent of global private consumer spending; in contrast, the 31 one third living in South Asia and sub-Saharan
Africa account for only 3 per cent (Gardner, Assadourian and Sarin, 2004).
Much of the available data relating to young peoples sustainable consumption patterns and lifestyles focus on youth in the urban and suburban areas of developed countries. These youth constitute a minority, but it is their behaviour that has the greatest environmental impact. Conversely, the 79 per cent of the worlds youth who live in regions where agriculture accounts for more than one third of employment and where almost half of all youth are rural residents generally leave a substantially smaller carbon footprint, but will bear the brunt of climate change over their lifetimes.
While inequalities in consumption remain high, growing numbers of people in developing countries are adopting lifestyles that incorporate the manifestations of a modern existence, including refrigerators, televisions, computers, and automobiles. It is estimated that the number of individuals with discretionary spending power worldwide is approaching 1.7 billion people and that nearly half live in developing economies (united_nations and united_nations Environment Programme, 2007). This trend seems
Figure III.1
The consumption process likely to continue; energy demand is expected to increase by half between 2007 and 2030, with over 70 per cent of the upsurge coming from developing countries (united_nations Development Programme, 2007). Even with this substantial increase in their share, however, total energy consumption in developing countries is likely to lag behind that of developed countries for some time.
The dominant youth market
For many youth, consumption has become central to identity construction. The display of certain possessions and a particular style is one of the principal ways young people signal their membership in specific peer groups and their distance from others.
Young women and men represent close to one fifth of the global population, and their combined purchasing power translates into significant market control. In 2003, the combined spending power of youth in 11 major economies exceeded US$ 750 billion (Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004). To put this into perspective, this amount is greater than the GDP of the entire African continent in that same year, which amounted to just over US$ 700 billion (world_bank, 2010). Young people not only make decisions about their own purchases, but they also exert a strong influence over the spending of their families and peers. It is estimated that youth in the united_states spend or influence the spending of US$ 300 billion a year, or about 1 in 3 consumer dollars spent (World Wildlife Fund and Center for a New American Dream, 2003).
The influence young people have over the purchases of their friends and families and the fact that brand loyalties are developed early in life make youth a valuable market segment, especially for fashion items, food, and leisure goods. Youth have been specifically targeted by advertisers since the late 1950s (Kjeldgaard and Askegaard, 2006). Since then, advertising has boomed, becoming so pervasive that youth find it virtually impossible to escape its impact.1
It is estimated that most teenagers in Australia, for example, will have been exposed to at least 350,000 television advertisements by the end of secondary school and will deal with more than 3,000 marketing messages each day as they move into adulthood. A study carried out in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China found that youth watched an average of two to three hours of television per day and were exposed to a substantial number of promotional messages during this time (Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004).
The development of powerful information and communication technologies, which are increasingly accessible to youth in even the most remote areas, has helped to spread the advertising messages that have played such an important role in shaping young peoples ideas, aspirations, cultures, and lifestyles and have ultimately contributed to the creation of consumer societies. Global media are portraying consumption-intensive lifestyles as desirable for youth from all backgrounds and regions. Influenced by advertising messages and the portrayal of their role models and peers by the media, many young people around the world feel the need to compete in the race for the latest gadgets and the newest and coolest products on the market.
Young peoples ecological footprint
Young people are very aware of how the products they own and display influence their social standing. However, many do not realize that their consumption also has a significant impact on the environment. The most serious climaterelated consequences of the behaviour of todays youth will take years to manifest themselves, but young people must come to realize that their lifestyles and consumption patterns are having a substantial impact on overall environmental sustainability even now.
Although not enough hard data are available to adequately determine the ecological impactor carbon footprintof todays youth population, it is known that young peoples expenditures, particularly in developed consumer societies, are largely devoted to conspicuous consumption goods and leisure activities deemed pivotal to youth peer group acceptance and differentiation (Brusdal and Langeby, 2001). Among the most popular consumption items for young people in these contexts are clothes, entertainment and communications equipment, and food (Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004).
Fashion changes constantly as the frequent redefinition of what is in and what is out generates a need to buy the latest styles. Excess production and waste occur as outmoded products are discardednot because they no longer fulfil their main functional purpose, but simply because they are no longer deemed desirable. Meeting strong consumer demand can put a strain on the environment. In the apparel sector, for example, the industrial manufacture of fabric and other fashion goods can undermine air quality; dyeing and printing use vast amounts of water and chemicals, and shipping garments around the world is energy-intensive and constitutes a source of GHG emissions. Even natural fibres are not always environmentally friendly. Cotton production accounts for less than 3 per cent of the worlds farmed land but consumes almost 25 per cent of the insecticides and 10 per cent of the herbicides used worldwide (united_nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and united_nations Environment Programme, 2008).
Technology, like fashion, is constantly evolving. New technology items are becoming increasingly important to young people for the management of their leisure time and social relations, so it is not surprising that youth are among the main consumers of mobile telephones, computers, video game consoles, and other electronic equipment. These devices are becoming pervasive even among youth in some developing regions. In Africa, which has the highest mobile phone growth rate in the developing world, mobile penetration had reached more than 25 per cent by 2008 (International Telecommunication Union, 2009). Although electronic items are often small, their collective carbon footprint is quite large. It is estimated that between 3 and 13 per cent of residential electricity use in Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries can be attributed to standby power consumption alone (European Environment Agency, 2005). High energy intensity characterizes not only the use but also the manufacture of many small electronic devices. In fact, manufacturing accounts for 80 per cent of a computers energy use over its life cycle. Taken together, their high energy use in manufacturing and typically short lifespans make computers more energy-intensive than refrigerators (Williams, 2005).
The technology embedded in computers, mobile phones, music players, and video game consoles changes rapidly, and youth are under constant pressure to buy the newest models to take advantage of higher connectivity speeds and improvements in product size and sophistication. Once personal computers, televisions, mobile phones, video game consoles, and other electronic devices are discarded, they become e-waste. It is estimated that 20 million to 50 million metric tons of e-waste are generated worldwide every year, with developed countries accounting for the bulk of the total (united_nations Environment Programme, 2006; Schmidt, 2006).
Youth in consumer societies tend to have relatively few financial commitments and thus devote a fairly high proportion of their disposable income to leisure activities such as tourism. Their travel choices, including the mode of transportation and type of accommodation selected, the distance travelled, and the activities undertaken, all affect the environment. The precise contribution of tourism to humaninduced climate change has not been comprehensively assessed. It is estimated, however, that emissions from three of the main tourism subsectors (transportation, accommodation and activities) represented between 3.9 and 6 per cent of global emissions in 2005, with a best estimate of 4.9 per cent (World Tourism Organization and united_nations Environment Programme, 2008). Staying longer in one location, using public transportation, and lodging with friends or relatives can reduce the environmental impact of tourism.
The consumption paradox: Do young people walk the talk?
Young people around the world are very concerned about the environment. A UNEP poll of nearly 2,000 twelveto eighteen-year olds in five countriesBrazil, India, the Russian Fed eration, South Africa, and the united_states found that close to 90 per cent believe world leaders should do whatever is necessary to address climate change (united_nations Environment Programme, 2008b). A number of other surveys have confirmed that youth are worried about the environment and climate change (see, for example, Special Eurobarometer 300, Directorate General for Communication of the European Commission, 2008; and Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004).
Young people say they care about the environment, but to what extent does their consumption behaviour reflect this concern? Do they understand the environmental impact of their choices as consumers? Quantitative and qualitative studies on young peoples perceptions of sustainable lifestyles (defined in box III.1) are limited in number and scope, particularly for youth living in developing countries. To provide an initial mapping of the attitudes, behaviours, and expectations of youth and their sense of power to change lifestyles and promote sustainable consumption, UNEP and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) launched a survey in 2000 on the consumption patterns of more than 5,000 middle-class urban youth in 24 countries. The UNEP/UNESCO Survey on Youth and Consumption: Is the Future Yours? constituted part of the UNESCO/UNEP project on Youth, Sustainable Consumption and Life Styles. The few other existing studies on young peoples perceptions about sustainable consumption have supported the findings of the UNEP/UNESCO research. UNEP is currently in the process of conducting a follow-up study, the Global Survey on Sustainable Lifestyles, which will shed more light on the perceptions and behaviours of youth in developing countries with regard to sustainable consumption and lifestyles.
products, and the disposal of productsin assessing the effect of their own consumption on the environment. Most recognized the environmental impact of the second and third phases but did not acknowledge the critical role their initial product selection and purchase played within this context. Whether it is a case of not knowing enough or not caring enough, environmental concerns appear to be given lower priority than other criteria in shopping decisions. The UNEP/UNESCO Survey found that environmental impact was assigned less weight than factors such as trendiness, price, and quality in young peoples buying decisions (Nyberg and St, 2001). These results were confirmed by subsequent studies, which showed that variables such as price, brand name, quality, and peer pressure all seemed to exert a greater influence on young peoples purchasing decisions than did sustainability considerations. In fact, an Australian study found that only 1 per cent of young respondents found the sustainability of a product to be the most important factor influencing their consumption (Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004).
Several factors, including age, education, and gender, seem to influence youth perspectives on sustainable living. A number of studies have confirmed that younger members of the youth cohort are less inclined than older youth to believe they consume too much and are less conscious of the effects of their behaviour (see, for example, Bentley, Fien and Neil, 2004; and Autio and Heinonen, 2004). Interest in sustainable development and sustainable consumption appears to be positively correlated with the level of education (Maggi and others, 2001). With respect to gender, many studies have shown a particular tendency among girls and women to favour green values. Whereas males seem to associate environmentally conscious behaviour with limitations on their personal freedom, females generally appear to understand it as a reflection of the need to take action (Autio and Heinonen, 2004). In the UNEP/UNESCO study, more young women than young men reported basing their purchasing decisions on the ecofriendliness of a product (Nyberg and St, 2001).
The incongruity between young peoples professed concern for the environment and their consumption behaviour is linked to several real and perceived barriers that may deter them from adopting sustainable consumption practices and lifestyles (Bentley, Fien and Neil,
Box III.1
Defining sustainable lifestyles
Sustainable lifestyles can be defined as practices and choices at the individual and collective levels that enable individuals to meet their needs and aspirations with a sense of responsibility for the well-being of present and future populations, taking into account the environmental and social consequences of their actions. Sustainable consumption behaviour is an important component of a sustainable lifestyle and is characterized by the following: satisfying basic human needs rather than the desire for luxuries; valuing quality-of-life concerns over material standards of living; minimizing resource use, waste and pollution; taking a life-cycle perspective in consumer decision-making; and acting with concern for future generations.
The consumer behaviour of young people suggests that their concern for the environment is not reflected in their purchasing decisions. The UNEP/UNESCO study found that young people often failed to consider all three phases of consumptionshopping behaviour, the use of
2004). Many young people perceive existing green products to be incompatible with their needs, too expensive, or not readily available. In some cases, there may be no green products that can substitute for everyday goods or that serve the same identity-building function as the more popular consumer items. A substantial number of young people acknowledge that they may require more information about alternative products and services. Youth also need to be made aware of what constitutes over-consumption, as they may find it increasingly difficult to ignore the constant barrage of advertising messages directed at them.
Although many young people are genuinely concerned about the environment and climate change, their purchasing behaviour and leisure activities suggest that they do not fully comprehend the extent to which their purchases and actions affect the planet. Helping youth understand and acknowledge the impact their lifestyles have on the environment can help them make the connection between their consumption behaviour and environmental concerns. Education plays a crucial role in this regard.
Environmental education is a prerequisite for effective youth engagement and participation in efforts to address climate change. Young people need to be well-informed about climate change science and mitigation options and to be made aware of the consequences of their consumption behaviour so that they can play a strong role in combating climate change and promoting changes in attitudes and behaviours. Education and training in the field of climate change can also prepare young people to take advantage of new employment opportunities arising from the shift to a greener economy.
Climate change education is an element of the broader interdisciplinary framework of education for sustainable development, which promotes understanding of the social, cultural, economic, and environmental dimensions of sustainability and teaches students how to make decisions that take into account the long-term future of the economy, ecology, and society.
In addition to helping put the world on a more sustainable path in the future, climate change education can produce tangible benefits today. For instance, teaching energy-saving and resource-conserving behaviours not only promotes sustainable lifestyles but can also lead to cost savings. Similarly, learning about disaster risk reduction in schools can increase students awareness and understanding of their immediate environment and provide them with empowering tools that will facilitate their active involvement in preserving the safety of their communities. Young people can also disseminate information on disaster risk management, educating their families and communities about disaster preparedness (Regional Consultative Committee on Disaster Management, 2007). When the residents of an area are aware of the risks around them and take the time to develop crisis response strategies, the injuries, damage, and trauma associated with disaster situations are significantly reduced.
Key features of effective education for sustainable development
Education for sustainable development can be presented as a cross-cutting, interdisciplinary theme or integrated into the curricula of exist35 ing subjects such as geography, earth science,
chemistry, economics, social studies, biol ogy, and technology. The learning outcomes of climate change education and education for sustainable development should include the acquisition of attitudes, knowledge, skills,
and behaviour that promote scientific inquiry,
ecological and social responsibility, community action and involvement, and global solidarity
Experience has shown that it is important to complement thematic teaching with practical activities and projects. These help make abstract information and theories more concrete and allow young people to see the connection between the target messages and their everyday lives. Students who are able to identify the direct relevance of a concept to their own lives are more likely to retain the information and act upon it. An ineffective approach to promoting environmental awareness would be to teach only the scientific facts, leaving out any reference to the personal and social relevance of the information (Uzzell, 1999). In environmental education, the connection between the student, climate change, and personal action is best emphasized through active learning meth ate materials to achieve this objective, the united_nations Environment Programme, the united_nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and the World Health Organization joined forces to develop an environmental awareness programme geared towards primary and secondary school students.
The OzonAction Education Pack for primary schools includes entertaining hands-on curriculum materials that can be used to educate children about the protective role of the ozone layer and the causes and consequences of its depletion. The Pack contains a teaching and learning programme that incorporates basic information as well as practical skill-building and participatory opportunities to provide students with simple, concrete steps they can take to protect the ozone layer and safely enjoy the sun.
The OzonAction Education Pack for secondary schools includes teacher and student materials that explore the same conceptsozone layer depletion and protection and the health risks of strong ultraviolet radiationat a more advanced level. The Pack allows young people to acquire a deeper understanding of the scientific concepts linked to ozone issues and provides them with opportunities to develop and apply policy solutions. Role-play is one strategy used to engage students right from the start. The first activity is one in which each student assumes the role of a young journalism graduate who is being considered for a job at an important news agency. The student is asked to write an article that not only informs the world about ozone depletion and its link to climate change but also provides practical tips for children and youth to help protect the planet.
In terms of educational outcomes, children and youth who have participated in this programme should exhibit the following:
ods. Students might, for example, be given an ecological footprint activity or asked to use a carbon footprint calculator to enhance their understanding of how their personal energy consumption contributes to climate change (Cordero, Todd and Abellera, 2008).
Other elements of effective environmental education might include presentations by experts, field trips, hands-on exposure to meteorological equipment or the establishment of small meteorological stations in schools, and participation in national science fair competitions that promote the development of environmental solutions. Media such as television and the Internet (including Web-based courses) can also be used effectively in teaching about climate change (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2006).
Education for sustainable development continues to be driven by national circumstances and capacities. Educational materials should therefore incorporate locally relevant and culturally appropriate content that takes into account specific conditions and contexts and is geared towards local needs and perceptions.
Effective approaches to integrating climate change and other environmental issues in classroom instruction should be incorporated into teacher education and training. Teachers who are already working should receive additional training in climate change education to strengthen their scientific and pedagogical knowledge in this area (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2003). A number of resources are readily available on the Internet to support teachers efforts to raise environmental awareness. One example is the OzonAction Education Pack, jointly developed by several united_nations entities to ensure that high-quality, copyright-free instructional material on climate change would be available to all primary and secondary schools (see box III.2).
Box III.2
The OzonAction Education Pack
Environmental education should begin at an early age and continue throughout every phase of schooling. In order to ensure the availability of appropri ing committees have been set up to ensure that relevant information is effectively integrated throughout the formal education system. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have also been actively involved in the development and implementation of many environmental education initiatives.
evant information and to use it to develop practical action plans;
   bility and a desire to become more active in protecting the ozone layer;
    sues at stake and of how to protect oneself from the dangers of ultraviolet radiation.
Teacher and student books may be downloaded free of charge from www.  cationpack.htm or  action/information/ educationpacksec_school.htm.
Box III.3
Promoting education for sustainable development at the highest level
The crucial role played by climate change education in changing behaviours, attitudes, and values is explicitly recognized at the international level. Article 6 of the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change calls on Governments to promote and facilitate the development and implementation of relevant educational and public awareness programmes; public participation in efforts to address climate change; public access to pertinent information; and the training of scientific, technical, and managerial personnel. Similarly, article 10(e) of the Kyoto Protocol calls on Parties to cooperate in and promote at the international level and, where appropriate, using existing bodies, the development and implementation of education and training programmes, including the strengthening of national capacity building ... and [to] facilitate at the national level public awareness of, and public access to information on, climate change (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, n.d.).
In recognition of the importance of education for sustainable development, the united_nations General Assembly declared 2005-2014 the united_nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development, with the united_nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as the lead agency. Information on the goals and strategies associated with the Decade is available at  esd/.
The evaluation of existing tools and the identification of baseline indicators to monitor and assess the effectiveness of climate change education are also necessary to ensure that young people are benefiting from appropriate environmental content and instruction (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007c).
As a result of coordinated efforts by Governments and international organizations (see box III.3), climate change, sustainable development, and other environmental concerns are receiving increased attention in both developed and developing countries at all levels of education. In many countries, institutional and legal frameworks have been established to support the design and implementation of educational and awareness programmes focusing on climate change or broader sustainable development issues, and specific measures have been adopted to systematically support and monitor the implementation of innovative projects (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007c). In some countries, national climate change education units and coordinat-
Challenges in implementing education for sustainable development
Effective basic education systems must be in place before education for sustainable development can be fully integrated. Reducing global disparities in educational access and quality is essential for the widespread implementation of climate change education. At this point, per capita spending on students remains highly variable. In 2004, North America and Western Europe accounted for 10 per cent of the world population aged 5 to 25 years, but 55 per cent of global education expenditure. In contrast, sub-Saharan Africa accounted for 15 per cent of the population between the ages of 5 and 25, but only 2 per cent of worldwide spending on education. (united_nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2008)
In developing countries, the implementation of education for sustainable development is often impeded by the lack of institutional, financial, and technical capacities and by the lack of relevant teaching materials and qualified instructors.
In spite of the various challenges, a number of countries have institutionalized environmental education. Their experience constitutes a valuable source of information and guidance for others seeking to integrate climate change education at the systemic level. In the Seychelles, for instance, the Ministry of Education created an Environmental Education Unit that has facilitated the successful integration of climate change issues into geography and science curricula and has also developed and implemented a compulsory teacher training programme on environmental education. The Unit regularly coordinates environmental education activities in schools, including extracurricular options such as an eco-school programme. Every year it puts together an annual environmental education calendar that includes competitions, environmental theme days, festivals, and other events geared towards increasing environmental awareness (united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2007b). The University of the South Pacific, a regional tertiary institution supported by 12 Pacific Island countries, has been providing climate change education for several years and now offers a number of degree programmes in the field (see box III.4).
ed to adapt to climate change and mitigate its impact, non-formal and informal learning reinforce and supplement classroom learning. More importantly, non-formal approaches can offer many benefits and opportunities to young people who do not have access to formal education or to those who have dropped out of the formal education system.
Civic engagement and community service represent an important component of non-formal education, providing youth with personal, hands-on experience and training. Young people can play a key role in the promotion of climate change education through advocacy and by participating in local sustainable development initiatives. A number of youth initiatives relating to climate change are described in chapter IV of the present Report.
Recent years have seen significant growth in green industriesand green jobsaround the world. In addition to providing much-needed employment opportunities for youth, green jobs represent a way for young people to contribute directly to the fight against climate change. They enable youth to move beyond adopting green behaviours in their private lives, making it possible for them to translate their convictions into action in the workplace.
What, exactly, are green jobs? They are defined by UNEP as work in agriculture, industry, research and development, services, and administration that contributes to preserving or restoring the quality of the environment (united_nations Environment Programme and others, 2008).
The growing attention given to climate change and sustainable development in the midst of the financial and economic crisis that began in 2008 translates into an ideal opportunity to promote green economic growth around the world. In the united_states, US$ 60 billion in fiscal stimulus money will be invested in clean energy, including the creation of green jobs (united_states, White House, 2009). In China, 12 per cent of a US$ 586 billion economic
Box III.4
Tertiary climate change education in the Pacific Islands
Climate change threatens the sustainable development of the water supply, agriculture, coastal zones, tourism, health, and many other vital sectors in the Pacific Islands. At the University of the South Pacific (USP), climate change is addressed in a range of undergraduate courses in geography, marine science, agriculture, physics, and economics. For more than a decade, USP has offered a postgraduate course on climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation. The course focuses on the specific risks climate change poses to the Pacific Islands and examines strategies for managing those risks. Students are provided with a brief overview of climate science, mitigation measures, and relevant international political and legal institutions, and an adaptation policy framework is presented that can be applied at the community, regional, or national level. USP is offering a new postgraduate diploma in climate change beginning in 2010; the programme will include the existing course on climate change impacts and adaptation as well as a new course on climate science. USP also works closely with the START-Oceania secretariat (based at the University) to provide scholarshipand award-based training opportunities for young scientists studying environmental change.
Non-formal climate change education
Formal education is only one means of creating awareness about climate change and teaching about adaptation and mitigation. Non-formal, out-of-school approaches also have a crucial role to play in sensitizing youth to the causes and consequences of climate change. By providing real-life experiences and the skills need gers to other members of their community, enabling the buyers to access a mobile source of electricity (and thus receive news via radio and communicate by cell phone) at an affordable price.
Using skills and equipment passed on to them by a British volunteer, the young people are engaged in the entire line of production, from slicing the silicon sheets to wiring the connectors and calculating the correct voltage. Many of the youth involved in the solar project have never had a job or seen anyone in their families work. The young craftsmen, once trained and operating, receive a small income and see a portion of the profits from the sale of the photovoltaic cell units go directly into funding other KCYP programmes, such as theatrebased HIV/AIDS training, environmental clean-ups, and peace-building soccer teams. The average wage in Kibera is US$ 1 a day, but a small solar panel, which takes just minutes to put together, can sell for around US$ 5.
Fred Ouko, the coordinator of KCYP, says that the young people are starting to gain confidence: What I want to see is real empowerment, real benefit trickling down to individual persons. ... Theyre actually making something up to a full product and then selling it, and they know now they can do this for themselves.
The programme has had an immediate local impact, benefiting the residents of Kibera and surrounding rural communities. Groups in neighbouring Uganda have asked the members of KCYP to share their experience, knowledge, and training, which implies that even the simplest small-scale endeavour can potentially have a far-reaching impact. In 2007 KCYP won a World Clean Energy Award for its pioneering work.
stimulus package will be allocated to increasing energy efficiency and other environmental improvements (Barbier, 2009). The global market for environmental products and services is expected to double by 2020 (united_nations Environment Programme and others, 2008).
It has been argued that the renewable energy sector may be well situated for the creation of green jobs both now and in the future (united_nations Environment Programme and others, 2008). There have been more than 2.3 million green jobs created in the renewable energy sector in recent years, including 300,000 in the wind industry, 170,000 in solar photovoltaics, 624,000 in the solar thermal industry, and 1,174,000 in biomass production. Investment in renewable energy has increased significantly in the past decade, growing from US$ 10 billion in 1998 to US$ 66 billion in 2007. With investment rising at an annual rate of 20 per cent, the number of jobs in the renewable energy sector could exceed 20 million by 2030 (united_nations Environment Programme and others, 2008).
Potential job opportunities exist for youth in many areas of the renewable energy sector, including design and planning, energy policy analysis and development, energy economics and energy management, energy efficiency consulting, assessment of the social and environmental impact of energy systems, and research and development (united_nations Industrial Development Organization, 2003). Some young people, such as those involved in the Kibera Community Youth Programme in Nairobi, have already begun to inject themselves into the sector and its development (see box III.5).
Box III.5
Youth harnessing the power of the sun through the production of solar photovoltaic panels
The Kibera Community Youth Programme (KCYP) is a community-based organization established and run by young people in the Kibera slum in Nairobi, Kenya. The project provides youth with work assembling small and affordable solar panels. KCYP members sell hand-constructed solar char-
Improving energy efficiency in building and construction constitutes another area with considerable potential for creating green jobs for youth. There are currently 4 million jobs in Europe and the united_states devoted to energy resource optimization, and this number could increase significantly. Youth who are willing to complete apprenticeships in this field may find themselves well positioned to take advantage of new employment opportunities in the coming years.
Young people, in particular rural youth who seek continuity in their livelihoods, may want to take advantage of green jobs aimed at minimizing the negative impact of climate change on agriculture. Various efforts are under way to make agriculture more sustainable, both by reducing its effects on the environment and by safeguarding it against the consequences of environmental change. Organic farming is one area with enormous growth potential. This type of production is environmentally friendly, but it is also relatively labour-intensive, so a continued shift in this direction could lead to the creation of more jobs in the agriculture sector. Organic farming is expanding rapidly; in 2006, sales in this subsector amounted to US$ 100 billion globally (united_nations Environment Programme and others, 2008).
The rural non-farm economy, which accounts for 35-50 per cent of rural income across developing countries, also constitutes a potential source of green jobs for youth (Haggblade, Hazell and Reardon, 2009). Rural non-farm sectors, including energy production, trade, agroprocessing, manufacturing, and commercial and service activities, represent a viable complement or alternative to agriculture in stimulating rural income growth. Although nonfarm sectors still frequently rely on a robust and successful agricultural sector, these two segments of the rural economy are increasingly decoupling as improved infrastructure opens up new opportunities that are less dependent on agriculture.
A number of different jobs for youth can be generated in environmental protection and sustainable land management. In South Africa, the Governments Expanded Public Works Programme has created more than 800,000 jobs in infrastructure, services, and agriculture. One particular programme, Working for Water, has provided at least 6,000 young people with short-term employment and is described in some detail later in the chapter (IRIN, 2009).
The recycling industry may offer young people entrepreneurial opportunities; however, careful implementation is necessary to ensure that practices undermining human development are not perpetuated. While recycling is a growth industry that accounts for a substantial number of new jobs, many of these do not constitute decent work and are concentrated in the informal sector, where wages tend to be relatively low and conditions precarious. Nevertheless, young people in developing countries have successfully started small-scale recycling businesses, an area with great potential for expansion (see box III.6).
Box III.6
City garbage recyclers in lowincome estates
A forward-thinking entrepreneur and former truck driver, Andrew Macharia, won grants and awards to address the ever-increasing problem of solid waste, especially plastic bags, in the slums of Nairobi. With the support of local authorities and the Government of Kenya, the Kenya Institute of Manufacturers, the united_nations Childrens Fund, the united_nations Development Programme, and other collaborators, he helped set up 20 community groups to collect plastic polyethylene waste products and turn them into reusable items such as fence posts, roofing tiles, rain gutters, and washbasins. The groups, which are all part of a cooperative primarily made up of youth and women, have already collected more than 100 metric tons of waste. The project has created employment for over 500 women and youth and has helped raise income for over 5,000 Nairobi slum residents. The project has also allowed cooperative members to save and take part in credit schemes, further improving their livelihoods. Macharia is encouraging the formation of additional recycling cooperatives and small business ventures that turn urban waste into products such as charcoal briquettes,
nutrient-rich soil, and mattresses, all of which are ultimately sold back to the community.
The green economy must be developed in a balanced and sustainable manner, with attention given to social development considerations. Green jobs have the potential to enhance employment in rural areas and across the globe. However, without careful implementation and proper monitoring, some green activities, including certain recycling practices and the production of biofuel crops, could actually undermine human development by, for example, perpetuating substandard working conditions or threatening food security (Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations, 2009b).
With climate change expected to bring about major shifts in the labour market and with unprecedented numbers of youth entering the labour market in the years to come, Governments must strive to ensure that young people are ready to take advantage of new environment-oriented employment opportunities. Currently, too few of the green jobs that are being created are filled by youth, primarily because most lack the necessary skills. This is also hampering growth in green sectors. Green energy operators have noted that one of the primary impediments to continued growth in the coming years will be insufficient access to new talent and employees. Although some progress has been made in providing young people with the knowledge and technical skills they need to take advantage of new employment opportunities afforded by the shift to a greener economy, much remains to be done.
Education and training
As new entrants to the labour force, youth have an advantage over many adults in that they are less likely to suffer the negative effects of technological change. While older workers may experience job dislocation with the introduction of new technologies to combat climate change, youth are well positioned to acquire the req uisite skills while they are still in education or training programmes.
In response to the increased interest in greening the workforce, universities and other postsecondary institutions have set up specialized programmes designed to ensure that youth acquire the necessary knowledge and skills. In recent years, the number of university courses and degrees focusing on environmental issues, renewable energy, and sustainable practices has surged.
Although tertiary studies can prepare students for a professional career in the environment sector, many green jobs do not require a university degree. Adjusting educational curricula and encouraging youth to take up technology-related subjects in secondary school are important steps in facilitating the transition to green employment. Vocational training oriented towards new technologies is equally essential. This type of training can range from courses at secondary schools and workforce development centres to longer, more specialized postsecondary programmes that prepare candidates for positions requiring particular skills.
Along with classroom-based learning and formal vocational training, green internships constitute an important means of promoting young peoples interest in environmental employment and facilitating the development of relevant occupational skills. In the united_states, the public transport sector has launched several initiatives that provide internship and education opportunities for young people. The Conference of Minority Transportation Officials has an internship programme for students, and similar opportunities that expose youth to the workings of the sector are offered by municipalities and campuses around the country through the National Summer Transportation Institute (united_states Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Office of Civil Rights, 2007). During the Summer Institute students learn about problems such as traffic congestion, inefficient modes of transportation, urban sprawl and appropriate land-use planning, as well as sustainable transportation infrastructure and energy efficiency in the design of transportation projects. This initiative aims at creating awareness of transportation careers among secondary school students and encourages them to consider transportation-related courses in their higher-education pursuits.
Recent experience in green job training has yielded valuable lessons. First, in order to ensure the maintenance of high standards and job transferability, certification programmes must be developed; both Governments and industry leaders can play an important role in this regard. Second, training institutions must work closely with local employers and industry associations to meet emerging labour demand. Finally, it may still be necessary to raise awareness among some employers about the future potential of green sectors. A survey conducted in Australia among young tradespeople indicated that youth were willing to learn green skills; 87 per cent of the respondents were either interested or very interested in acquiring such skills, but three quarters of them felt they lacked the knowledge and opportunity to pursue their interest. While a significant proportion of those surveyed cited cost as an obstacle to the implementation of green skills on the job, an even larger percentage identified lack of interest by employer or work attitudes as barriers (Dusseldorp Skills Forum, 2008).
Aside from ensuring that young people are provided with a quality education and appropriate skills training, there are two key strategies that may be adopted to help youth make the transition to green jobs: promoting green entrepreneurship and (temporarily, at least) involving them in environmental public employment schemes.
Youth entrepreneurship
With increasing numbers of youth joining the labour market, entrepreneurship can be an important source of job creation and can offer young people the chance to effect change. Young entrepreneurs can exploit opportunities to promote environmental sustainability in a number of different sectors including agriculture, renewable energy, and recycling.
Young peoples entrepreneurial potential is fuelled by their creativity and willingness to try new approaches. However, their relative inexperience and limited resources and networks place them at a disadvantage. Starting a new business is risky, and potential entrepreneurs must be well prepared. In order to ensure the viability of green youth ventures, young people must be provided with entrepreneurship training, including support in the development of business plans and access to technology and technical know-how. Once the groundwork has been laid, seed grants and manageable financing options need to be made available to youth to start their own businesses.
In some regions, notably the Middle East and North Africa, entrepreneurship is still regarded as less appealing than public sector employment. In these areas, new initiatives that foster an entrepreneurial spirit among youth should be implemented, and increased emphasis on green and social entrepreneurship should be incorporated in existing initiatives.
Environmental public employment programmes
Environmental public employment programmes can provide young people with marketable skills and work opportunities while at the same time engaging them in environmental rehabilitation and conservation. Historically, public employment programmes have been used to create jobs for the poor and unemployed in times of crisis. In some cases, these jobs have contributed to environmental sustainability while also providing a livelihood for those in need. The Civilian Conservation Corps, established in the united_states in 1933 as one of the New Deal programmes during the Great Depression, is one such example. Active until 1942, this initiative provided employment for 2 million people. The Corps planted between 2 billion and 3 billion trees, controlled erosion on 40 million acres of farmland, facilitated mosquito control over 230,000 acres of land, established 711 State parks, and developed 3 million acres of land for park use (Lieuw-Kie-Song, 2009). Although this type of environmental public employment programme typically targets the poor, a case could be made for expanding it to include unemployed youth.
In response to the global financial and economic crisis set in motion in 2008, leaders around the world have called for the implementation of the Green Economy Initiative, or Global Green New Deal, launched by UNEP. Components of this initiative could be executed through public employment programmes, with specific areas of concentration selected on the basis of local and national needs and priorities. A number of countries, including India and South Africa, have piloted public employment initiatives that provide poor unemployed or underemployed individuals with labour-intensive work, and many of these could be adapted to provide green jobs for youth (Lieuw-Kie-Song, 2009). The Working for Water initiative in South Africa is one such example (see box III.7). Public employment schemes could also be a useful mechanism for involving youth in specific industries such as public transportation, which might otherwise not seem like an obvious career choice for young people.
such as solar water heaters. Because these types of technologies play such an important role in climate change mitigation and adaptation, there is substantial support for the rapid implementation and scaling up of this initiative, which could greatly benefit energy-poor communities and unemployed youth.
Box III.7
Youth employment through invasive alien species eradication
Under the South African Governments Expanded Public Works Programme, more than 800,000 jobs have been created in sectors such as infrastructure, services, and agriculture. One particular programmeWorking for Waterhas provided at least 6,000 young people with short-term jobs and training in clearing invasive alien species and has supplied them with the information and experience they need to start their own micro-enterprises in the discipline. The Programme employs out-of-work youth and poor residents to clear areas where invasive alien species of plants are causing problems. Such efforts allow less-waterdemanding native vegetation to flourish, increase stream flows and water availability, raise land productivity and hence land values, and strengthen resilience to fires.
The Programmes success has spurred the creation of spin-off initiatives using a similar labour-intensive, costeffective, and sustainable approach to dealing with natural resource issues. These initiatives include Working for Wetlands, Working on Fire, Working for the Coast, Working on Waste, and more recently, Working for Forests and Working for Energy. The last initiative listed is designed to help provide universal access to affordable energy services through the use of decentralized renewable energy technologies
In order to ensure sustained success, environmental public employment programmes must include components that facilitate young participants transition to more permanent employment. One option might be to establish a link between these public employment programmes and existing youth training programmes in order to provide young people with targeted skills and environmental awareness so that they will be able to identify entrepreneurship opportunities in the field of environmental conservation and rehabilitation (Lieuw-KieSong, 2009).
Despite the divide between the environmental concerns and the consumption behaviour among youth, progress is being made. Climate change education is critical to bridge this gap and can teach youth to adopt a life-cycle perspective when making their consumption choices. What is important is for young people to have access to environmental education that is developed in a way that is relevant to their specific context. There is an opportunity for youth from all walks of life to contribute now, whether it is in their homes, schools or their places of work. Considering the influence young people have over the purchasing decisions of their friends and families, changes made now could produce not only immediate tangible benefits, but also have a far-reaching effect on the future of the economy, ecology and the societies of generations to come.
Bentley, Matthew, John Fien and Cameron Neil (2004). Sustainable Consumption: Young Australians as Agents of Change. Canberra: National Youth Affairs Research Scheme.
This study explores how young people can be encouraged and empowered to make changes in their own consumption patterns as well as being catalysts for change in the wider community. The focus is mainly on Australian youth, though international evidence is reported where available.
This report examines the results of the 2000 UNEP/UNESCO Survey on Youth and Consumption: Is the Future Yours?, which constituted part of the UNESCO/UNEP joint project on Youth, Sustainable Consumption and Life Styles. An effort is made in the report to interpret some preliminary findings on young peoples attitudes towards consumption, and to identify the potential role of youth in the transition towards sustainable consumption lifestyles.
united_nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and united_nations Environment Programme (2008). Towards Sustainable Lifestyles: youthXchange Training Kit on Responsible ConsumptionThe Guide. Available from  images/0015/001587/158700e.pdf; the online training kit is available from www. youthxchange.net.
The youthXchange guide and related website constitute a toolkit to help teachers, NGOs, and youth groups raise awareness of sustainable consumption and empower youth to put theory into practice. By providing accessible information, concrete examples, and specific facts and figures, UNEP and UNESCO endeavour to show young people that it is possible to translate their aspirations for a better world into effective action.
The Green Jobs report explores the impact a transformation to a green economy could have on work, enterprise, and the way people earn a living. Drawing on information from around the world, this study is the first that has provided a global overview of these issues.
This edition of State of the World examines how and why people consume and what kind of impact their consumption choices have on the planet and their fellow human beings. It argues that Governments, businesses, and concerned citizens can harness their purchasing power to build markets for products that do not destroy the environment and maintains that a less consumptive society is not only possible but essential.
The most recent edition of State of the World argues that consumerism has engulfed human cultures and the worlds ecosystems. In the report, 60 renowned researchers and practitioners describe how the worlds leading institutionseducation, the media, business, Governments, traditions, and social movementscan be used to reorient cultures toward sustainability.
Moving forward: youth taking action and making a difference
The combined acumen and involvement of all individuals, from regular citizens to scientific experts, will be needed as the world moves forward in implementing climate change mitigation and adaptation measures and promoting sustainable development. Young people must be prepared to play a key role within this context, as they are the ones who will live to experience the long-term impact of todays crucial decisions.
The present chapter focuses on the participation of young people in addressing climate change. It begins with a review of the various mechanisms for youth involvement in environmental advocacy within the united_nations system. A framework comprising progressive levels of participation is then presented, and concrete examples are provided of youth involvement in climate change efforts around the globe at each of these levels. The role of youth organizations and obstacles to participation are also examined.
The united_nations has long recognized the importance of youth participation in decisionmaking and global policy development. Environmental issues have been assigned priority in recent decades, and a number of mechanisms have been established within the system that enables youth representatives to contribute to climate change deliberations. A variety of youth advisory bodies and youth caucuses provide young people with opportunities to share their ideas. However, as shown later in the chapter, the existing participatory mechanisms frequently do not allow them to contribute meaningfully to the decision-making process.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child emphasizes that participation is a substantive right and is the means through which children and young people may take part in and influence processes, decisions, and activities in order to achieve justice, shape outcomes, expose abuses of power, and realize their rights. The intent underlying this Convention was reaffirmed in 1995, when the united_nations General Assembly adopted the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond (united_nations, 1995), and again in 2007, in the Supplement to the World Programme of Action (united_nations, 2007a). Generally considered the first global blueprint for developing effective policies for young people, the World Programme of Action for Youth2 identifies full and effective participation of youth in the life of society and in decision-making as one of fifteen priority areas requiring action by Governments, the international community, civil society, and the private sector (see box IV.1). As stated in the World Programme of Action, the capacity for progress of our societies is based, among other elements, on their capacity to incorporate the contribution and responsibility of youth in the building and designing of the fu ture. In addition to their intellectual contribution and their ability to mobilize support, they bring unique perspectives that need to be taken into account (united_nations, 1995, para. 104).
Box IV.1
The World Programme of Action for Youth on the importance of participation
The World Programme of Action for Youth recognizes that the active engagement of young people is central not only to their own development but to the development of society as a whole. It acknowledges that young people are part of the solution to the difficulties facing societynot another problem to be solved.
Because the economic, social, and political participation of youth is essentially a prerequisite for the implementation of the proposals included in all the other priority areas of the Programme of Action, promoting the involvement of young people is critically important. Proposals for action relating specifically to youth participation include the following:
(a) Improving access to information in order to enable young people to make better use of their opportunities to participate in decisionmaking;
(b) Developing and/or strengthening opportunities for young people to learn their rights and responsibilities, promoting their social, political, developmental and environmental participation, removing obstacles that affect their full contribution to society and respecting, inter alia, freedom of association;
(c) Encouraging and promoting youth associations through financial, educational and technical support and promotion of their activities;
(d) Taking into account the contribution of youth in designing,
implementing and evaluating national policies and plans affecting their concerns;
(e) Encouraging increased national, regional and international cooperation and exchange between youth organizations;
(f) Inviting Governments to strengthen the involvement of young people in international forums, inter alia, by considering the inclusion of youth representatives in their national delegations to the General Assembly.
The environment was identified as one of the original ten priority areas in the World Programme of Action for Youth. While climate change was not considered a high priority at the time the Programme was adopted, the deterioration of the natural environment was. Interest in the environment intensified over the years, becoming one of the principal concerns of young people worldwide. In 2008, youth delegates to the united_nations General Assembly identified climate change as one of their key priority areas for action in the lead-up to the regular Assembly sessions. During the General Assembly debate that year, youth delegates spoke about the eagerness of young people to participate in decision-making on critical issues such as climate change.
Another important avenue for youth participation in united_nations intergovernmental processes is the Youth Caucus of the united_nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD Youth Caucus). The Youth Caucus is the interface used by the major group representing the interests of children and young people around the world, as mandated by chapter 25 of Agenda 21, to communicate the perspectives of youth and coordinate their participation in the meetings of the Commission on Sustainable Development, and to increase youth visibility and involvement within this context. The Youth Caucus is an international network of 2,000 youth leaders from more than 1,000 youth organizations, many of which are national networks that bring together young people with a desire to contribute to the creation of a more sustainable world. The Youth Caucus facilitates the introduction of youth perspectives to the Commission on Sustainable Development, which is the highest-level forum within the united_nations system for sustainable development issues. In addition, the Youth Caucus fosters communication and the sharing of information between youth organizations that share an interest in sustainability (united_nations, CSD Youth Caucus, 2008).
Young people have also played a prominent role within the united_nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, especially at its seventh session (April 2008), whose special theme was Climate change, bio-cultural diversity and livelihoods: the stewardship role of indigenous peoples and new challenges. The Indigenous Youth Caucus brought together 145 indigenous young people from more than a dozen countries. In one of its statements to the Forum at the seventh session, the Caucus highlighted the role indigenous youth could play in the fight against climate change but also expressed its concern over the limited participation of indigenous youth in decision-making processes at the local, national, and international levels (see box IV.2).
Box IV.2
Mainstreaming indigenous peoples issues in international development assistance programmes and funds dedicated to addressing climate change
Indigenous peoples, in particular indigenous youth, feel that they have been largely excluded from discussions on climate change at all levels. Indigenous youth have much to contribute and want the international community to recognize that their people offer unique perspectives and traditional knowledge that can be used in the development of mitigation and adaptation strategies. The involvement of indigenous youth as full and effective partners will be important to the suc-
UNEP is working in countries around the world to promote youth involvement in combating climate change. In February 2003 the Programmes Governing Council adopted the Tunza Youth Strategy, a long-term approach to engaging young people in the work of UNEP and supporting their participation in environmental activities and decision-making. Through Tunza, UNEP facilitates youth participation in global and regional environmental negotiations. Initiatives and activities, including the involvement of youth in the UNEP Governing Council sessions, are preceded by a Tunza youth retreat to enable youth leaders to review the issues being discussed and agree on their contributions to these discussions. The Tunza International Youth Conference, held every two years, is one of the key platforms for cooperation and interaction between UNEP and its youth partners.
As noted in chapter I of the present Report, the annual COP sessions constitute the principal forum for Governments to discuss climate change mitigation and adaptation policies as well as national commitments to reduce GHG emissions, so youth involvement in this process is especially critical. The youth presence at COP sessions has gradually gained strength and focus. What was once a relatively loose configuration of participantsgenerally small numbers of college students and young professionals from developed countrieshas evolved into more unified and coordinated youth contingents; hundreds attended COP 14 in Poznan, Poland, in 2008, and more than a thousand participated in COP 15 in Copenhagen.
Young people have been involved in climate change activities for some time. However, it was not until the year 2000, at COP 6 in The Hague, that a youth conference was organized and a youth declaration was prepared. Since then, each COP session has incorporated a youth event, and young people have actively sought official recognition from the Conference. In 2004, at COP 10 in Buenos Aires,
cess of global climate change mitigation efforts. Prioritizing programmes aimed at increasing climate change awareness among indigenous youth through education and training would greatly enhance their capacity to participate in decision-making processes. Such efforts could also include the strengthening of networks through which indigenous youth might share their perspectives and experiences with their counterparts in other areas of the world.
Paragraph 7 of the Anchorage Declaration, issued on 24 April 2009 at the conclusion of the Indigenous Peoples Global Summit on Climate Change, reads as follows: We call for adequate and direct funding in developed and developing States ... to enable Indigenous Peoples full and effective participation in all climate processes, including adaptation, mitigation, monitoring and transfer of appropriate technologies in order to foster our empowerment, capacity-building, and education. We strongly urge relevant united_nations bodies to facilitate and fund the participation, education, and capacity-building of Indigenous youth and women to ensure engagement in all international and national processes related to climate change.
Many of the other united_nations organizations that deal with youth issues have identified climate change as a key concern and have made it the focus of various initiatives. For example, the united_nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF), in partnership with UNEP, has developed Unite for Climate, a social networking tool that serves as a platform for youth exchange and mobilization for action on climate change. Unite for Climate also enables UNICEF and other united_nations agencies to communicate with youth. The groups software is designed to work in areas with connectivity or bandwidth limitations and to accommodate varying skill levels among users, thereby maximizing participation.
youth participants issued a formal declaration that begins as follows: Youth participation in the COPs of the UNFCCC, as in many other international, national and local decision-making processes, is scarce and disarticulated. However, the decisions being taken significantly affect our life at present and in the future (Youth: Protagonists, Not Spectators, 2004). The following year, more than a hundred youth from 24 countries attended the International Youth Summit at COP 11 in Canada, articulating their shared vision in a youth declaration entitled Our Climate, Our Challenge, Our Future. This document included a set of demands that focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation policy requirements. The Declaration also reiterated the need for a permanent, funded youth constituency to be included in the international climate change negotiation process by the time the COP met at its next session. Over the past several years the participation of youth, including individuals sponsored by Governments and NGOs, has continued to grow. Young people have become increasingly involved in Conference activities, participating in media events, meeting with Government delegations, and expanding the global youth climate change network while continuing to lobby for official status at the COP sessions.
Some of the more recent COP sessions drew over 500 youth delegates from more than 50 nations. In Bali in 2007 and in Poznan in 2008, the young delegates were given the opportunity to make formal statements to the Conference of the Parties on behalf of youth around the world. Because large numbers of youth were in attendance, it was possible to stage large-scale theatrical activities to drive home environmental messages and attract world media attention. The increasing size of the youth contingent prompted the development of strategies for the establishment of an internal secretariat and other governance structures to manage and coordinate the participation and activism of youth delegations (Gracey, 2008).
COP 15, held in Copenhagen in December 2009, attracted more than a thousand young people from over 100 countries. A special youth event, Young and Future Generations Day, was held to showcase different youth activities and draw the delegates attention to the efforts being made by young people to address climate change. The youth day encompassed more than 40 events, including a high-level side event in the form of an intergenerational inquiry on climate change solutions, as well as other side events focusing on the role of education in relation to the climate crisis, forest protection, intergenerational equity, and agriculture. Attendees of all ages showed support for the youth day initiatives by wearing orange clothing.
The youth attending COP 15 called for fair, ambitious, and binding commitments from Governments to prevent catastrophic climate change and ensure the survival of present and future generations (see box IV.3). The young participants voiced their support for those countries that made the most progressive demands and put the most challenging targets on the table. Its late, but not too late! was the message conveyed by young people (Howe, 2009). The collective demands put forward by youth in Copenhagen included the following:
Ensure climate justice;
Limit the global temperature increase to 1.5 C;
Reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide levels to 350 parts per million or less;
Commit developed countries to allocating at least 5 per cent of their gross domestic product to finance adaptation measures by 2020;
Reduce the emissions of developed countries to at least 45 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020 (UNFCCC Youth Constituency, 2009b);
Reduce the emissions of developed countries to at least 80 per cent below 1990 levels by 2050.
Box IV.3
Youth voices at the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 15)
I came as a part of the Pacific youth delegation, but here I united with the Caribbean, the Maldivian, and the International Youth Climate Movement as a whole, calling out with one united voice for only 1.5 degrees of temperature rise and 350 ppm of carbon concentration in the atmosphere, said Krishneil Narayan from Fiji. If the youth can unite as one movement at COP 15, we expect the leaders deciding our future to do the same (UNFCCC Youth Constituency, 2009b).
Prisca Randriamampihavana, a 20-year-old youth delegate from Madagascar, challenged the negotiators at COP 15: We want to ask world leaders, how old will you be in 2050? (UN-
FCCC Youth Constituency, 2009a).
status during the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and will likely be granted permanent status at COP 17. This unprecedented coalition of participating youth organizations acts as a single entity with a unified voice during official negotiations. As a recognized constituency, young people are given a speaking slot at the high-level segment of COP sessions and can make statements during the plenary. They are also able to cooperate more closely with the united_nations Climate Change secretariat, helping to organize meeting logistics and coordinate fundraising to increase the participation of young people, especially youth from the global south. Conference support for youth involvement is already in evidence; generous funding from the Government of the Netherlands enabled 50 youth from the global south to attend COP 15 in December 2009.
The recognition and support of the youth constituency is in line with the provisions of article 6 of the Framework Convention, which calls for an increase in education, training, and public awareness on climate change issues.
COP 15 marked the first time youth were officially recognized as a formal constituency, though the group was assigned provisional status pending a final decision that would legitimize its position by COP 17 (see box IV.4). The youth constituency has already set up an internal system for democratic decision-making and information sharing and is very well-organized. It keeps the united_nations Climate Change secretariat informed of its progress and contributes to crucial discussions and decisions relating to youth participation and representation. The constituency plays an important role in capacity-building for a growing number of youth participants, with those who have been involved for some time helping newcomers understand how the process works through engagement in various advocacy activities. The youth constituency is also active on the political front, producing powerful messages for interventions at the plenary and building relationships with other stakeholders, including the chairs of negotiating bodies and regional groups as well as the other constituencies. All of this has been achieved in a remarkably short time by a group that appears to enjoy an extraordinary degree of unity, coherence, and cohesion.
Growing numbers of young people are participating in united_nations efforts to combat climate change, seeking to influence the global policy agenda through more organized environmental activism and lobbying to promote sustainable development. More youth than ever before are attending international meetings, making their voices heard as they demand that Governments and policymakers undertake the commitments necessary to tackle climate change and ensure global sustainability. Unfortunately, while their ideas, concerns, initiatives, and calls for action are being acknowledged, youth are rarely given the consideration they deserveor the opportunity to participate meaningfullyin the formulation of climate change policy.
Box IV.4
The status of the youth constituency in activities carried out under the auspices of the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
The youth constituency, referred to as YOUNGO, was assigned provisional
The section below takes a closer look at the various levels of youth participation, provides examples of youth involvement in climate change initiatives at each of these levels, and considers what needs to be done to ensure that youth play a more active role in decisionmaking.
YOUTH PARTICIPATION: CLIMBING THE LADDER TOWARDS GENUINE EMPOWERMENT
Young people across the globe have been at the forefront of efforts to respond to climate change. However, they have fought a protracted uphill battle to ensure that their voices are not just heard, but heeded. Although youth are allowed to participate in many of the higher-level policy processes, consultations, and activities, they often remain on the periphery, excluded from decision-making. Young people want to be involved and, given their stake in the
(Biffi, 2008).
Significant awareness-raising efforts have been undertaken to ensure that young people are informed about the causes and consequences of climate change. Such efforts are important in that they provide a solid knowledge base and in some cases facilitate the development of targeted skills, but they essentially constitute a one-way process that contributes only minimally to building capacities for responding to climate change through meaningful engagement. When young people are empowered to collaborate in setting the agenda for change and shaping policy, they become full partners in action, strengthening the communitys capacity to make a difference.
The ladder of participation
Youth involvement in climate change initiatives may be examined in terms of levels of empowerment, represented as a ladder of participation (International Association for Public Participation, 2007). The lowest rungs on the ladder sometimes constitute what may be termed pseudo-participation (Hart, 1992), where young people serve as window dressing, their involvement is essentially tokenistic, or they are manipulated into arriving at predetermined outcomes. The middle and higher rungs, however, represent a progression towards genuine empowerment and include the following:
1. Informing and educating young people;
2. Gatheringinformationfromyoungpeople;
3. Consulting with young people;
4. Involving young people;
5. Establishing collaborative partnerships with young people.
Providing young people with information and education on climate change establishes a firm foundation for environmental advocacy. On this first rung of the ladder, however, youth are offered few, if any, opportunities to influence policy decisions. Involvement at this level is usually limited to exchanging ideas and building relationships. In some instances, youth are recruited to help coordinate information sessions or to serve as peer educators.
On the second rung of the ladder, information is collected from young people who care about the environment and want to share their perspectives. At this level of participation youth are heard, but those in positions of authority make no commitment to acting in ways that give the youth voice any force.
The third rung is consulting with youth. This level constitutes a potential tipping point, as it is here that the balance may begin to shift towards meaningful involvement and genuine empowerment. Consultation entails the mutual exchange of information and allows for the possibility that the input of young people might have an impact on the direction policy takes or on the content of programmes being developed.
By the time the fourth rung is reached, the involvement of youth is being actively sought. Young people are given the opportunity to help set the agenda, contribute to deliberations, or otherwise influence the course of events.
At the fifth rungthe highest levelyouth are engaged in collaborative partnerships. In such settings, young people are empowered to share in managing the decision-making process, which includes identifying solutions and reaching agreement as to how the solutions generated will be implemented.
At each of the levels of participation represented by the rungs of the ladder, actions initiated by youth improve their prospects for exerting genuine influence. Every level constitutes a necessary step to the top but is also important in itself. Participation on the lower rungs often leads to action further up the ladder and to enhanced empowerment; however, even those young people whose involvement remains on the lower rungs may contribute to an initiatives success.
In general, the key principles of effective and authentic participation are clarity of intent (the purpose is understood by all involved); inclusiveness (participants are diverse and include those not often heard); participativeness (opportunities are available for two-way exchange, mutual learning, and relationship-building); and the scope to influence (the potential exists to bring about change in some way or to some degree).
Youth initiatives focusing on climate change have a broad range of entry points, and there are examples from all over that show how youth have been involved in mitigation and adaptation efforts. The youth activities highlighted in the sections below constitute a representative sample of the types of advocacy in which young people are currently engaged. Most of the examples derive from contributions submitted by youth and youth-led organizations in response to a call for inputs to the present World Youth Report. They are not linked to specific rungs on the ladder of participation but instead reflect the gradual progression from awarenessraising to active collaboration. The examples in this chapter are illustrative and do not comprise a comprehensive catalogue of youth initiatives. The seeming predominance of developed country activities in the sections to come is a reflection of the availability of relevant informa tion and inputs; it is unclear at this point whether youth involvement in climate change initiatives is more prevalent in developed countries or whether youth in developed countries are simply more likely to report on their activities. It is also possible that many youth initiatives in developing countries are subsumed under another headingsuch as disaster planning or reliefand are therefore not readily identifiable as relating to climate change.
Before young people can participate effectively in mitigation and adaptation activities, they must learn about both climate change and successful advocacy. Increased content knowledge is essential, but young people also need to know how to interpret data and assess risks, probabilities, and opportunities. It might appear that participation at this level is limited to one-way, top-down communication in which experts tell young people what they think they should know, contributing little to their empowerment. However, there are many examples (including those highlighted below) of youth actively and successfully educating each other in formal, informal, and non-formal contexts. Qualitative evaluations of peer education in other areas have shown that young people appreciate and are positively influenced by well-designed and properly supervised peer-led instruction. Youth serving as peer educators have the opportunity to improve their own knowledge and skills and generally find the experience both challenging and rewarding. In many instances peer educators have been shown to be more effective than adults in establishing norms and changing attitudes (united_nations Childrens Fund, 2009).
International
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (2009a) include 186 member National Societies, many of which sponsor dynamic youth volunteer programmes. Initiatives focused on raising awareness about climate change include the following:
Youth-led community-based approaches to raising awareness about climate change have included the production of dramas and puppet shows and the devel opment of informational materials for children. Hundreds of volunteers have been trained, and thousands within the community have participated in local forums or in national conferences or meetings. Many have also benefited from microprojects relating to climate change.
Students planted trees and put on a hand-made-puppet show to inform audiences about climate change and reducing the risk of landslides.
The Kick the Carbon Habit Education Campaign was initiated by UNEP to empower and educate youth and the general public in the area of environmental responsibility. Youth leaders and ground teams are recruited to host educational events focusing on climate change issues, where participants are provided with relevant information and learn concrete ways to reduce their carbon footprint and address climate change. Twenty young people spearhead the Campaign. (Kick the Carbon Habit Youth Network, n.d.)
The Fiji Red Cross Society is developing a youth group curriculum on disaster awareness that will include a segment on climate change (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009a).
Young people participated in a video proFIJI
duction on the effects of climate change.
Youth are educating other youth about climate change through drama.
Enviroschools is a national initiative that takes a whole-school approach to education for a sustainable future. The programme encourages creative thinking and the acknowledgement of others perspectives and seeks to bring about long-term behavioural change by helping students think critically about the long-term impact of their attitudes, values, and lifestyle choices (Enviroschools Foundation, n.d.).
The Honiara Youth and Climate Change Forum, held in November 2008, brought young people from the Solomon Islands together with an elder to learn about climate change through discussion and fieldwork. Participants concluded the event with the development of personal and group action plans (Jionisi and Owens, n.d.). The Solomon Islands Red Cross Society, one of the main organizers of the Forum, began engaging youth in a climate change programme in 2007. Initiatives have included school awareness programmes, village assessments, radio quizzes, advocacy activities, and the building of youth networks. Young people are involved both as participants and as volunteers (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009a).
Young people have come together in numerous forums around the world to share information and perspectives on climate change. In the process, they have strengthened their social capacity to respond to the challenges associated with this issue. The distinction between informing/educating and information-sharing/ capacity-building is not always clear, but it may be argued that the latter is situated slightly higher on the ladder of participation because it entails active learning, sharing, and developing. Capacity-building involves raising awareness, but it also encompasses building analytical skills and enhancing decision-making abilities. These outcomes can be achieved through different approaches, including training, formal education, seminars and workshops, and networking. Many of the examples of youth participation that appear elsewhere in this chapter incorporate elements of capacity-building. However, those highlighted below are mainly awareness-raising activities. Most appear to be isolated events; it has been suggested that the effectiveness of such activities might be enhanced if they were embedded in longterm programmes that integrated a number of capacity-building approaches (united_nations Environment Programme, Division of Technology, Industry and Economics, Economics and Trade Branch, 2006).
In August 2008, the Indian Youth Summit on Climate Change brought together young people from India and abroad to share views and establish collaborative partnerships. The Summit included keynote speakers and presentations from experts and organizations working with climate change, youth presentations and the exchange of ideas among young people, an international youth panel on climate change, human art formation, and a film festival. One major outcome was a youth declaration that included individual commitments and a collective pledge to work towards a better future in India, together with a strong statement on the importance of youth engagement in policy-making on climate change at all levels (Indian Youth Summit on Climate Change, 2008).
Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction programmes led by the Red Cross Society have engaged youth in workshops on disaster risk assessment and response, including the production of a drama about flooding events that have occurred. This has prompted some young people to initiate similar activities in their own communities. The two programmes have also involved youth in planting pandanus trees and cleaning up the shoreline. Youth unemployment is high in Tuvalu, and while such programmes do not provide any monetary compensation, they do offer youth an opportunity to engage in productive work that benefits their communities. Through the Red Cross Society, youth have also participated in school programmes on climate change and in a national poster design competition focusing on this issue. (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009b)
You, Me, and the Climate, an initiative of The National Trust, provides 16to 19-year-old climateers with the organizational, communication, and leadership skills they need to become community advocates and get people in their area thinking about climate change and its consequences. The emphasis is not only on youth taking action, but on young people working together to give their actions force at the national and international levels through joint activities, coordinated media campaigns, and the use of the Web and other new media. (You, Me, and the Climate [YOMAC], n.d.).
YOUTH APPLYING INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES
About 1.8 billion people use the Internet on a regular basis for their work, leisure activities, and general living needs (Internet World Stats, n.d.). Ever-expanding communication networks are connecting people, organizations, and nations in ways that are unprecedented, with enormous potential for enhancing civic participationincluding involvement in climate change initiatives. Global Internet usage remains very uneven, however. Although it has grown exponentially in developing countries, penetration rates are still relatively low8.7 per cent in Africa, 20.1 per cent in Asia, and 28.8 per cent in the Middle East, compared with 76.2 per cent in North America (Internet World Stats, n.d.). Moreover, the global digital divide (the gap between those who have Internet access and those who lack access or the ability to use current technologies) is growing wider.
In the initiatives reviewed involving youth participation in climate change activities, especially in the developed world, computers and the Internet appear to be central to bringing young people together for dialogue and action. Climate change is a global challenge, and the Internet has facilitated the development of worldwide networks, collaborative partner ships, and youth-led discussion forums. Where Internet access is limited, other audio-visual and telecommunications technologies have been utilized to engage young people in creative new ways.
International
Make the Link, Be the Change uses a multilingual website and videoconferencing to develop climate change awareness among students. Participants learn about local environmental consequences, contributing factors, behaviour change, and partnerships using shared lesson plans. This is complemented by out-of-school work including essay writing, drawing, photography, and sculpture representing the impact of climate change. Some of the works created have been displayed at the World Museum Liverpool and at COP 15 as part of the Children in a Changing Climate display. Eighty schools in twelve countries are involved (Plan International, 2009).
TakingITGlobal uses information and communication technologies to provide opportunities for learning, capacity-building, self-development, and cross-cultural awareness. One of the aims of the organization is to increase recognition of the important role youth can play in decisionmaking processes. The TakingITGlobal website includes a page devoted to introducing youth to climate change issues and offers a downloadable version of the Climate Change Youth Guide to Action. A Web platform is made available to users interested in starting, running, and managing their own initiatives. (TakingITGlobal, n.d.).
In February 2009, the Indian Youth Climate Network organized an electric car caravan that stretched from Chennai to Delhithe longest such procession ever attempted. As the participants travelled, they reported on local innovative solutions to climate change, conducted numerous youth climate leadership training sessions, and engaged young people in brainstorming sessions. The stories they collected were written and disseminated in ways that appealed to youth, with many appearing as short movies on YouTube. The aim of the project was to show the world that India was doing something about climate change. (Indian Youth Climate Network, n.d.).
Children from a flood-prone informal settlement in Jakarta partnered in the production of a participatory video on climate change, and youth volunteers continue to use the video (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009a).
A university student intern produced a five-minute participatory video on climate change in collaboration with the Malawi Red Cross Society, engaging fifteen young people in the process (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009a).
The African Radio Drama Associations climate change project is a 26-episode radio production aimed at improving the capacity of smallholder farmers to respond to climate change. The important role of youth and women in sustainable agriculture is highlighted. (African Radio Drama Association, n.d.).
NUFF Global held an international youth film festival on climate change in 2007. In their productions, the enthusiastic young filmmakers share stories featuring challenges that have arisen as a result of climate change. Screened at the united_nations Climate Change conferences in Bali in 2007 and in Poznan in 2008, many of the films have garnered international attention. (NUFF Global, n.d.).
Fired Up Media reports from the front lines of the youth climate movement and trains climate change activists through an online organizing wiki. The network is harnessing dynamic advances in digital communications and other new media, creative social entrepreneurship, and ex isting youth media on and off campus to build a revolutionary media network. The aim is to empower the global youth climate movement to address the challenge of climate change in the most effective way possible. Youth-produced stories and short videos are featured on the website. (Fired Up Media, n.d.).
The collection of local data on social indicators and the physical environment, the creation of databases, descriptions of initiatives, and benchmarking studies provide a deeper understanding of the area-specific effects of climate change and also contribute to building knowledge and skills that can increase local adaptive capacity. Young people around the world have both led and participated in data-gathering initiatives that have bolstered climate change research and strengthened local resilience to the consequences of climate change.
International
Our Task, an international youth network involved in promoting awareness of global sustainable development issues, works with mentors in analysing, assessing, and summarizing relevant trends, models, and strategies to produce the Youth Earth Plan, an annual publication that presents ... the thinking of young adults on the large-scale changes needed if youthand all forms of lifeare to reach 2100 safely. Forty young adults from fifteen coun tries are involved. (Our Task, 2008).
The China Youth Climate Action Network comprises more than a hundred universities, providing a platform for sharing solutions and taking action to combat climate change. The Network is especially active in research and development relating to campus sustainability. Core projects include a survey on youth awareness, a green campus initiative that includes the collection of data on campus GHG emissions and their impact, the maintenance of a university energy consumption database, and the development and dissemination of learning materials to increase awareness among youth. The Network recently produced the China Youth Climate Change Guidebook, which is being used on university campuses to promote student awareness and activism. One of the main goals of the Network is to reduce emissions by 20 per cent on 40 pilot campuses. (China Youth Climate Action Network, 2008).
Dynamics of Biodiversity Loss and Permafrost Melt in Lake Hovsgol National Park, a world_bank/Global Environment Facility project, hired 23 young graduate and post-graduate researchers to help investigate the effects of localized climate variability on permafrost. Working with national mentors and international academics, the young researchers were offered invaluable learning opportunities in areas such as biostatistics, decomposition and ecology of local plants, meteorology, and permafrost studies. (Academy of Natural Sciences, n.d.).
and Oswald, 2008).
YOUTH INVOLVEMENT IN CAMPAIGNING, LOBBYING, AND ADVOCACY
Youth organizations engaged in campaigning, lobbying, advocacy, and networking represent the most prevalent and possibly the strongest form of youth involvement in the climate change movement. These organizations employ a variety of strategies to achieve their objectives. Some focus on encouraging young environmental advocates to take the first steps towards action, while others work directly with Government entities to facilitate the integration of green values at the State level. A number of youth organizations concentrate on a particular area, such as addressing legal challenges. A growing number are engaging in Internet activism together with direct action in order to maximize the impact of their efforts and to achieve the critical mass needed to make their voices heard.
International
Established by Greenpeace International in 2003, Solar Generation is a network of young people from 15 countries engaging in climate change advocacy and activism. (Greenpeace, n.d.).
Young people on high school and college campuses across Canada and the united_states have joined the Campus Climate Challenge to demand 100 per cent clean energy policies at their institutions. More than 30 youth organizations and 600 campuses are involved. (Campus Climate Challenge, n.d.).
The Indian Youth Climate Network is a coalition of Indian youth and youth-oriented organizations concerned about climate change. The Network has launched, supported, or participated in a wide range of initiatives, including an agents-of-change programme that prepares Indian youth delegations for participation in united_nations climate change negotiations; a rural clean energy project; a campus climate challenge; a climate leaders programme that provides youth with the leadership skills they need to initiate grassroots action in their own communities; and a climate solutions project that includes a website, outreach activities, and an engagement strategy to promote existing solutions to climate change. In recent years the Network has organized a number of Indian youth summits and participated in various youth festivals. (Indian Youth Climate Network, n.d.).
In February 2009, 12,000 young people from across the united_states converged on Washington, D.C., to demand bold, comprehensive, and immediate action on climate change at the national level. The aim was to persuade the new Obama Administration to reclaim the future of youth through the implementation of ambitious climate and clean energy policies. Power Shift 09 built on the momentum generated by the Power Vote campaign, which was initiated by the Energy Action Coalition to mobilize 1 million young climate voters and make the global climate crisis a key issue in the 2008 election. (Power Shift, n.d.).
The international frameworks and initiatives described previously have created numerous opportunities for young people to have their say. Similarly, several Governments and international agencies have set up youth advisory councils and other consultative initiatives aimed at eliciting the views of youth on climate change; some of these are highlighted below. Acknowledging the need for dialogue is a step in the right direction, but the extent to which such consultations have resulted in meaningful youth participation is not yet clear. Genuine engagement requires that young people be given the space and opportunity to express their views and that organizations make a commitment to respond to their concerns.
International
A concept and issues paper entitled Towards a strategic framework on climate change and development for the world_bank Group was discussed at a youth consultation event to give young people an opportunity to share their input (world_bank, 2008b).
In the months leading up to the 2007 Africa-Europe Youth Summit, consultations were held with young people from Africa and Europe to obtain their input on global issues, including climate change. (EuropAfrica.net, n.d.).
The Department for International Development held a Youth Consultation event on 20 March 2009, soliciting the views of youth on climate change and the economic crisis to inform policy-making by the Department. Fifty young people between the ages of 16 and 24 were involved (united_kingdom, Department for International Development, 2009).
Young individuals and youth organizations around the world are actively initiating responses to climate change. Young people are taking personal and social responsibility for protecting the world they live in, engaging in stewardship and advocacy aimed at improving the resilience of their local environment and strengthening the relationship between people and their natural surroundings.
The Young Mens Christian Association (YMCA-Ghana) is engaged in a project to curb deforestation and environmental degradation, which is adversely affecting livelihoods. The project includes a treeplanting programme focusing on women farmers, who traditionally cannot own land, and a youth-run seedling nursery. (World Alliance of YMCAs, n.d.).
The Children International Youth Council in India secured a grant to address climate change in a rural area near Kolkota. The initiative included reforestation activities, efforts to discourage fossil fuel use, and a community awareness programme. Some 1,500 trees were planted by more than 1,000 teenagers and their families. (Children International, n.d.).
Korean students from all over the country participated in the CO2 Zero Eco Campus Competitions, submitting climate-friendly initiatives they had designed. The winners were provided with funding for their projects. (HyunJin, n.d.).
Girl Guides attend camps where they are trained as community educators to help rural women respond to the challenges of climate change through improved agricultural practices (World Association Girl Guides and Girl Scouts, n.d.).
Manos a la Tierra is a youth-led alliance that has been involved in reforestation activities since 2007. With over 6,000 volunteers, the alliance has planted more than 70,000 trees and has raised awareness about climate change and the importance of water and biodiversity in the Mexico City metropolitan area. (Manos a la Tierra, n.d.).
Youth affiliated with the Samoa Red Cross Society produced a community-based drama with a climate change theme. Working together with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, they were also involved in community-based vulnerability and capacity assessments and in the implementation of action plans they had designed. (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009a).
Student Switch Off is an energy-saving initiative in which university residence halls compete to reduce their energy usage. Eleven universities are currently involved. (Student Switch Off, n.d.).
The Climate Change Action Club was initiated by two students at Brookline High School in Massachusetts. They set up a carbon cafe where town residents could obtain information on climate change and pledge to take action to reduce their carbon footprint. (Ullman, 2009).
The Clinton Global Initiative University, established in 2007, brings young people together to discuss urgent social and environmental problems and to undertake Commitments to Action. Since 2008, more than 3,000 commitments have been made by students, universities, and youth organizations. For example, students from
Columbia Universitys Engineers without Borders Uganda Programme have pledged to install a multifunctional energy platform in one farm cooperative in Uganda using jatropha oil as a sustainable fuel source. Several other campuses in the united_states have made commitments to infuse climate change awareness and sustainability into campus culture. (Clinton Global Initiative, Commitments Department, 2009).
Policy development constitutes an institu tionalized form of influence that typically has a broader reach than one-time initiatives. Be cause policies shape budgets, decisions, and actions at the local, national, and international levels, they often have a significant public im pact. Over the past few decades young people have issued repeated demands for a greater say in climate change policy development and decision-making but have largely been ignored.
There are some notable exceptions, however,
where young people have been empowered 63 to help develop climate change policies at dif ferent levels. In some instances, young people have initiated these efforts, while in others, governing organizations have facilitated youth involvement. Both avenues have led to the same outcome: youth are finally beginning to break through the power barrier and collaborate in shaping the policies that will affect them in the years to come.
On 15 November 2008, 470 young people participatedboth virtually and in-personin the first IDEAL-EU pan-European town meeting on climate change. The event, held simultaneously at three venues in France, Italy, and Spain, included a full day of discussion and debate focusing on the united_nations policy agenda on climate change. Key questions posed and addressed by youth at the meeting included the following: How can Europe reduce its use of fossil fuels? Why are renewable energies currently not widespread? What measures would be effective in reducing CO2 emissions? How can we reduce the consumption of energy? What could we change in our daily habits? Whats wrong with the current model of socio-economic development? The participants were able to vote electronically on innovative proposals emanating from this brainstorming phase. (IDEAL-EU, n.d.).
The International Student Initiative for Action on Climate Change provides young academics and professionals with the opportunity to contribute to the development of climate change mitigation policies aimed at protecting their regions tropical forests. The Initiative is built around a network of graduate students and young professionals in Latin Americawith regional teams in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexicowho focus on guiding and supporting the development of public policy that addresses the role of tropical forests as carbon sources and sinks. Young people are involved in multiple aspects of policy development, including conducting background research, engaging in policy dialogue, participating in seminars, and consulting with policy-makers, forest specialists, members of academia, and other students. The Initiative has had a genuine impact on policy in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. In Brazil, for example, the efforts of the regional team led to the development of new legislation making it more difficult for banks to finance illegal logging projects. (International Student Initiative for Action on Climate Change, n.d.).
The Nepalese Youth for Climate Action coalition has opened discussions on climate change policy and has developed a draft policy document for stakeholder comment (Nepalese Youth for Climate Action, n.d.).
SustainUS is a united_states-based youth-led organization engaged in grassroots advocacy and education as well as policy advocacy and development relating to sustainability. In an effort to influence policy, SustainUS delegations work with Government entities, civil society groups, and other youth organizations. Since 2003, through its agents-of-change programme, SustainUS has sent youth delegations to several conferences and summits, including the COP sessions.
The organizations website includes a wiki for the development of policy positions. (SustainUS, n.d.).
YOUTH AS PARTNERS IN DECISION-MAKING
Young people can make important contributions and have a significant impact on decision-making outcomes when they are given the opportunity to help frame the issues, develop alternatives, and identify solutions. Youth involvement at this level appears to be increasing but is still relatively rare. Even less frequently, final decisions are placed in the hands of young people and commitments are made to implement these decisions. In both instances, youth engage in collaborative and empowered decision-making.
In El Salvador, Plan International is actively involving children and young people in environmental resource management and disaster risk reduction. The country is highly vulnerable to disasters, and the risk is increasing with climate change. Disasters take a high toll on the population, and children and youth have traditionally been among those least able to defend themselves against the attendant threats. Plan Internationals work in this area has had a dual focus: raising awareness among children and youth and engaging them in the implementation of disaster risk management activities. The organizations efforts began with the establishment of schoolbased childrens clubs in which students mapped disaster risks in their area and discussed what they could do in the event of a disaster. As the club participants have grown older, they have begun to take an active role in managing disaster risk in their areas and in lobbying the Government for change. In one project initiated by a youth club, for example, young people successfully lobbied to stop the quarrying of stone from a riverbed because it was increasing the flood risk. In this instance, youth took control of climate change adaptation in their community. (Plan International, n.d.).
The New York University (NYU) Sustainability Initiative, launched in 2006, is a col laborative endeavour that brings together students, faculty, staff, alumni, parents, and neighbours of NYU to promote better environmental performance and a green culture on campus. The Initiatives advisory body is the Sustainability Task Force, whose 60 members represent key university constituencies and are involved in various working groups, outreach activities, and the administration of a green grants fund used to support projects led by NYU students, faculty, and staff. The various stakeholders have worked together to assess current practices and have created a prioritized green action plan for NYU. Overall, there is a balanced mixture of student-led and staff-led initiatives. Young people are running and participating in programmes and activities in areas as diverse as bicycle recycling, gardening, cooking, project management, and research. (New York University, n.d.).
YOUTH MOBILIZING THEMSELVES: YOUTHLED ORGANIZATIONS
Although there is some general concern about youth disengagement, the commitment of young people to civic engagement remains strong. Young activists are effectively combining new advocacy approaches with the more traditional participatory structures of previous generations. They are increasingly developing informal, non-hierarchical ways to communicate and organize, using the Internet, mobile telephones, and other high-technology communication tools; however, membership in formal organizations remains critically important.
Young people are more likely to participate if their peers are involved as well. Youth-led organizations can provide a framework for young people to take action. Youth-led organizations around the world are having an impact on the climate change agenda and will continue to do so. Young people are proving that they constitute a formidable force when they come together under one banner for a specific cause in this case, climate change.
Youth-led organizations may start out as isolated entities with a limited focus. Eventually they may form coalitions with similar groups,
broadening their reach. In recent years a number of youth coalitions have banded together under the umbrella of regional and global youth movements. The International Youth Climate Movement, for example, is a worldwide coalition of youth organizations working to inspire, empower, and mobilize members of the younger generation to take action on climate change. Regional networks that have joined the Movement include the Australian Youth Climate Coalition (see box IV.5), itself a coalition of more than two dozen youth organizations from across the country; the Canadian Youth Climate Coalition, made up of 48 youth organizations; the China Youth Climate Action Network, which includes seven youth environmental organizations; the French Youth Coalition for Climate and Social Justice, a collective of 13 youth movements; the Indian Youth Climate Network; the Japan Youth Ecology League; the Malaysian Youth Climate Justice Network; South Asia Youth for Environment Education; and the UK Youth Climate Coalition. Other national, regional, and global coalitions and movements have been established that have the same goal as the International Youth Climate Movement. (International Youth Climate Movement, n.d.).
Box IV.5
Youth climate campaigning down under
The 50,000-member Australian Youth Climate Coalition develops, supports, and oversees a number of initiatives. Recent activities in which the Coalition has been involved include Power Shift, an Australian youth climate conference held in July 2009; an ongoing Youth Climate Leadership Skills programme; a petition for the establishment of strong emissions targets; a green jobs programme; and a school-based programme to support advocacy. The Coalition has also sent youth delegations to the most recent sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (Australian Youth Climate Coalition, n.d.).
Between 14 and 21 September 2009 more than 37,000 young people participated in Youth Decide, Australias first national youth climate vote and one of the worlds largest-ever per capita mobilizations of young people on climate change. Youth Decide was organized by the Australian Youth Climate Coalition in partnership with World Vision Australia, bringing young people together to speak with a united voice to compel the Government of Australia to demonstrate the leadership required to secure an ambitious, fair, and binding global climate agreement at COP 15. A total of 330 youthled voting events were set up to mobilize youth support. The overall results indicated that more than 90 per cent of voters wanted to see a commitment in Copenhagen to reduce emissions by at least 40 per cent, and an overwhelming 97.5 per cent of young people voted for emissions targets stronger than those currently proposed by the Government. (Youth Decide, n.d.).
all over Europe and is set up to represent their common interests and concerns. The Forum recently adopted a comprehensive position paper on climate change that calls for decisive action, focusing on adaptation, mitigation, financing, and governance. The paper also emphasizes the importance of supporting youth advocacy and of involving young people in decision-making and policy development processes. (European Youth Forum, 2008; Youth Forum Jeunesse, 2009).
The World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts, another ICMYO participant, has worked with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the united_nations and UNICEF in developing tools and resources for climate change education. Available materials include a guide for teachers and youth leaders on how to undertake climate change activities and initiatives, an educational booklet, a challenge badge, resource packs, and information on organizing drawing competitions. In addition, the Association is a partner organization in the Unite for Climate Web portal, an entry point for global youth action on climate change (see above). (World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts, n.d.).
As shown throughout this chapter, small NGOs around the world are playing a crucial role in climate change mitigation and adaptation. Unfortunately, their work is often not as well documented as that of the larger, better-funded NGOs. Greater attention must be focused on the successful initiatives undertaken by all types of organizations, regardless of their size or complexity, so that good practices can be identified and replicated.
Young people can combat climate change not only as members of youth organizations, but also as individuals. Each of the worlds 1.2 billion young women and men has an impact on the environment. Through the choices they make in their everyday lives, they contribute to the preservation or degradation of their natural surroundings.
International youth NGOs and regional youth platforms participating in the International Coordination Meeting of Youth Organisations (ICMYO) have also been active in climate change initiatives around the globe. ICMYO is held at least once a year to strengthen regional and international cooperation among youth organizations and to coordinate political inputs to global youth policy processes. Between the meetings, the participating organizations maintain contact with one another and operate as an informal network. In order to ensure that the coalition is as representative and inclusive as possible, a special effort is made to solicit the participation of youth organizations in countries and regions that typically receive less attention. The goal is to ensure that the perspectives of all young people are integrated into global processes. (International Coordination Meeting of Youth Organisations, n.d.).
The European Youth Forum, or Youth Forum Jeunesse (YFJ), is one of the organizations participating in ICMYO. It is made up of about a hundred national youth councils and international youth NGOs that are federations of youth organizations in themselves. YFJ brings together tens of millions of young people from
Historically, the younger generation has promoted change and embraced innovative values. In many cases, youth have been the initiators of social movements that have given rise to cultural and social transformations (Maggi and others, 2001). While the young people of today constitute a major consumer group, many of them are dissatisfied with the consumer societies in which they live and are seeking alternative lifestyles. This could mean a drive for change.
The main constraints young people face in taking action include doubts about how and where to begin, limited confidence in their ability to make a difference, inadequate monetary resources, competing demands on their time, insufficient encouragement from peers, and a lack of political and community support. These are valid concerns, but they should not be perceived as insurmountable obstacles. The fact is that young people all over the world can realize their aspirations for a better world by introducing small changes in their daily lives, strengthening their commitment to action one step at a time. Although everyday measures to reduce carbon emissions and protect the environment may seem insignificant, they can add up and make a real differenceespecially when entire youth communities take part and young people are able not only to alter their own consumer behaviour but also to influence the consumption patterns of their peers and families.
Young people around the world are increasingly making small but important changes that represent essential steps in their transition to a more sustainable lifestyle. Youth can start right where they are, and many actually prefer this approach to organized action, promoting and implementing changes in their homes, social networks, and local communities. As noted in chapter III, consumption choices constitute a key area in which young people can exert a positive influence and make a real impact. As figure IV.1 shows, there are many different areas in which young individuals can take action to make their lifestyles greener and more sustainable. The suggestions included in the figure tend to be somewhat broad, but many of them can easily be adapted to local contexts.
Figure IV.1
AT HOME:
Turning the lights off when leaving a room
Installing compact fluorescent lighting (CFL)
Unplugging idle electronic items
Having several members of a household share televisions, computers, and other electronic items
Wearing an extra layer of clothing to reduce the need for heating
Reducing the temperature of the thermostat by a few degrees
Opening windows to create a draft and reducing air conditioner (AC) use
Using a ceiling fan to help circulate cool air
Cleaning/replacing dirty AC filters to increase the efficiency of AC units
Using more energy-efficient electronics and appliances
Taking showers instead of baths to reduce water use
Setting the water heater to 50o C (122o F) or lower
Using eco-friendly cleaning products
Reducing energy use by sharing a residence (not living alone)
Installing water-saving taps and shower heads
Using cold water when possible
Line-drying clothes
Running the dishwasher and washing machine only when they are full
Taking the stairs rather than the elevator
SHOPPING TRANSPORTATION:
BEHAVIOUR:
Saving rather than spending
Buying long-lasting products
Refraining from buying the newest version of a product if the current version is still functioning well
Using public transportation, biking, skating, or walking
Combining errands to avoid extra car trips
Carpooling
Renting a car from time to time rather than owning
Purchasing environmentally friendly products, including one recycled goods and items that are easily recyclable and biodegradable
Buying used or vintage clothing and furniture
Learning more about the products one buys, including their carbon footprint
Choosing eco-labelled and ethical-labelled goods and services
Choosing goods made/distributed by manufacturers and dealers with clear environmental and ethical policies and related codes of conduct
Avoiding unnecessary drives
Driving in a more fuel-efficient manner (for example, avoiding quick starts and stops and driving slowly)
Driving a more fuel-efficient car
Inflating a cars tires
Turning a car off rather than idling
Regularly changing a cars air filter
Not making any purchases for TRAVEL:
an entire day
CIVIL ACTION:
Sharing information on sustainable lifestyles with family and friends
Planting a tree
Conducting research on which products and lifestyle choices are eco-friendly
Joining campaigns to improve manufacturing and employment practices
Travelling less to faraway places
Engaging in local leisure activities
If flying cannot be avoided, taking direct flights
Avoiding overpacking: extra weight means more fuel burned and increased emissions
Buying certified carbon offsets
Exploring agro-tourism or eco-tourism
Staying longer in one location
Lodging with friends and relatives
For young people to be successful in driving change they require a strong support system that includes parents, teachers, community and religious leaders, the Government, the private sector, the media, and civil society. Various studies have also found that for behaviour change to occur, the willingness or need to address environmental problems must be complemented by both opportunity (the availability of means) and ability (access to means) (Tukker and others, 2008).
Existing infrastructure and social systems are not always supportive of positive change. Many countries have still not introduced policies that are specifically designed to promote environmentally friendly lifestyles. Such supportive policies, together with forward-looking urban policies and development planning, can be effective in helping youth to take action. For example, improving access to communal services used by young peopleincluding public transport, libraries, swimming pools, and community gardens or parksis one important means of reducing the multiplication of goods and services associated with highly individualized consumption patterns.
Political and other systemic barriers may also exist that effectively preclude meaningful civic engagement among youth. Although youth involvement is widespread and the value of youth participation is internationally acknowledged, the idea that giving young people a role in society can lead to better policy outcomes is far from being universally accepted. The rights and decision-making capacities of young people often remain unrecognized, and their potential as a valuable resource is seldom realized. Even in countries that acknowledge the need to provide young people with opportunities to participate in the policy-making process, youth involvement tends to be highly circumscribed; the views of young people are sought, but they are not allowed to influence decision-making and therefore remain on the fringes of democratic processes. Such restrictions can undermine the potential of young people as agents of social change.
The gap between intent and reality in youth empowerment is not surprising because decisionmaking mechanisms are rarely set up to allow ordinary adult citizens, let alone young people, to participate in decision-making processes. Institutionalized collaborative decision-making is difficult to find at any level of governance. Consequently, young peoplewho are typically at a relative disadvantage in terms of power and influencemay find it impossible to secure a formal place at the decision-making table. Institutionalizing collaboration would require the establishment of a formal relationship in which mutual rights and responsibilities are legally defined and societal sanctions are imposed if such engagement fails to occur. Official recognition is essential, but true institutionalization will occur only when youth participation in decision-making becomes embedded within the system and is viewed as the norm. Unfortunately, young people are nowhere near achieving this level of empowerment.
The worlds 1.2 billion young people have made it abundantly clear that they want to be involved in the decisions impacting society and addressing climate change is no exception. Throughout the world, youth have developed creative ways to raise awareness, share information, build capacities, and work together on climate change mitigation and adaptation practices  often achieving impressive results through their own initiatives.
In recent years, young people are increasingly attending global gatherings on climate change to express their concerns and press Governments for action. However, they are often denied participation in decision-making processes where their unique perspectives and innovative ideas could be integrated toward more effective policies.
Overall, political progress on the climate change agenda has been stagnant as significant policy adjustments towards more sustainable patterns of production and consumption have not been agreed upon. Delaying action imposes greater sacrificing on the part of youth populations and further strains socio-economic development. Circumstances such as these reverse progress and threaten the very base from which all societies prosper.
By and large, traditional economic growth patterns are environmentally unsustainable due, in part, to their heavy reliance upon the use of natural resources. Within the international community, consensus is emerging for a departure from current models. Enhancing development frameworks by integrating a Green Growth focus offers a pathway toward the transition to green economies including by addressing policy barriers.
In the residuum of the global financial and economic crisis arises an opportunity to bridge the gap from rhetoric to action. As policy-makers and economic managers, Governments are called upon to develop a global vision for a more equitable and greener future. Climate change poses a global threat and requires an inter-governmental response as a matter of urgency. However, commitments made at the international level should bear in mind varying national contexts. In order to provide the widest possible opportunity for universal implementation, national leadership must be able to translate global models into national strategies.
Broad-based partnerships  including Governments, the united_nations, the private sector, civil society and the scientific community  provide stakeholders with a platform to share knowledge and good practices. Partnerships can also diminish the marginalization of relevant points of view, including those of youth. Collective action of this nature is key to developing sound policies for thriving green economies.
While halting climate change and reversing its negative effects require steady political will and the implementation of a robust plan of action over the course of many decades, much can be done in the meantime to lay the groundwork for significant progress. With this knowledge and in the spirit of recognizing their positive contributions to society, young people should be encouraged and supported to take part in the universal endeavour to address climate change, including through meaningful participation in decision-making processes.
Now that you have read the World Youth Report: Youth and Climate Change, it is the hope that with this newly gained knowledge you are inspired to take on the challenges presented by climate change and do your part in achieving sustainable development goals. Here are some suggested steps youth can take toward mobilizing collective action for positive change:
GET INFORMED:
Keeping in step with the latest scientific advancements and political developments on the climate change agenda is important when advocating for change. Relevant and informed positions lead to better strategies and more success.
BE THE CHANGE:
Taking a more conscious approach to your everyday behaviours by considering the environmental and social consequences of your actions is a good first step in decreasing your carbon footprint. Practicing a sustainable lifestyle sets a positive example for others to follow; therefore, multiplying your personal efforts.
EDUCATE:
Share your knowledge, information and innovative ideas with others, including: your peers, school boards, community leaders, Government Officials, business owners, and so on. Encourage them to learn more about climate change and to modify their personal and work-place consumptive behaviours.
MOBILIZE:
Collectively, youth in action are a powerful force. Consider the deep convictions held by young people, especially with respect to their future prospects, together with the vast number of youth today. In some countries, youth populations out number all other groups so, youth groups have great lobbying potential from local to national levels.
VOLUNTEER:
Youth civic engagement has the potential to profoundly impact local communities sustainable development efforts. Donating your knowledge, skills and labour on activities such as environmental clean ups, building sustainable structures, and recycling programmes have both immediate and long-term effects.
PARTNER:
Partnerships for sustainable development contribute to the implementation of intergovernmental commitments and were a complementary outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. The UN Commission on Sustainable Development establishes partnerships with a variety of actors, including youth organisations, with the aim of contributing to the implementation of Agenda 21, Rio+5 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. Through formally established multi-sectoral partnerships, organizations have the opportunity to interact with a range of actors and increase their knowledge on emerging climate change issues.
ADVOCATE FOR 73
GOVERNMENT ACTION:
It is up to the current generation of leaders to take concrete steps to harness the potential young people represent in the fight against climate change. Governments should draw upon their youth populations to compliment their efforts and strengthen the implementation of sustainable development policies and programmes. Youth can call upon their Governments to:
Institutionalize youth participation in decision-making. Tokenistic arrangements must be replaced with formalized inclusive and deliberative processes that allow young people to routinely influence climate change policy development and decision-making. In addition, a mechanism to ensure serious and timely consideration of their proposals should also be established with a component to assess and explain the adaptation or rejection of their inputs. Just as in other democratic processes, institutionalized youth participation must be characterized by consistency, transparency, and accountability at all levels of decision-making.
Invest in youth initiatives. Strategies to secure funding for youth organizations involved in addressing climate change are required at local, national, regional and international levels. A climate change fund could be administered by and for young people to support initiatives that promote youth engagement in climate change adaptation and mitigation activities.
Establish a participatory role in international forums. Young people are now involved on a regular basis in the activities of various international advisory bodies, including within the united_nations system. The effectiveness of these bodies in integrating youth perspectives and facilitating youth empowerment should be evaluated with the aim of supporting the ladder of participation model outlined in chapter IV of this report. Actions such as granting permanent status to the youth constituency (YOUNGO) at COP 17 are a step in the right direction.
