A renewed global partnership for development
Executive Summary
In todays increasingly integrated world, the post-2015 development agenda must be conceived as a truly global agenda with shared responsibilities for all countries. The world has changed fundamentally since the adoption of the Millennium Declaration. It is faced with new challenges and opportunities, many of which require collective action. The renewed global partnership for development underpinning the post-2015 development agenda will need to evolve with the changing development landscape to enable transformative changes. To do so effectively, it should build on the strengths of the current global partnership for development while going beyond its present framework. Most importantly, it will have to be based on a strong commitment to engage in collective actions with a clear distribution of tasks between developed and developing countries.
Important lessons can be learned from the experience with the present global partnership for development. MDG 8 has played a central role in galvanizing aid, increasing market access, providing debt relief, improving access to ICT and essential medicines and other forms of support. It also helped bring greater focus to the special needs of the most vulnerable countries. Yet, MDG 8 also had important gaps and systemic shortcomings, and there is a large discrepancy between its initial level of ambition and its implementation. In addition, MDG 8 perpetuated a donor-recipient type of relationship and did not pay sufficient attention to mobilizing development financing other than aid.
Aid remains an important source of development finance, and the international community should reaffirm and set clear timelines for achieving its official development assistance (ODA) targets, especially for countries with special needs. Part of these external resources should be geared towards increasing the capacity of developing countries to mobilize domestic resources, while also promoting good governance and combating capital flight. The renewed global partnership should also continue to foster dialogue on debt sustainability beyond its narrow focus on HIPCs and should further look to build a more equitable multilateral trade system, concluding the Doha Round but also addressing supply-side constraints in developing countries, including through improved access to new technologies and long-term investment.
Further, a renewed global partnership will have to strengthen global governance by addressing weaknesses in international arrangements for collective decision-making. Currently, there is an inconsistency between a rules-based multilateral trading system and an essentially unregulated financial system. Areas such as investment, technology and aid are managed at the national level or through ad hoc coordination, global public goods are under-provisioned, and developing countries are not adequately represented in multilateral institutions and other normand standard-setting bodies. Creating a more inclusive and equitable system of global governance would help strengthen coherence within the global partnership and would contribute to creating an international enabling environment for development.
vi A renewed global partnership for development
Within the post-2015 framework, the global partnership will have to include explicit commitments from all countries across the goals and targets of the new development agenda, according to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. There could be explicit commitments towards a renewed global partnership for development, with a focus on creating an enabling environment for development, promoting the contribution of multiple partners, covering areas of common, and, in some cases, differentiated responsibilities. In addition to this broader international enabling environment goal, partnerships could be mainstreamed under each thematic goal. For accountability purposes, multi-stakeholder partnerships could also be mainstreamed under each thematic goal, strengthening the links between goals and the means of achieving them. This structure would help to better reflect the contributions of voluntary and purpose-specific partnerships, which could be coordinated and linked to the priority needs of developing countries in a more systematic manner.
Lastly, robust accountability mechanisms at the global, regional and national levels will be critical to increase the effectiveness of the renewed global partnership. By keeping track of progress, robust accountability will help ensure that commitments are being honoured by all sides. Member States have already taken a first step in strengthening global mutual accountability through the establishment of the ECOSOC Annual Ministerial Review and the biennial High-level Development Cooperation Forum, but strong political support from all countries will be needed to strengthen these measures.
This report is a live document that will be refined to reflect outcomes of ongoing processes and conversations on the post-2015 development agenda. It captures the findings from the global conversation launched through the UNDG national and thematic consultations through which people from all over the world have been invited to help Member States shape the future development agenda (see ). Further refinements to the report will be based on the findings from these consultations.
A renewed global partnership for development
I. Introduction
1. In the report Realizing the Future We Want for All the united_nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 united_nations Development Agenda1 laid out its main findings and recommendations for a development agenda beyond 2015, founded on the core values of human rights, equality and sustainability. It called for an integrated policy approach that ensures inclusive economic development, social progress, environmental sustainability and peace and security, and for a development agenda that facilitates transformational change to respond to the aspirations of all people for a world free of want and fear.
2. In the present report, the united_nations Task Team Working Group on Strengthening the global partnership for development to support the implementation of a post-2015 development agenda continues this analytical work and formulates recommendations on desirable features of a renewed global partnership for development that are required for a successful post2015 global development agenda. Main issues include the need to accelerate progress towards completion of the unfinished goals set out in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) agenda, and, at the same time, to find a response to the more ambitious objectives of sustainable development set out in the outcome document of the united_nations Conference on Sustainable Development
 
(Rio+20). This report reflects the shared understanding and equal contributions of all members of the united_nations System Task Team in a genuinely collaborative process. This report is a live document that will be refined to reflect outcomes of ongoing processes and conversations on the post-2015 development agenda. Notably, these improvements will capture the findings from the global conversation launched through the UNDG national and thematic consultations which has invited people from all over the world to help Member States shape the future development agenda (for details see ).
3. The main role of a renewed global partnership for development in the post-2015 era will be to provide countries with a supportive, enabling environment to ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the worlds peoples of present and future generations.2 To do so, it will have to build on existing commitments, accelerate efforts to achieve the goals and targets it had originally set, and expand its scope and depth to address new and emerging global challenges.
A renewed global partnership for development
 
II. Lessons learned from the present global partnership for development
4. The global partnership for development was conceived at the united_nations Millennium Summit in 2000 when Member States agreed to create an environment  at the national and global levels alike  which is conducive to development and to the elimination of poverty.3 This concept was further fleshed out in the Monterrey Consensus and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 8 has since become shorthand for the global partnership for development. It has taken shape to include the targets and indicators of MDG 8, related to aid, trade, debt relief and increased access to essential medicines and new technologies, as recommended in the Road map towards the implementation of the united_nations Millennium Declaration (see Box 1).
5. This section assesses the strengths and weaknesses of the present framework of the global partnership for development, as well as other multistakeholder partnerships. It also explores to what extent the underlying principles of the present global partnership for development remain relevant, with the intention of drawing recommendations for the post-2015 development agenda.
The Millennium Summit and the Monterrey Consensus supported global development through partnerships
A renewed global partnership for development
Strengths and weaknesses of the Global Partnership for Development
6. MDG 8 targets and indicators have served as an advocacy tool to galvanize efforts of the international community towards creating an enabling environment for development. The simple, transparent and easy-to-understand formulation has facilitated its use as an advocacy tool in international conferences and clearly identified the areas on which most stakeholders thought the world should focus. MDG 8 also recognized the needs of the most vulnerable countries and called for strengthening of commitments to increase support to least developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) and small island developing States (SIDS). It did not, however, single out the needs of countries emerging from conflict, which are lagging behind most in terms of MDG achievement.
7. Additional resources were mobilized, at least until the onset of the economic and financial crisis. Official development assistance (ODA) from the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) countries grew 63 per cent between 2000 and 2010 in 2010 constant prices.5 Several major donors have put timetables in place to achieve the united_nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI). However, in 2011, the lagged effects of the economic and financial crisis started to impinge upon aid budgets, which fell in real terms for the first time since 1997. Market access for exports from developing countries increased through a gradual decrease of tariffs and with support from an increase in Aid for Trade, which targets developing countries ability to improve their productive capacity with investments in trade related areas coming from ODA. Debt ratios decreased during the past several years, and 36 of the 39 heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs) have benefited from debt relief. Despite the success of debt-relief initiatives, 20 developing countries still remain at high risk of debt distress, including 7 countries that have concluded the HIPC process. Access to information and communication technologies increased dramatically, while efforts to increase access to affordable essential medicines have been strengthened.6
8. Despite the virtues of the MDG 8 framework, several gaps have become apparent in the scope of actors and areas covered. MDG 8 is the only Goal that gave direct responsibility to the developed countries. This perpetuated the donor-recipient paradigm, rather than calling for collective action at the multilateral level to achieve a stable global economic environment. MDG 8 lacked a strong normative foundation, as it failed to integrate international human rights commitments, including the duty of international cooperation for development established by the UN Charter and affirmed by the Declaration on the Right to Development.8
MDG 8 galvanized global support for international development
Faster delivery on aid commitments remains neccessary
The post-2015 agenda should replace donorrecipient relations with collective action
A renewed global partnership for development
The lack of precise MDG 8 targets weakened the global partnership for development
9. In addition, MDG 8 did not reflect the important role of other actors in development cooperation, such as private philanthropic foundations, civil society and other new forms of cooperative and collective actions. The private sector was only marginally mentioned in a very narrow sense in targets 8.E and 8.F. Hence, the goal did not sufficiently highlight other sources of finance such as foreign direct investment (FDI), remittances and innovative sources of development finance, but was instead often misinterpreted as focusing solely on aid commitments. This may have inadvertently created unreasonably high expectations about the role of aid and downplayed the importance of other sources of international finance, and of domestic policies and domestic resource mobilization, in financing the MDGs and promoting development.
10. A main weakness of the present global partnership is the lack of accountability of stakeholders. This results partly from a lack of precision of targets and indicators. For example, MDG 8 calls for more generous ODA to countries committed to poverty reduction, but does not provide any objectively verifiable or time-bound targets. The lack of a time frame and quantitative targets in MDG 8, which sets it apart from other MDGs, reflects the lack of political commitment to define more precise targets as part of the global partnership for development.
11. It was not until the Secretary-General created the MDG Gap Task Force in 2007 that more focused, integrated and detailed MDG 8 monitoring started. However, data that would allow adequate tracking of the targets is still lacking in some areas of the global partnership. For example, the proportion of the population with access to affordable essential drugs on a sustainable basis has been measured by the MDG Gap Task Force, using data from national and sub-national surveys on public and private sector availability and prices of selected essential medicines. However, the survey samples were small and the periodic follow-up surveys for tracking progress have not been done.
12. In some instances, there was also a lack of consistency between some of the indicators and targets. Target 8.A calls for the further development of both the trading and financial system, but there is no indictor to measure the lack of progress in the international financial system, which has remained essentially unregulated. Target 8.D addresses the debt problems of developing countries, whereas the associated indicators focus mainly on the progress of the more limited set of poorest most indebted countries under the HIPC initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). Targets 8.E and 8.F call for cooperation with the private sector, but no measure of the private sectors contributions has been proposed. Moreover, the indicators of the latter target measure information and communications technologies (ICT) only, while the target calls for increased access to new technologies more broadly. (See Box 1 and Annex I for the official list of targets and indicators in MDG 8.)
13. Qualitative issues were also missing in MDG 8. Improving predictability, reducing policy conditionality, addressing fragmentation, reducing the incidence of tied aid, and safeguarding concessionality were not an explicit part of the MDG framework; therefore, only limited progress has been made in these areas.
Lack of consistency between MDG 8 targets and indicators are a reason for insufficient progress
Qualitative issues were also missing in MDG 8
A renewed global partnership for development
14. Nonetheless, the areas covered in MDG 8 remain extremely relevant to the creation of an enabling environment for development in the context of the post-2015 development agenda. Its ambitious targets on the trade and financial systems, external debt, technology and access to medicines do have the potential to contribute to transformative change for sustainable development. Yet, the choice of indicators to track progress towards these targets in the MDG framework reduced the level of ambition and reinforced the perception of a traditional donor-beneficiary type of development cooperation.
15. In a post-2015 context, reaffirming the level of ambition reflected in the commitments made in relation to trade, finance, debt, and technology transfer and medicines, while addressing the special needs of the most vulnerable countries, will provide a strong foundation to formulate a global agenda for development. Moreover, the principles laid out in the Monterrey Consensus, which recognized the centrality of addressing systemic issues to ensure coherence and consistency across the international, monetary, financial and trading systems in support of development, should provide an additional anchor for strengthening the global partnership for development. The challenge will be to identify the concrete mechanisms that will enable the realization of an ambitious and coherent agenda for development.
 
Learning from multi-stakeholder partnerships
16. In addition to the global partnership for development as defined by MDG 8, partnerships, as a form of collaboration and cooperation at the global, regional and national levels, have been in existence for decades. They play an increasingly important role in delivering existing programmes at reduced costs, by allowing partners to leverage their respective strengths. Partnerships such as Sustainable Energy for All and Every Woman Every Childhave become a crucial tool for a more participatory approach to implementation, and a key mechanism in leveraging the comparative advantages of different
The ambitious MDG 8 targets are still important for the post-2015 agenda
Multi-stakeholder partnerships are crucial
A renewed global partnership for development
Multi-stakeholder partnerships can mobilize resources and raise awareness stakeholders. In its 2006 resolution entitled Towards global partnerships,7 the General Assembly defined partnerships as voluntary relationships between various parties, both public and non-public, in which all participants agree to work together to achieve a common purpose or undertake a specific task, and, as mutually agreed, to share risks and responsibilities, resources and benefits. The resolution also noted that global partnerships, while not a substitute, can be an important addition to existing international commitments to realize the internationally agreed development goals, including the MDGs.
17. Partnerships have successfully steered resources towards their set purposes. For example, the Partnership on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health has played a major advocacy role to turn the worlds attention to this issue and it is anticipated that the initiative will mobilize around $40 billion dollars. Over $30 billion have been pledged through the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. While the vast majority of resources raised through these partnerships comes from bilateral donors aid budgets, and is thus not additional to ODA in a narrow sense, they have been able to make efficiency gains in the delivery of health services for specific diseases. For example, the Global Alliance for Vaccination and Immunization has contributed to greatly expanding access to vaccines at reduced prices.8 The Special Program for Food Security contributed to South-South cooperation across several countries helping to reduce hunger.
18. Purpose-oriented partnerships have also helped to build consensus around controversial issues. Global partnerships with strong civil society participation have helped to promote change at the grass-roots level, which has then gradually been scaled up to include the participation of Governments. Female genital mutilation (FGM) is one example where partnerships have been continually creating consensus. A total of 2,744 communities in 15 countries made public declarations to abandon FGM in 2011, compared to 596 communities in 2010.9
19. Despite the ability of partnerships to mobilize resources, advocate for important issues and share knowledge, they have a poor record of promoting systemic change. Partnerships with a focus on specific short-term quantifiable results can also detract funding from long-term investment essential to promote long-term development. The ad hoc nature of partnerships and their focus on specific issues also makes it difficult to link them to the priority needs of developing countries. Lastly, the establishment of separate parallel structures can lead to duplication of efforts, or in some cases even undermine government efforts, thereby weakening country ownership and leadership.
More coherence across partnerships is needed to align them with countries priorities
A renewed global partnership for development
 
III. Desirable dimensions of a renewed global partnership for development
20. In an increasingly interconnected world faced with multiple development challenges, a renewed global partnership for development post-2015 has to be based on strong collective actions and clear commitments from developed and developing countries alike, according to their level of development. This will be essential to further the objectives of people-centered stable and inclusive growth, improved social development, equality, sustainability, the realization of human rights for all without discrimination, and peace and security. Moreover, a genuine partnership and solidarity with enhanced global support and appropriate mechanisms at all levels will be crucial for the most vulnerable groups of countries, such as LDCs and countries experiencing violence and political conflict, to achieve the post-2015 development agenda. A strengthened multilateral system backed by effective monitoring of commitments will help to build the links from actions and resources to development results.
21. The commitments of MDG 8 and the Monterrey Consensus will remain two important cornerstones of this renewed global partnership for development. They are pertinent to the development challenges of the world today, and they need to be enforced with adequate targets, indicators and monitoring mechanisms to ensure that the trade and the financial systems are development oriented; that there is effective transfer of technologies to address the development needs of countries and populations, especially in relation to
The post-2015 agenda will require collective actions and commitments from all countries
A renewed partnership is needed to complete the unfinished MDG agenda while also responding to new global challenges
Countries with special needs require specific support from global partners climate change; and that there is consistency across the international, monetary, financial and trading systems in support of development.
22. Building on these commitments, the renewed global partnership for development can complete the unfinished MDG agenda. At the same time, a post-2015 development agenda will have to respond to pressing challenges that are global in nature. This will require both a strengthening and a broadening of the global partnership for development. Against this backdrop, this section highlights possible features and formats of a future global partnership for development and also proposes a more effective accountability mechanism.10
Financing sustainable development post-2015
23. The mobilization of resourcesboth domestic and externalwill be essential for the implementation of a post-2015 development agenda. The international community should reaffirm its intent to fulfil its ODA commitments with regard to developing countries (0.7 per cent of GNI) and, in particular, least developed countries (0.15-0.20 per cent of GNI), including timelines for their implementation. For LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS, which constitute the 91 most vulnerable Member States of the united_nations, ODA, along with an enabling global environment for development, will remain essential. In addition, the renewed global partnership will have to address the special needs of countries experiencing violence, political conflict, insecurity and societal vulnerability, which lag behind in terms of progress towards achieving the MDGs.11
24. Quantitative targets with a clear timetable for the mobilization of additional resources to complement ODA should be set. These should be based on the notion of inclusive and balanced development partnerships with strong multi-stakeholder participation and strong country ownership and leadership. Quantitative aid targets should be complemented by development effectiveness targets and targets on the allocation of aid based on needs.
25. Such efforts by donor countries to increase ODA must be matched by efforts of developing countries to mobilize domestic resources. Domestic resource mobilization has the ability to both reduce long-term aid dependency and to broaden developing countries policy space, the importance of which was acknowledged in the Monterrey Consensus. Hence a renewed global partnership must enhance government capacity to efficiently and effectively mobilize public and private domestic resources. It could, for instance, help identify possible priority areas for improving tax systems and subsidization. It could also promote good corporate governance and combat illicit capital flight.
26. A global development partnership should promote the flow of longerterm investment, including FDI, to a greater number of developing countries and into critical sectors such as transport, agriculture, energy, infrastructure, communications and information technology. Targeted private investments
Domestic resource mobilization can reduce long-term aid dependency and broaden policy space
A renewed global partnership for development can also help put the world on a more sustainable development pathway. This will require the mainstreaming of sustainability concerns into the core business and operational decision-making of financial institutions globally. In addition, Governments can support innovative green technologies by providing necessary incentives and an appropriate regulatory framework for both green technologies and conventional options.
27. The need for additional and predictable financing has also led to a search for new sources of development financenot as a substitute for aid, but as a complement to it. The Monterrey Consensus recognized the value of exploring innovative sources of finance. In March 2006, a group of countries launched the Leading Group on Solidarity Levies to Fund Development to explore and promote potential innovative mechanisms. Since then, a number of innovative initiatives have been launched. A renewed global partnership for development should identify effective mechanisms for the mobilization of additional resources and agree on the mechanisms for disbursement to support the development efforts of countries in need and to expand resources for global public goods.
28. Remittances have emerged as an important flow of resources to developing countries. With the surge in international and internal migration over the last decades, officially recorded international remittances flows to developing countries were expected to reach approximately $406 billion in 2012,12 three times the amount of total aid flows from OECD/DAC donors in 2011. A renewed global partnership should foster a more effective collaboration between source and destination countries of migration to reduce the transaction costs of remittances and, where possible, to relax legal and funding barriers to remittances and other financial flows by migrants.13
29. Lastly, sustainable development financing has so far mostly been equated with climate-change financing, which in turn has evolved largely on a separate track from conventional development finance. In part, this arises from the concern that climate financing for developing countries should be new and additional to traditional ODA, as a reflection of the Rio principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities enshrined in the UNFCCC. If sustainable development should move centre stage in a post-2015 development agenda, as suggested by a broad range of stakeholders, a sustainable development financing strategy will need to go beyond climate-change financing and serve to integrate all its dimensions better into mainstream financing.
30. Climate-change financing thus far has also mostly focused on mitigation, while little progress was made on the much more costly financing for adaptation. Reflecting on how climate-change financing could be related
A renewed global partnership should foster effective collaboration between source and destination countries
Sustainable development financing must go beyond climate-change financing
A renewed global partnership for development
The global partnerships needs to foster the dialogue on debt sustainability to low-carbon and climate-resilient development could help bridge the political gap between developed and developing countries around these issues. Mobilizing the financing committed in negotiations on climate change remains a major challenge, and the work to identify and develop sources of financing needs to accelerate. As part of comprehensive anticipation and response to the impact of climate change, mobilizing finance for disaster prevention and disaster risk reduction and for building resilience should also form part of a renewed global partnership for development.
 
Debt, trade, technology and migration in the renewed global partnership
Debt
31. Despite the considerably positive impact of the HIPC and MDRI initiatives, some beneficiary countries are still at high risk of debt distress. Moreover, several severely indebted developing countries were not included in either initiative and retain critical public debt positions. In 2011, external public debt in low-income countries increased as a share of GDP for the first time since 2005. Overall, 20 low-income countries are either in debt distress or at high risk of debt distress, with another 23 countries at moderate risk.14 As the international initiatives to reduce and restructure excessive sovereign debt are coming to a close, the global partnership needs to foster the dialogue on debt sustainability and on how to effectively deal with sovereign debt defaults and distress in a timely, equitable and less costly manner. The partnership could also monitor the rising share of non-concessional elements in aid.15
UN/DESA, UNDP and others, Financing for sustainable development in the global partnership beyond 2015, Thematic Think Piece, available from  policy/untaskteam_undf/thinkpieces/21_thinkpiece_financing_development.pdf.
A renewed global partnership for development
Trade
32. Trade can serve as an engine of growth, development and job creation, but many developing countries need increased productive capacity in order to take advantage of open global markets. The trading system and related policy frameworks at the national, regional and international levels have to support growth that is both sustained and sustainable, and lead to the equitable integration of developing countries into the world economy. The future global partnership should look to build a more equitable global, multilateral trading system by concluding the Doha Round while also building on the Aid for Trade platform.
33. A successful conclusion of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations would make an important contribution to improving market access for developing countries. It would also help to reduce certain distortions in international trade, such as agricultural subsidies, tariff peaks and tariff escalation that still impede market access for many countries. Fisheries subsidy reform would yield large environmental dividends. Greater market opening in services would facilitate more inter-regional mobility for workers, a key factor in contributing to labour market efficiency (and a valuable source of remittance income). A carefully designed conclusion of the Round would represent a step forward for the global partnership on development, enhancing coherence among trade, financial, human rights, and environmental issues and strengthening the effectiveness of the open, rules-based multilateral trading system in addressing specific development challenges.
34. Global efforts on fully implementing duty-free, quote-free market access for LDCs on a lasting basis, need to continue together with creating simpler rules of origin requirements. For LLDCs in particular, expediting trade facilitation negotiations and their implementation would contribute to reduced transit-related trade barriers and costly border delays that affect their exports. Among SIDS, a stronger focus is needed to tackle market access issues, constraints caused by their small market size and production capacities, as well as non-tariff measures affecting their exports.
35. Non-tariff measures (NTMs), such as sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical standards, have become more prominent obstacles to trade flows. When NTMs are considered, for example, the average import barrier facing agricultural exports to developed economies from low-income countries rises from 5 percent to 27 percent. While most NTMs cannot be simply eliminated because they often emerge from real public concerns about safety, international cooperation in the areas of harmonization and mutual recognition, along with targeted financial and technical support for poorer countries, and the promotion of responsible and sustainable investment practices, can significantly reduce the trade-restrictive impact of NTMs.
36. Aid for Trade has emerged as an important channel for providing such additional resources to address supply-side constraints, for strengthening productive capacity in various sectors and for diversifying export profiles, including through support for infrastructure development. Going forward, the Aid for Trade platform needs to strengthen productive sectors and diversify
Efforts to conclude the Doha Round must continue
There is a need to facilitate market access for LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs
Aid for Trade can provide important additional resources to build exporting capacities for LDCs
A renewed global partnership for development
Access to science, technology and innovation underpins progress in all development dimensions export profiles, particularly in LDCs, including through support for infrastructure development and productive capacities.16 The Technology Bank and science, technology and innovation (STI) supporting mechanism for LDCs, foreseen in the Istanbul Programme of Action is one new initiative in this area.17
 
Science, technology and innovation
37. Access to science, technology and innovation underpins progress in all development dimensions; from economic growth to environmental protection, the containment of health epidemics and decreasing maternal mortality, mitigating climate change, and much more. To the extent that knowledge and technology exhibits several properties of a public good, there is a persistent danger of underinvestment however, and international collaborative ventures and alliances can and should support the creation and dissemination of technologies. Within the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the new Technology Mechanism established by the Cancun Agreements in December 2010 represents a move towards a more dynamic arrangement through fostering public-private partnerships; promoting innovation; catalyzing the use of technology road maps or action plans; mobilizing national, regional and international technology centres and networks; and facilitating joint R&D activities. Scaling up and extending this kind of approach should be a central part of the post-2015 global partnership.
A renewed global partnership for development 15
38. Aligning the interests of the private sector with the overall need to promote access to existing technologies and create products and services aimed at markets with little or no ability to pay is no easy task. Left on their own, these interests will most likely not converge. There is a need to rethink how best to diffuse existing technologies as well as promote access to new technologies for all. Whether embodied as products or processes, or in the form of knowledge transfers, such exchange holds the key for a sustainable and prosperous future for all.
Migration and Human mobility
39. With one out of seven people on the planet on the move, migration and the networks it creates will be a defining feature of the 21st century. Migration and human mobility is driven by development opportunities, but they also drive development. Beyond the above mentioned relevance for financing for development, human mobility is a driver of innovation and trade and helps to tackle future skills deficits. It counterbalances effects of ageing societies and the youth bulges and builds resilience to economic and environmental risks and shocks.18 At the same time, however, mobility can be associated with new inequalities and vulnerabilities, especially when it is poorly governed and occurs under conditions of insecurity. South-to-South migration is now just as important as South-to-North migration which underlines the complex interdependencies brought about by the global surge of human mobility. In order to function as a human development enabler, migration requires cooperation at all levels, across borders and a variety of stakeholders. Already existing partnershipssuch as the Global Forum for Migration and Development, Regional
 
South-South cooperation is an important complement to North-South cooperation
Consultative Processes on Migration and bilateral accords such as EUs mobility partnerships  should be enhanced and complemented.
Engaging new and emerging actors
40. In recent years, a more multi-polar global economy has emerged, led by the rapid growth of middle-income countries. Some middle-income countries now play a much more prominent role in development cooperation, and SouthSouth cooperation reached between $12.9 billion and $14.8 billion in 2010,19 even though data gaps are likely to render this an underestimation. Nonetheless, it remains a small fraction of ODA, and should be seen as a complement rather than a substitute for North-South cooperation. South-South and triangular development cooperation are particularly relevant for in-kind contributions (including human resources as seconded personnel or volunteers; equipment or mediarelated products and services), exchange of skills, technical support and best practices. Such peer learning as well as knowledge, experience and technology sharing is vital to promote the development of innovative forms of partnerships.
41. The private sector, private philanthropic organizations and foundations have also significantly increased their contribution to development. Although it remains unclear what portion of these amounts are development oriented, their cooperation complements flows from other providers and plays a vital role in meeting needs in critical sectors, such as health and education.
42. To maximize their positive impact, new partnershipsincluding NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation, with participation from civil society organizations including migrant diaspora organizations,20 the private sector, and philanthropyshould be formed in a transparent manner, in collaboration with the beneficiaries and with a clear framework for monitoring and mutual accountability. They should also be in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities of all providers. A renewed global partnership could support new and emerging actors in the development and diffusion of indicators for such new and non-traditional flows.
43. To ensure complementarity between the objectives and activities of the united_nations, the G20 and other platforms (such as the Africa-South America Summit, the forum on China-Africa cooperation, the India, Brazil and South Africa Forum, and the India-Africa Forum) a renewed global partnership should also foster greater coherence across the entire united_nations system, including the international financial institutions, as well as between these traditional and new platforms.
44. The united_nations has been a driving force behind many of the leading global, regional, and country-level partnerships where multiple stakeholders participate to advance the implementation of the MDGs. In resolution 60/215
New actors should be engaged in partnerships in a transparent manner in line with national development plans
The united_nations can facilitate a systematic approach to partnerships
A renewed global partnership for development on global partnerships, the General Assembly encouraged the united_nations system to continue to develop a common and systemic approach for those partnerships in which it participates. 21 A mapping exercise of united_nations participation in different partnerships at different levels could provide a better understanding of the breadth and depth of the Organizations involvement in global partnerships and its potential to evolve as a facilitator and knowledge hub for partnerships at the global, regional and national levels.
 
Strengthening global governance
45. A renewed global partnership should aim at making international arrangements for collective decision-making and corresponding government policies that can meet the challenges at hand. This will require a partnership at the global level between all groupings of countries, multilateral organizations and other stakeholders. It should also bring greater coherence to the complex and fractured frameworks covering global issues.22 The international community has already adopted a number of global conventions and treaties. However, these international arrangements for collective decision-making and corresponding government policies have not kept pace with mounting challenges. For example, there is still an inconsistency between a rules-based multilateral trading system and an essentially unregulated international financial system. Other important drivers of development, including investment, technology, population dynamics, human mobility and aid, are managed almost exclusively at the national level or through ad hoc coordination at the regional or international
DESA, UNDP and others, Global governance and governance of the global commons in the global partnership for development beyond 2015, Thematic Think Piece, available from .  governance.pdf.
There is need to further improve the regulation of the financial sector
A renewed global partnership for development
Developing countries are still under-represented in global decision-making bodies levels, while global public goods are under-provisioned. Overcoming the collective action problems in the supply of public goods will require internationally coordinated actions in order to ensure adequate provisioning. Striking the right balance between global rules that are both effective but also fair will be a key factor in a successful global partnership for development.
46. In addition to a focus on the mobilization of additional resources and the inclusion of new actors, a renewed global partnership should also promote efforts to enhance the voice and representation of developing countries, especially the poorest and most vulnerable, in multilateral institutions and other normand standard-setting bodies. Working towards an inclusive and equitable system of global governance, including a monitoring and accountability mechanism led by the united_nations, will also be critical.
47. While there is a strong incentive for all countries to engage in achieving an effective and inclusive system of global governance, political sensitivities are likely to arise in terms of refining the institutional mandates of intergovernmental organizations, as well as implementing reforms concerning the adequate level of representation of hitherto under-represented Member States. A further challenge would be to strengthen the alignment between the united_nations and decision-making bodies, such as the G20 and other forums for development cooperation. To address these challenges, concrete governance targets could be set, provided they allow for political compromise and flexibility.
Desirable format of a new global partnership
48. A future global partnership for development will need to be based on a compelling narrative around a truly universal global agenda. The transformational change that is needed for sustainable development requires a well-designed accountability framework to turn promises into effective commitments and should be backed by a limited number of goals, targets and indicators. A renewed partnership for sustainable development will require universal commitments from developed and developing countries across the various goals that become part of the agenda. Such a universal agenda should help to facilitate collective action to address the problems of an increasingly interconnected world. Unless effective commitments and global actions are adopted to build economic and financial stability, address the causes of climate change, and build sustainable management of the global commons, sustainable development will remain an elusive goal.
49. In its report Realizing the Future We Want for All, the united_nations Task Team laid out the three principles that constitute the common underlying elements of a global development agenda post-2015human rights, equality and sustainabilityand the four dimensions of development where progress will be neededenvironmental sustainability, peace and security, inclusive economic development and inclusive human development. These are the areas for possible goaland target-setting. However, underpinning these global goals and targets, there are several enabling conditions that need to be in place to facilitate progress towards achieving goals (see Figure).
Further progress in global development requires building a global partnership along the four dimensions of environmental sustainability, peace and security, inclusive economic development and inclusive social development
A renewed global partnership for development
National, regional and global mutual accountability systems need to reinforce each other
50. A renewed global partnership containing explicit commitments for all countries according to their level of development would have to be defined as an intrinsic part of goaland target-setting across the various dimensions. In addition, there should be room to define more explicitly the type of partnerships required to build the global enabling conditions for development. These include issues that will not necessarily be reflected as goals (such as financial stability); instead, more explicit agreements will have to be made in order to improve the international enabling environment as a major contributing factor for development.
51. To achieve this, a dual structure could be considered. There could be explicit commitments towards a renewed global partnership for development with a focus on creating an enabling environment for development, promoting the contribution of multiple partners, covering areas of common and in some cases differentiated responsibilities. In addition to this broader international enabling environment goal, well defined partnerships could be mainstreamed under each thematic goal. With regard to these specific goals, a limited number of ambitious yet realistic universal goals could be adopted as a common minimum baseline, with a time horizon of 15 to 25 years, allowing enough time to accomplish the major transformations necessary. To reduce the risk of weaker accountability, intermediate targets could be added. To take account of different national circumstances, the universal goals could be complemented by more ambitious national targets and indicators. In addition, the indicators will need to be developed in close coordination with the work being undertaken by Member States on a proposed set of sustainable development goals. By complementing each of these goals with specific partnerships, the link between goals and the means of achieving them would be strengthened. To reflect the contributions of voluntary global partnerships in a more systematic and integrated manner, non-state actors should be linked to the thematic partnerships under each goal.
Strengthening global mutual accountability
52. Greater mutual accountability helps to increase the effectiveness of the development partnership with participation of all stakeholders by improving the quality of national development strategies and partnership policies, results frameworks and public financial management systems. It can also help reduce transaction and administrative costs, duplication and project proliferation, and increase predictability, all of which are crucial to promoting greater country ownership and leadership. National, regional and global mutual accountability are mutually reinforcing. A post-2015 development agenda should therefore be supported by robust mutual accountability mechanisms at each of these levels.
53. Today, global mutual accountability is still in its infancy and a fullyfledged global mutual accountability mechanism with universal membership and multi-stakeholder participation has yet to emerge. Some progress has been made, however, during the past years, both within the united_nations and beyond. Notably, the establishment of the ECOSOC Annual Ministerial Review (AMR) and the biennial High-level Development Cooperation Forum
A renewed global partnership for development
(DCF) have marked important steps towards strengthening accountability. The AMR has been a useful tool to monitor progress towards the achievements of the internationally agreed development goals, including the MDGs, and to share lessons learned and best practices.
54. In his recent report on Strengthening of the Economic and Social Council, the Secretary-General proposed that a strengthened Ministerial Review could become a central venue for monitoring the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, supported by the entire ECOSOC system. It also suggests that the DCF, which has emerged as a mutual accountability forum within the united_nations system, could further expand its role as a driver for greater national and global accountability in development cooperation by promoting mutual accountability as an overarching principle in the post-2015 development agenda, with a view to promoting enhanced reporting on agreed commitments and adapting development cooperation to emerging challenges.23
55. As decided at the united_nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), the united_nations General Assembly is also conducting informal consultations for the creation of the high-level political forum that will support the implementation and monitoring of the concept of sustainable development in its three dimensions. The exact shape and location of the forum are currently being discussed in the General Assembly, but there is broad agreement that the forum should bring in the highest level of political support to the implementation, monitoring and compliance of commitments in a unified post-2015 development agenda. In addition, the establishment of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation at the margins of the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Republic of Korea, marks another step towards supporting and ensuring monitoring and accountability of the effectiveness of development cooperation.
56. Efforts to strengthen mutual accountability should be guided by the universal responsibility of all actors to respect human rights. Post-2015 accountability arrangements should therefore also build upon the human rights accountability standards and infrastructure that already exist, including the Universal Periodic Review of the UN Human Rights Council and human rights treaty monitoring bodies. With their focus on the human person, international human rights mechanisms can make an important contribution to strengthen the accountability of all states and institutions to right-holders, i.e. people.
57. Ultimately, and similar to the implementation of the MDGs, the implementation of a post-2015 development agenda will have to take place at the country level. Strengthening national mutual accountability mechanisms must hence be a centrepiece of any effort to implement a post-2015 development agenda. Today, key pillars of national mutual accountability are rarely in place. Lack of political leadership and capacity constraints have been identified as
Mutual accountability needs to be strengthened at the national level major obstacles to stronger mutual accountability.24 Hence, priority should be given to design enablers for mutual accountability. National mutual accountability mechanisms should also allow for the inclusion of South-South development cooperation providers, decentralized providers and local governments, parliaments, private philanthropic foundation, civil society and the private sector, while recognizing their differentiated responsibilities.
58. Establishing robust mutual accountability mechanisms will be of particular importance if a decision is taken to complement universal goals with more ambitious national goals, targets and indicators. In such a case, mutual accountability mechanisms can serve as an effective vehicle for development partners to jointly formulate, monitor and report on national development goals and targets through the use of robust indicators. They should also serve as an entry point to link accountability for commitments to accountability for development results.
