
The 2013 World Youth Report of youth migrants. The literature on point for the discussion.
offers a broad understanding youth migration and its development of the situation of young impact in countries of origin and Chapter 1 provides basic information migrants from the perspective of young migrants themselves. The report highlights some of the concerns, challenges and successes experienced by young migrants based on their own lives and told in their own voices. Young people move within their home countries as internal migrants, or beyond their borders as international migrants. The report focuses largely on the phenomena of international migration which increasingly has a significant impact on the origin, transit and destination countries and communities. The consequences are complex, context-specific and subject to change over time. They may be influenced by factors such as the type of migration, migrant category, national migration policies, and programmatic interventions that are in place in a particular locale.
Young people and youth-led organizations working on migration have on several occasions requested the united_nations look at the situation destination is sparse. This report attempts to fill this gap and offers a comprehensive account of the life experiences of young migrants. The structure of the report takes into consideration both the dimensions of processes and types of migration. The struggles and opportunities young migrants face often differ according to the type of migration.
The report is aimed at youth-led organizations and young migrants as well as policy-makers, academia and the general public. The report itself and each chapter individually is designed to facilitate further discussion on the topic, and for that reason, chapters may sometimes entail minimal repetition from previous chapters. The suggested further reading list builds on the themes outlined in the chapter and provides additional information on understanding the experiences and the rights of young migrants, while the extensive references in the bibliography were selected to serve as a starting onmigrationandexaminestheimpact of youth migration on individuals and communities. The chapter also highlights the mixed impact on youth left behind by migrant parents.
Chapter 2 examines the motivating factors behind young peoples migration decisions, the importance of information in preparing for and reducing the risks associated with migration, and the cost of migration and how it influences the choice of migration routes. The chapter concludes with an overview of the challenges potential youth migrants face and a set of recommendations for various stakeholders.
Chapter 3 focuses on the factors that influence the choice of transit countries in the migration process, the features of transit migration, and the challenges and opportunities young migrants are presented with while in transit. Special attention is given to the unique vulnerabilities of certain categories of young migrants in transit and how they should be addressed.
In chapter 4, young international and internal immigrants share the challenges they have faced in finding housing, securing employment, accessing healthcare services, and generally adapting to life in a new locale. The chapter offers some insight into their remittance behaviour and the challenges young returnees face in terms of social and economic reintegration in their places of origin.
Chapter 5 makes the case for youth awareness and engagement on migration and provides examples of how this is being done around the world. The chapter suggests that youth engagement in migration as well as in policy and programming will not only improve the situation of young migrants, but also will lead to better targeted and successful interventions.
The outcomes of this Report were informed by a number of consultative activities undertaken by the united_nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. These activities provided greater qualitative understanding of the experiences of young immigrants, return migrants, and other youth affected by migration. Having direct contributions from youth has ensured that the World Youth Report is based on the perspectives of young people who continue to comprise a significant proportion of international migrants, and is enhanced by the views of those affected by migration.
As part of the process leading to the development of the 2013 Report, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs organized a number of interactive activities, including an online survey, weekly e-consultations, a Google+ Hangout with young people and experts, and a call for artistic pieces produced by youth. The Department set up a dedicated web platform (. org) to allow youth to contribute their personal stories and perspectives on how migration affected them, whether they were prospective migrants, immigrants, return migrants, or young people left behind by migrant parents. All of the activities were promoted through various channels, including relevant social media platforms and youth networks, and were carried out between 23 January and 10 March 2013. Although efforts were made to encourage the participation of young people around the world, the responses provided may not reflect the full breadth of the challenges and opportunities associated with youth migration.
E-consultation
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs organized a five-week consultative and interactive discussion with young migrants and other youth affected by migration. During the weekly e-consultations, held from 23 January 24 February 2013, via designated web pages on the World Youth Report web platform, the following key issues were discussed:
     youth preparing to migrate from their places of origin to other communities or countries;
     experiences in transit countries;
     opportunities experienced by youth migrants in destination countries, as well as particular challenges and opportunities linked to permanent and return migration;
     impacts of migration on youth left behind in countries of origin by their migrant parents;
 labour migration.
For each of these weekly discussions, a guest moderator was invited to guide the discussion with the lead moderator. One to three questions were posted each day on the weeks topic, along with follow-up questions for the various responses. More than 500 comments were exchanged between youth participants1 and moderators in the e-consultations.
Surveying youth migrants and returnees
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs produced and administered an online questionnaire on youth migration using SurveyMonkey. The questions were designed to identify the livelihood challenges and opportunities young people encountered in the migration process (from planning and preparation to permanent migration or return). The survey was conducted from 23 January to 10 March 2013, and was open to migrants and return migrants aged 15-35 years.
The survey included 57 questions covering a range of issues relating to the social and economic characteristics and livelihood experiences of young migrants and return migrants. Along with multiple-choice questions, openended questions were incorporated to encourage respondents to provide more detailed information and observations. Open-ended questions invited comments and suggestions on how to address challenges associated with youth migration. For the e-consultations most young people provided their exact age, but the survey respondents selected only an age range. Every effort was made to preserve the anonymity of respondents, given the sensitivities surrounding the legal status of many migrants/immigrants and their livelihoods.
The survey elicited 262 responses. Almost two-thirds of the respondents were female. Among those who indicated their age range, young people between the ages of 19 and 25 comprised the largest group (34.1 per cent), followed by youth aged 2629 years (29.8 per cent), those aged 30-35 years (28.3 per cent), and 15to 18-year-olds (7.8 per cent). The young respondents shared information and personal experiences relating to their places of origin and destination. The survey and the participant responses can be found in the annex of this publication.
Photos and illustrations
Seeking to bring additional meaning to the findings of the e-consultation and survey, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs invited young people to contribute paintings, cartoons and photographs for possible inclusion in the Report. The submissions highlighted the positive and negative effects of internal and international migration on young people, migrant families, and their nations as a whole. Some of the images illustrated what youth organizations are doing to address migration challenges in their respective communities or countries.
Migration stories
Young migrants/immigrants in destination societies and returnees were invited to share their personal stories. These stories have contributed to a better understanding of the various trajectories of youth migration (predeparture, transit, arrival, post-arrival, and return/no-return) and their impact on the social and economic livelihoods of youth.
Google+ Hangout on Youth Migration and Development
The united_nations Focal Point on Youth held a Google+ Hangout on 6 March 2013, during which a panel of experts and youth representatives engaged in a discussion based on the theme Youth Migration and Development: Towards Sustainable Solutions. The Hangout participants explored practical strategies for realizing youth migrants potential, protecting their human rights and promoting their social inclusion, and discussed how these goals could be achieved through collaborative efforts with youth organizations and other relevant stakeholders. The Google+ Hangout featured a one-hour live discussion as well as a question-and-answer session with panelists from the united_nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, International Organization for Migration, and Permanent Mission of Sweden to the united_nations and two youth representatives.
Prior to the commencement of the interactive activities, the organizers engaged in direct outreach to young migrants via e-mail, social media, and organizations working with or for youth affected by migration. The united_nations Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development and the partner youth organizations mentioned earlier supported the dissemination of information pertaining to this initiative.
For the purpose of this Report, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs invited the participation of young people aged 15-35 years  a range that encompasses the ages of most countries definition of youth and deemed optimal given that the highest proportion of young migrants are between the ages of 20 and 34 (united_nations, 2013a). Representatives of youth-led organizations were also invited to share their perspectives and experiences on youth and migration.
Thanks to the support of some youth representatives and youth organizations, it was possible to collect information on the perspectives of youth who had little or no access to the Internet or online platforms, thereby ensuring an inclusive participatory process.
YOUTH, MIGRATION AND
C H A1 P T E R
nternational migration has increased steadily over the years, becoming an established feature of the contemporary social and economic landscape for many youth. Young migrants constitute a relatively large proportion of the overall migrant population and have a significant impact on origin, transit and destination countries and communities.
According to the latest united_nations estimates, there are 232 million international migrants worldwide, representing 3.2 per cent of the worlds total population of 7.2 billion (united_nations, 2013a).2 There are 35 million international migrants under the age of 20, up from 31 million in 2000, and another 40 million between the ages of 20 and 29. Together, they account for more than 30 per cent of all migrants. Females account for approximately half of the international migrant population.
Migrants constitute a diverse group. Their social, economic and educational backgrounds, the means/forms of migration, and their motivation for leaving all influence the scope, scale and type of migration.
Some young migrants leave their home communities intending to return at some point, while others plan to relocate permanently. There are studies suggesting that youth migrants are more inclined to undertake temporary migration than permanent migration.
Young people may choose to move within their home countries as internal migrants or beyond their national borders as international migrants. The majority of migrants stay in their own countries as internal migrants. Estimates place the number of migrants at approximately 740 million. Youth intending to migrate outside their national boundaries may first undertake rural-urban migration or urban-urban migration within their country of origin in order to find paid employment or intermediary services to support their plans for international migration.
bOx1.1
International migrant
According to the 1998 united_nations Recommendations on Statistics of International Migration, an international migrant is defined as any person who changes his or her country of usual residence. A persons country of usual residence is that in which the person lives. It refers to the country in which the person has a place to live where he or she normally spends the daily period of rest. Temporary travel abroad for purposes of recreation, holiday, business, medical treatment or religious pilgrimage does not entail a change in the country of usual residence.
A person who moves to a country other than that of his or her usual residence for a period of at least a year (12 months), so that the country of destination effectively becomes his or her new country of usual residence is defined as a long-term migrant. A person who moves to a country other than that of his or her usual residence for a period of at least 3 months but less than a year (12 months) except in cases where the movement to that country is for purposes of recreation, holiday, visits to friends and relatives, business, medical treatment or religious pilgrimage is defined as a short-term migrant. For purposes of international migration statistics, the country of usual residence of short-term migrants is considered to be the country of destination during the period they spend in it.
Internal migrant
A movement of people from one area of a country to another for the purpose or with the effect of establishing a new residence. This migration may be temporary or permanent. Internal migrants move but remain within their country of origin (e.g. rural to urban migration).
Undocumented migrant/migrant in an irregular situation
A foreign citizen who is present on the territory of a State, in violation of the regulations on entry and residence, either after having entered the country illegally or whose residence entitlement (e.g., as a tourist or a visa holder) has expired.
Refugee
A person who, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinions, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country.
Circular Migration
The fluid movement of people between countries, including temporary or long-term movement linked to the labour needs of countries of origin and destination.
Young migrants vary in terms of their legal status in transit and destination countries. Some travel as documented migrants, moving through legal channels or staying in other countries with the required paperwork. However, others are undocumented migrants who may lack the necessary legal authorization (such as a valid passport or specific type of visa) to enter, stay or work in a transit or destination country, or have overstayed the allowed time in their country of destination and are thus in an irregular situation.
Youth migration may be forced or voluntary. Young people subjected to forced migration may be influenced by natural or man-made circumstances. Human trafficking, which is trade in human beings, typically involves various forms of coercion, most often with the aim of forced labor. In other cases people leave their communities in response to threats to their lives and livelihoods; an example would be internal displacement occurring as a result of conflict or natural disasters. Other examples include those fleeing their country of origin to escape persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, sexual orientation or because they are a member of a persecuted social group
C H A1 P T E R
or because they are fleeing a war; in these cases the migrants are entitled to international protection as refugees. In contrast, voluntary migrants are not influenced by immediate external push factors or coercive pressure. Those who move of their own volition in order to improve their livelihoods include student migrants, young migrants joining their partners abroad and young labour migrants. However, due to the complexity and interlinkages of the different factors leading to migration, it is often quite difficult to differentiate between forced and voluntary migration.
Young people may also engage in circular migration. Traditionally, such migration has been limited to seasonal work activities in the agricultural sector, such as grain and wine harvesting and fruit and vegetable picking. More recently, an increasing number of international students have been crossing borders to intern and gain professional and international exposure during long school recess periods. Similarly, many multinational corporations and transnational partnerships participate in cross-border employee placement and exchange activities that may range from several months to several years.
Recognizing the diversity of youth migrants is important for understanding the motives behind migration, the conditions under which different categories of youth migrants move, and the impact of migration on the human development of young men and women, as well as their country of origin and destination. It is also essential for designing specific interventions that address their unique vulnerabilities.
Voluntary migration for work, study or family reasons is far more prevalent than forced migration. For instance, only 15 out of 232 million international migrants were refugees in 2013. South-South migration is as common as South-North migration, with the number of international migrants in both categories estimated at 82 million in 2013. The majority of young migrants (60 per cent) live in developing countries. However, the number of youth migrants aged 1524 as a percentage of the total youth population varies considerably by development level. In 2013, youth
Note: North refers to more developed countries and South refers to less developed countries.
Figure 1.1

The reasons for youth migration vary. Often, a combination of several major factors leads to the decision to migrate. Personal considerations, socio-economic circumstances, and the political situation in the country of origin may be important contributing factors. Often, the main driving force behind youth migration (particularly international migration) is the magnitude of perceived inequalities in labour market opportunities, income, human rights and living standards between the countries of origin and destination. Some young people migrate to escape conflict, persecution, or environmental threats. The decision to migrate is often related to important life transitions, such as pursuing higher education, securing employment or getting married. Marriage migration has become a distinct feature of international migration in Asia as a large and increasing number of young women from developing countries in the region are migrating to developed Asian countries for this purpose. This phenomenon has led to social, cultural and demographic transformation of the communities of origin and destination.
n migrants accounted for 9.1 per cent of the total youth population in developed countries, but only 1.4 per cent in developing countries.
Most foreign students (84 per cent) were enrolled in educational institutions in developed countries, with the largest proportion (58 per cent) studying in North America and Western Europe in 2010. However, the foreign student population has been increasing at a much faster rate in developing countries, more than tripling from 130,000 in 1999 to 443,000 in 2008. Data from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics show that east_asia and the Pacific is the largest source of international students, accounting for 28 per cent of the world total.
C H A1 P T E R
Because these young women are able to send remittances to family members, they often enjoy a higher status in their communities of origin, although they may find themselves in a more restrictive, patriarchal environment in their marriage household. This trend has resulted in an increase in cases of depression and anxiety for many young men living in the sending communities over their diminished status and dwindling marriage prospects.
Youth with at least some secondary education tend to be more likely to have the desire to migrate (internally and internationally) than those with less education. There are young people who migrate because they want to satisfy a desire for adventure or experience a different culture. Aspirations towards increased social prestige as well as family pressure or responsibilities can be influenced by the attitude of returning migrants and ultimately inform the migration decisions of potential youth migrants in places of origin.
C H A1 P T E R GLOBALIZATION
to take advantage of them in todays world. Web-based social networking platforms such as Facebook, YouTube weblogs (blogs) have been particularly important within this context, in addition to more traditional information technology, such as television and radio, in less connected parts of the world.
Social networks are playing an increasingly visible role throughout the migration process, from initial decision-making to permanent settlement or return. Evolving ICT options have transformed the nature
The availability of faster and cheaper means of transportation has improved human mobility and thus facilitated international migration, but it is arguably the development of information and communications technology (ICT) that has played a key role in facilitating the migration of young people. Youth who have access to information about better opportunities elsewhere are more likely bOx1.2
The number of students enrolled in tertiary education abroad rose from 2 million in 2000 to 3.6 million in 2010, an increase of 78 per cent. China, India and the Republic of Korea were the top sources of international students.
The united_states of America was the most popular destination for foreign students, accounting for 19 per cent of the world total, followed by the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland (11 per cent), Australia (8 per cent), France (7 per cent), Germany (6 per cent) and Japan (4 per cent).
of transnational communication and, to some extent, the cultural experience of migration by allowing young migrants to stay connected to their home communities as they deal with the challenges of adapting to their new surroundings. Diaspora communities can communicate with one another more easily, stay in touch with friends and family members in their places of origin, and provide information and assistance to potential youth migrants. Social networks can also play an active role in facilitating return migration. Furthermore, the knowledge and skills acquired in destination countries can be transferred back to the community or the country of origin through the new ICT options, thus contributing to the development process in the place of origin.
Migration can be a risky undertaking, as will be discussed further in the following chapter, so most youth migrants prefer to move to areas where members of their network already reside. Maintaining regular contact within migrant networks has a number of potential benefits; the exchange of information, resources and assistance can reduce the risks and costs for new migrants and ease their transition to a
C H A1 P T E R
new setting (from the journey itself to finding housing and employment).
Migration affects both the young migrants themselves and those young and old persons left behind. It has a direct and often profound impact on migrants and their immediate families, but the wider community can be directly or indirectly affected as well. The consequences are complex, contextspecific and subject to change over time. They may be influenced by factors such as the type of migration, migrant category, national migration policies, and programmatic interventions that are in place in origin, transit and destination societies or countries. Staying connected with family members, peer groups and home communities through the exchange of information, ideas, and remittance flowsand with the stated intention of returning home at some pointis critical to producing positive development outcomes at the individual, family, community and societal levels.
The literature on youth migration and its development impact at the household level and in countries of origin and destination is sparse. What little information is available indicates that young people and the families they leave behind sometimes see migration as a strategy for improving their livelihood prospects. In certain settings, migration constitutes an important stage in the transition to adulthood and an opportunity for independent income generation. By taking advantage of new opportunities for employment, education and skill development in their destination countries, young migrants can shape their own futures.
When youth migrate, they tend to improve both their own financial situation and the economic circumstances of their families through the income they earn and the remittances they send home. In some settings migration may also strengthen young womens decision-making authority within families and society, contributing to greater gender equality and reinforcing equitable gender norms.
C H A1 P T E R
International migration can improve the social and economic welfare of young migrants and contribute to greater economic efficiency in receiving countries. However, its impact on countries of origin tends to be mixed. One of the most serious adverse effects is human capital flight, or brain drain, which deprives countries of origin of the economic and social contributions of their best educated and most highly skilled citizens. The negative impact of brain drain is particularly evident in the health and education sectors of developing countries, as well as in small developing countries, where the pool of professionals is limited.
There is empirical evidence, however, that the return of migrants to their countries of origin can offset some of the loss of skilled labour through emigration. Migrants often return with enhanced skills, business networks and knowledge, the transfer of which benefits the society of origin over the long-term, effectively resulting in brain gain.
bOx1.3
MIGRANT rEMITTANCES IN NUMBERS
Statistics relating to migrant remittances indicate the following:
 in Tajikistan (48 per cent), Kyrgyz Republic (31 per cent), Lesotho and Nepal (25 per cent each) and the Republic of Moldova (24 per cent).
 per cent in the poverty headcount ratio.
 cent of total remittance values at the global level. In sub-Saharan Africa and Pacific Islands, however, the cost of remitting funds exceeded 12 per cent and with the recent development of lifting fees or service charges levied by banks on recipients, the actual costs can amount to more than double the average sending cost.
Remittances, in addition to the knowledge, skills and investments made or sent home by young migrants in their country of origin, contribute meaningfully to enhancing economic growth and reducing povertyboth of which are central to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). At the household level, increased family incomes can insulate recipients against natural and economic shocks and defray health and education expenses. At the societal or collective level, remittances from diaspora youth communities may be channeled into basic infrastructure projects such as bridges and schools, improving local development in countries of origin.
Migration and remittances have both positive and negative effects on youth left behind. Traditionally, guiding children through their formative years has been a primary function of parents, and the absence of one or both parents can have a serious impact on the psychological, emotional and
C H A1 P T E R
social development of boys and girls during their childhood and youth with possible implications for their effective transition to early adulthood. At the same time, young people left behind may develop the capacity for independent decision-making as they assume greater responsibility for the well-being of the household at home. Financial transfers from family members living abroad improve the social and economic welfare of migrants children when they are used for education, clothing, health care and other basic needs. However, remittances can also promote dependency among youth and other household members left behind. Taken together, the lack of parental supervision and the availability of what may be seen as discretionary funds may increase the likelihood that youth left behind will engage in risky behaviours.
In destination societies, young migrant workers at various skill levels often fill vacancies for jobs that local workers are unable or unwilling to take, which can enhance labour market efficiency and contribute to economic growth in receiving countries and communities.
It is commonly assumed that immigrants reduce wage rates and compete with native-born workers for jobs, thus increasing the level of domestic unemployment. However, literature shows that in countries in which the characteristics of the immigrant workforce differ substantially from those of the native labour force in terms of education or work experience, migration becomes a net benefit to the economy. This generally occurs when immigrant jobseekers have lower education and skill levels than their native-born counterparts. Unskilled and low-skilled young immigrants are willing to accept lower wages for work in fields of little interest to nonimmigrants, so many of the more productive and better-paid jobs remain open to citizens.
The decision as to who may enter and reside in national territories is the sovereign right of States. However, all those living within a countrys borders, including migrants, are entitled to the b O x 1 4.
A SUMMARY OF THE EFFECTS POTEntial postivie and negative effects of youth migration
+
Diasporas frequently assist in emergency relief in their countries of origin.
The physical or virtual return of skilled workers translates into increases in local human capital, skills transfer and foreign network connections.
+ Positive effects
+ Migration can provide youth with work opportunities not available in their places of origin. The exit of jobseekers may ease domestic pressures linked to excess labour supply.
Negative effects
Migration often results in the loss of highly skilled workers and a reduction in the quality of essential services.
Economic growth and productivity decline with reductions in the stock of high-skilled labour.
In places of origin, returns on public investments in education are lower. The absence of parents may increase the vulnerability of youth left behind, and adolescents commonly experience difficulties in their social relations and will isolate themselves in small peer groups who are in a like situation.
Youth left behind by their parents commonly experience increased demands as they must assume responsibilities previously assumed by their parents. This can lead to declines in academic performance and exit from school altogether.
Remittances coupled with limited parental supervision may be linked to a higher probability of risky behavior among youth left behind.
Migration may expose youthespecially young womento higher risks of abuse, discrimination and exploitation.
+ +
+ +
Migration may empower young women and reinforce equitable gender norms.
Migration for reasons related to education or employment can allow girls to avoid marriage at a young age.
The inflow of remittances may contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in countries of origin and may also stimulate investment in human capital.
Diasporas can be a source of technology transfer,
investments and venture capital for countries of + origin.
same respect, protection and fulfillment of their human rights, regardless of their origin, nationality or immigration status.
Respecting the rights and fundamental freedoms of non-native residents or international migrants is essential if migration is to benefit the migrants themselves and the societies in which they live. Those whose legal rights are protected often make significant contributions to social and economic development in destination societies. However, there are many migrants-particularly those in irregular situationswho are particularly vulnerable to human rights violations ranging from unacceptable work and housing conditions and a lack of access to health care or education to abuse, exploitation and trafficking in persons. As a group, migrants often experience exclusion, racial discrimination and even violence. A survey conducted by the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights on immigrant and ethnic minorities and discrimination in 27 countries found that violence affected many immigrant groups at a rate much higher than the non-immigrant population. It also found that young people surveyed had experienced higher rates of criminal victimization than their older
C H A1 P T E R
counterparts. A lack of protection in immigration policies and inaccessibility of redress mechanisms not only leaves young migrants vulnerable to exploitation and abuse but also limits their ability to take advantage of the opportunities and benefits of migration over the short and long term. Countries of origin and destination should endeavor to provide support services throughout all stages of the migration process to ensure for the well-being and development of all young people, and work to develop programmes that provide easily accessible information on safe and regular migration channels.
The rights of migrant workers
Addressing the discriminatory and abusive treatment of migrant workers has long been on the international agenda. Three key instruments adopted to answer this concern include the following3:
    Convention (No. 97) concerning Migration for Employment tion (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) and C143  Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention (No. 143), available from  normlex/en/f?p=1000:12000:0::NO; and united_nations, General Assembly resolution 45/158 of
    (Supplementary Provisions) Convention (No. 143) [Convention concerning Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and Treatment of Migrant Workers]
 on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
 Decent Work for Domestic Workers
Although the conventions have been in place for several decades, relatively few States have ratified them. Developed countries and countries of destination make up a very small proportion of the total, accounting for 10 of the 49 parties to the 1949 Convention, only 3 of the 23 parties to the 1975 Convention, and none of the 47 countries that have ratified the 1990 Convention.
In 2011, the General Conference of the International Labour Organization (ILO) adopted the Convention Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers, which recognizes the economic and social value of domestic work and establishes standards for the protection of domestic workers (see box 4.3 in chapter 4). Eight countries had ratified bOx1.5
UN GENERAL ASSEMBly high-level dialogue
The 2013 General Assembly
High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development (HLD)
held on 3 and 4 October 2013, marked the second time in history that the united_nations considered international migration and development in the General Assembly. The overall theme of the 2013 HLD was identifying concrete measures to strengthen coherence and cooperation at all levels in order to enhance the benefits of migration and to address its challenges. More than 100 Member States, many at the ministerial and vice-ministerial level, about 350 civil society representatives as well as numerous permanent observers and international organizations participated in the event.
Member States adopted a Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development (A/68/L.5), in which they agreed on some key principles and recommendations on international migration and development. In particular, the declaration recognizes the important contributions migrants make to countries of origin, transit and destination. It acknowledges the need to integrate both development and human rights dimensions into the migration debate and calls for safe, orderly and regular migration. The declaration also recognizes migration as a key factor for sustainable development and calls for integrating migration into the post-2015 united_nations development agenda.
In their presentations, many Member States covered national practices and recommended measures to address migration challenges and to leverage migration for development. There were calls to develop a framework for the mutual recognition of qualifications and diplomas; to regulate the recruitment industry; to reduce the costs of migration, especially recruitment and remittance transfer fees; to engage diaspora groups; to respect migrant labour rights; to develop circular migration programmes; to improve the evidence base; and to promote coherence, partnerships and collaboration at the national, bilateral, regional and global levels.
In preparation of the High-level Dialogue, the General Assembly held informal interactive hearings with representatives of non-governmental organizations, civil society and the private sector on 15 July 2013. About 380 nongovernmental representatives attended the hearings and were discussing five broad aspects of international migration and development, which included a session on youth perspectives entitled Youth perspectives: Voices of change.
One of the invited speakers of the youth session, Mr. Rishi Singh, stated in his presentation I did not realize what it meant to be undocumented until I was graduating from High School and had to apply to colleges. I soon realized that because I was undocumented, I would not be able to get scholarships, financial aid and loans. (...) It was at this point that I was introduced to DRUM (youth organization). Being undocumented can be very isolating but being in DRUM I soon realized that I was not alone. It became my mission to work towards making sure families and young people do no have to go through what I had to go through. I was a Youth Organizer at DRUM building the leadership of hundreds of other immigrant youth in order to change policies that affected our lives.
For more on the High-level Dialogue, including preparatory activities, the report of the Secretary-General, the outcome documents and other relevant documentation, recordings of the meeting sessions, as well as an inventory of the statements, see  mainhld2013.html?main the Convention by the time it entered into force on 5 September 2013.4
The rights of refugees
The 1951 united_nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol establishes the principle of non-refoulement, which prohibits States parties from returning refugees to areas where their lives or freedom would be threatened on account of ... race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.5 As of August 2013, the Convention and Protocol had been ratified by 145 and 146 countries respectively. Most of the countries that have not ratified the Convention are in the Middle East and Gulf regions and in South and South-east_asia.
Combating trafficking in persons
There are two important protocols supplementing the united_nations Convention against Transnational
C H A1 P T E R
Organized Crime. The 2000 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (annex II to the Convention) is the first legally binding global instrument with an agreed definition on trafficking in persons:
the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs.
It is aimed at facilitating convergence in national approaches to investigating and prosecuting trafficking in persons as well protecting and assisting the victims of trafficking. As of August 2013, 157 States had ratified this Protocol.
The 2004 Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air (annex III to the Convention) is aimed at preventing and combating the smuggling of migrants by organized criminal groups, protecting the rights of smuggled migrants, and preventing their exploitation. It distinctly defines the smuggling of humans as:
Smuggling of migrants shall mean the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a State Party of which the person is not a national or a permanent resident
As of August 2013, 137 States had ratified the Protocol.6
tional Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto (General Assembly resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000), annexes II and III (Vienna, 2004). Available from  ties/UNTOC/Publications/TOC20Convention/ TOCebook-e.pdf
C H A1 P T E R
                Development. Available from     
The paper explores the link between migration and inequality, focusing on the positive and negative effects in both directions. The authors contend that inequality is an impetus for migration, but note that migration may contribute to perpetuating or reducing inequality, depending on factors such as remittance flows.
The paper provides information on the role young people play in international migration, their impact on migration trends, and the motivating factors behind youth migration. Attention is also given to gender considerations, regional migration, and the relationship between population dynamics and future migration trends.
The 2009 Report examines the link between human development and migration within the larger context of overall development. It notes that migrants typically move towards areas of higher mobility. The Report also asserts that improved migration policies and initiatives can enhance human development outcomes for migrants and the families they leave behind.
        Perspectives on Internal and International        from  
This publication contends that there is a positive correlation between migration and development. It provides examples of countries in which internal rural-urban migration has contributed to development, particularly in areas with low levels of education and high urbanization.
                        pdf
This collection of meeting papers highlights the positive impact of international migration on the achievement of Millennium Development Goals showing, for instance, how remittances can contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth. It explores the connection between migration and MDG achievement in the areas of gender equality, health and social development. The publication concludes with some policy recommendations for addressing migration within the MDG framework.
     and migration. Paper prepared for the             www.     
This paper examines human mobility from a gender perspective, exploring how women affect and are affected by migration. Although both positive and negative aspects of the issue are addressed, particular attention is given to womens greater vulnerability to the risks and dangers associated with migration relative to other groups. The paper concludes with suggestions for research and policy action.
C H2A P T E R
Ayoung persons decision to migrate can be influenced by different factors, such as by the desire for a better life or by the need to escape poverty, political persecution, or family/community pressures. Translating plans into action requires a substantial amount of preparation.
This chapter examines the motivating factors behind young peoples migration decisions, the importance of information in preparing for and reducing the risks associated with migration, and the cost of migration and how it influences the choice of migration routes. Key characteristics of migration decisions are also explored, with attention given to factors such as distance and duration, whether the intended move is internal or international, and whether youth migrants are to be accompanied or unaccompanied. The chapter concludes with an overview of the challenges potential youth migrants face and a set of recommendations for various stakeholders.
The role of the family
There is considerable research on the role of the family in decisions relating to youth migration. Some researchers argue that it is an individuals characteristics (such as life-cycle stage, attachment to place, social capital and environmental values) and the rational expectation of being better off elsewhere that drive migration decisions. This approach implies that the decision to migrate is a personal rather than a collective decision. Other researchers argue, however, that the individualist model is unrealistic, considering the complexity of migration and the potential role of social networks in reducing the costs and risks of migration. In the collectivist model, the family is recognized as the primary decision-making unit. This is true whether young people plan to migrate alone, with their parents, or with others inside or outside their kinship group.
In many cases, young people lack the financial resources to bear the full cost of their migration and must rely on their families for monetary support. Where family members provide financial or moral support for a young persons decision to move, migration and its benefits are considered a family gain rather than a personal gain. Remittances are often the central feature of the selfenforcing social contract between migrants and their families. The family helps the potential migrant move with the expectation that the young migrant will remit funds periodically in return. Sending a family member elsewhere allows the family to diversify their assets and resources against the risk of bad outcomes at home. For student migrants, the benefits of migration are expected to accrue upon return.
Youth participants in the online consultation noted that parents and close relatives were largely supportive of migration decisions and in some cases indicated their expectation of remittances to ensure family financial security. The responses suggested that a number of parents supported
C H2A P T E R
temporary migration abroad but not permanent settlement.
The role of others
Although families constitute the main source of support for potential young migrants, social networks of friends, peers and community members can have a significant impact on young peoples migration decisions as well. Some youth are even influenced by casual acquaintances or strangers.
Thoughts of migration may originate from young people themselves or from a multitude of external sources. Distant relatives or friends living abroad may share their own first-hand experiences or provide (possibly inaccurate) information on migrant prospects. Young returnees are often highly respected by family members and society at large, which can be a motivator for others. Young people participating in the consultation reported having been positively or negatively influenced by television programmes, social media or other information sources featuring successful or unsuccessful migration experiences. The stories highlighted below reflect the diverse circumstances surrounding young peoples migration decisions.
Youth perspectives: the influence of family, friends and others on migration decisions
TOME AND ELIZABETE, LABOUR MIGRANTS PORTUGAL          FRANCE
As a young, unmarried couple, we sought stability and the chance to start a life together. However, in Portugal, there were no prospects for the near future. Elizabete worked in a hotel, and I was unemployed and living with my parents. We were searching for a better life, and there came an opportunity to migrate. The proposal came from relatives who were living in the south-west of France.
MOHAMMED, CURRENTLY A LAWYER EGYPT          ITALY
When I was 27 years old, I got to know this man whom Id met several times. We became friends, and he asked me if I wished to travel to Italy, as he could make arrangements with someone who could facilitate my travel. I replied unhesitatingly that sure, I wanted to travel.... (continued on page 44)
ZUNIRA,
I was born and raised in Lahore, Pakistan, as an Ahmadi Muslim. The political and security situation in Pakistan was dire, and after considering the impending threats, my family came to the U.S. and I came with them. We were hoping to stay here for a few months until the situation improved. However, soon after we came we realized that it was not going to get better anytime soon, so we decided to apply for political asylum. Our application was accepted in January of 2011, and I have been living in the U.S. ever since.
REBECA, THIRD-GENERATION INTERNAL MIGRANT
I am pretty much a city girl. I was born at a hospital in the city centre of Brasilia, the capital of Brazil. Nevertheless, my urban life would never have been possible if my dad had not migrated from a little rural town called Pires do Rio to the newly constructed capital Brasilia in the 1970s. Filled with the hope
C H2A P T E R
of better opportunities and a better life, my grandparents were among the millions of Brazilians who left rural areas during that period and established themselves in rapidly growing cities. Now, I see that my dads rural-urban migration influenced my own migration storyone that actually changed my own feelings about the agricultural sector and made me realize that HOPE for the future is actually in the rural areas.
IRINI, FEMALE, AGE 27 CYPRUS TANZANIA
I believe the family environment is very important, both in relation to the acceptance of a young persons decision to migrate and in terms of the specific culture created within the family and immediate social environment in which migration is acceptable or unacceptable.
LAZ, MALE, AGE 30 PHYSICIAN/STUDENT MIGRANT, NIGERIA          united_states
My friends who were already in the U.S. greatly influenced my migration decision. My family felt good [about it] and had no reservations whatsoever. However, I am sure my parents would not have supported a decision to settle permanently in another country. Thus, I have plans to return to my country of origin after school.
YASMYN, FEMALE, AGE 25 PARIS
I have always had my mothers support [when it comes] to travel. She is the one who passed on the love of travelling [by introducing me to] TV programmes that showed me the good things one could expect abroad.
Other factors influencing migration decisions
During the consultations relating to the pre-migration phase, participants engaged in active discourse on the various push and pull factors motivating youth migration. Employment and education were identified as the top reasons for youth migration followed by marriage and family reunification to a limited extent. Overall reasons young people gave for migrating included expectations of greener pastures (economic prosperity), professional or educational opportunities abroad while only a few left home in search of adventure or a sense of belonging. Various young participants noted that internal migration from rural to urban settings typically offered improved access to basic public and social services for their family or better work opportunities. Youth in developing countries often migrated to their countrys capital prior to undertaking international migration to a more developed country.
Among the respondents to the Survey on Youth Migration and Development, some noted that they had migrated because of environmental changes in their country of origin. Environmental change is rarely the direct cause of migration, but its impact on a countrys economic, social and political circumstances can drive migration decisions.
Some youth decide to migrate because of perceived injustices in their countries of origin. There may be a high incidence of corruption, chronic political instability, or serious human rights violations. Those who are not members of mainstream society may fear discrimination or persecution. In one of the migrant stories below, a young woman writes that her sexual
C H2A P T E R
orientation and her local societys failure to protect her rights within this context were central to her migration decision.
Youth perspectives on factors influencing migration decisions
JOSEPH, MALE, AGED 20-29 LABOUR MIGRANT
I left my hometown because even with a university degree I could not find work. I later earned an advanced degree and left my home country becauseagainI could not find work.
LORRAINE, FEMALE, AGED 26-29 LABOUR MIGRANT
Irish skills and education are highly regarded in Australia; there is a shortage of workers in my skill area. I also had over five years of experience in my area, and this was highly regarded. The pay in Australia is much higher than in Ireland.
LIAAM, FEMALE, AGED 19-25 united_states
Persecution based on my sexual orientation and gender identity was a deciding factor [for me] as a transgender woman. My country of origin did not provide the guarantees necessary [to protect] my life.
The need for information during migration planning and preparation
Information is essential for youth planning to venture, quite literally, into unknown territory. At the premigration stage, young people need to know how to obtain a visa, choose and secure a means of travel, and make accommodation arrangements in transit and destination countries. Nowadays, many potential youth migrants have access to mobile phones, the Internet and other ICT tools to obtain travel-related information, to communicate with others in destination societies, and to acquire important information about the socioeconomic conditions and lifestyle in the areas where they plan to live.
Research shows that family members are the principal sources of information for many young migrants. These sources may be reliable or unreliable. Inaccurate information and a lack of awareness about the legal and administrative requirements for migration can delay or complicate the process and may put youth migrants, especially young females, at risk.
Migration information and training
It is becoming increasingly clear that initiatives developed to disseminate reliable migration information to prospective youth migrants and appropriately train migration counsellors can significantly reduce the negative effects and enhance the positive outcomes of migration (see box 2.2).
Youth-friendly information campaigns in countries of origin can change common misconceptions about migration among potential youth migrants, providing them with the knowledge and tools they need to make informed decisions. Campaigns in countries of destination can also influence public opinion about migration and the contribution, rights and responsibilities of migrants. These
C H2A P T E R
campaigns may discourage illegal or irregular migration among youth, make young migrants aware of their rights and responsibilities abroad, and foster dialogue and action on a wide range of youth migration challenges. Reliable information is also critical for raising awareness on the possibility of voluntary return among young migrants.
Accessing electronic information on migration
The Internet and other ICT resources offer young people fast and easy access to a wealth of migration information (see box 2.1). Youth can familiarize themselves with visa requirements, immigration regulations, transportation options, and information about transit and destination societies. They can also communicate directly with individuals already living in their desired locations via social media networks such as online blogs, Facebook or Twitter.
For those with access to electronic resources, self-education has become relatively simple and straightforward; however, youth are often faced with the challenge of ascertaining the reliability of information from these sources. It has been argued by some that limitations stemming from the digital divide and the poorer trustworthiness of virtual connections can create a number of hazards for youth migrants. In some respects, migrants who rely on social media resources are at a relatively high risk of becoming victims of certain form of abuse, or of serving the personal interests of the information provider. Virtual connections (weak ties) may often be more information-rich, but personal connections (strong ties) are often more trustworthy.
Many Governments publish lists of registered and approved businesses and may have information on how to verify offers of employment in destination countries. Although embassies and consulates are considered reliable sources of information, most of the consultation and survey participants report that easily accessible and verifiable information on safe migration is unavailable in certain languages. Below are a number of comments relating to the availability of information for migrants.
ZAIN, MALE, AGE 26, FAMILY MIGRANT DENMARK
Zain is a young manage 26. His bOx2.1
Information and communications technology
ICT tools empower youth with information relevant to all stages of the migration process
ICT resources: empowering youth with information on the migration process Information and communication technology (ICT) can offer young migrants access to valuable support at every stage of the migration process, from planning and preparation at home to integration at destination.
Pre-departure planning and preparation
Once youth have decided to migrate, ICT resources are often central to their pre-departure planning. They might search for online information about their desired destination or contact people already living there. In some cases, youth must use the Internet for their pre-migration preparations, particularly when they need to obtain a visa. Many embassies now require online appointment scheduling and visa application submission.
Transit
The use of ICT tools may reduce travel risks. While in transit, youth migrants can maintain regular contact with family members back home or in destination societies using mobile phones or other portable electronic communication devices.
Arrival and integration in destination societies
Upon arrival, youth migrants can use ICT to familiarize themselves with their new environment. Some might use the Internet to find jobs or housing or to access government services. ICT can also serve as a means of empowerment;
youth migrants can establish links with other members of their diaspora community in the host country, and with greater collective bargaining power, they may be in a better position to demand their rights and to protest discrimination or mistreatment.
Maintaining connections with places of origin
With the multitude of ICT options available, most youth migrants can maintain regular contact with their home communities. Cheap communication provides the social glue for transnational connections.a These links have implications on two levels. First, young migrants who are able to stay in touch with family members and friends back home may find the transition to a new society less difficult and the overall migration experience less emotionally taxing, as feelings of distance and separation are not as acute as might otherwise be the case. Second, young migrants who become part of home-based virtual communities can join their compatriots in lobbying for political change or reform in their places of origin.b family migrated to Denmark thirteen years ago. The main purpose was to gain access to better opportunities. They were partially aware of migrants rights, and they learned about them mainly through news and social networks. Denmark is a welfare state, so his family was provided with all their basic needs, and it has become like home.
RALUCA, FEMALE, AGE 26 ROMANIA          BELGIUM
The European Youth Portal provides a lot of useful information on work and volunteer exchanges. Indeed, the Internet remains the best option for ensuring awareness of migrant rights [and opportunities].
Technology is rapidly becoming a key component of the migration process for many young people. ICT resources can streamline migration planning and facilitate integration. They can be used to reduce bureaucracy and reach larger numbers of potential young migrants. One suggestion provided by a participant in the online consultation process relates to the creation of smartphone-friendly applications and websites for government institutions dealing with migration issues. Of
C H2A P T E R
course, online resources such as these would only benefit those with access to the necessary technology and equipment.
RIMA, FEMALE, AGE 29 DUBAI
Technology should be able to streamline these processes. The world is at our fingertips. If each countrys ministry of interior produced a smartphone app or website for potential youth migrants, this could simplify the process and ensure that fewer people fell prey to untrustworthy travel agents.
The cost of migration
Young people planning to migrate must have sufficient funds to cover pre-migration expenses, travel-related costs and settlement requirements. Many migrants consider international migration more lucrative than internal migration, but the costs of the former are significantly higher. Expenses for international migration may include official fees for travel documents and clearance, payments to intermediaries, travel expenses, and in some cases the payment of bribes. Evidence suggests that migration costs are often high for unskilled workersespecially those on temporary contractsrelative to their wage expectations abroad.
Distorted perceptions or insufficient information about economic and social realities in the desired destination country can lead to poor decisions among young migrants. The online consultations and survey results suggest that young migrants who lack information on legal migration procedures are more likely to travel without the proper documentation. Some rely on travel agents who may charge exorbitant fees for services never (or only partially) rendered and who may deliberately lead migrants into forced labour or trafficking situations. This issue is explored in some depth later in the chapter.
Millions of young people have the desire to migrate, but only those who secure the necessary funding can realize their dreams. Some youth are unable to obtain the required legal documents to move and may or may not choose to attempt irregular migration. It is the lack of financial resources that may constitute the largest obstacle to young migrants, however. In addition to travel costs, young people must be prepared to cover their expenses when they arrive, often for an extended period. Labour migrants
C H2A P T E R
Figure 2.1
Country
Australia
united_states
United Arab Emirates united_kingdom Canada
Singapore
Japan
China
russian_federation Spain
Germany
Annual student fees (US dollars)
Note: The research was conducted in 13 countries around the world.
Fees represent the average tuition cost for international students based on the top 10 largest institutions in each relevant country (sourced from individual institution data).
need to support themselves until they find employment, and international students must be able to pay their school and living expenses. As shown in table 2.1, tuition and fees for foreign students can be quite high, and many youth are unable to study abroad without a scholarship or grant assistance.
There is agreement among most respondents to the Survey on Youth Migration and Development that moving abroad is an expensive undertaking. This is especially true for migrants who have no immediate source of income on arrival.
LAZ, MALE, AGE 30 PHYSICIAN/STUDENT MIGRANT, NIGERIA          united_states
Financial dependence among young people significantly affects their migration decision. Some young people ... make the choice of using a cheaper but illegal route to move to another country when they are faced with the... paucity of funds.
Prolonged application processes, the cost of engaging travel intermediaries (see figure 2.1), and the payment of bribes for routine services in some countries can make applying for vital records and basic travel documents very expensive. There are often major differences between governmentapproved fees and the actual cost of migration, reflecting the existence of several tiers of rent-seeking intermediaries located in both countries of origin and places of destination.
Intermediaries are engaged to provide potential migrants, including youth, with travel-related information and assistance. They may familiarize clients with visa requirements and help arrange travel accommodations, and some even offer short-term loans to cover the initial costs of the move. Many of these middlemen afford genuine support, but some are untrustworthy and may be involved in smuggling and/or trafficking syndicates. There are numerous cases of fraud and abuse, where the potential migrant pays high fees for travel arrangements or an employment contract but is ultimately denied a visa or finds that the promised contract does not exist. In such cases, youth migrants may be unable to seek legal redress because of their inability to trace the whereabouts of the middleman or to obtain documentation that lays out the terms and conditions of work and monetary transactions. When intermediaries offer assistance with bOx2.2
International organization for migration
IOM migrant training and pre-departure orientation programmes: making migration-related information available for youth
Programme overview
+ The migrant training programmes developed by the International Organization for Migration (IOM) provide targeted, practical guidelines for practitioners assisting migrants preparing to travel to a new country. Between 2001 and 2010, more than 350,000 migrants benefitted from the briefings. The training programmes have evolved over a period of 60 years to meet emerging needs. IOM works closely with Governments and relevant institutions on training design and undertakes regular reviews and assessments to improve services for migrants.
+ In terms of programme methodology, IOM promotes an interactive, learner-centred approach that encourages participation and creates a sense of ownership and belonging among participants. Interaction with peers and experts and space for self-expression are vital components of the training. Psychosocial well-being is a priority of the training programmes; treating young people with dignity and compassion increases their confidence and their chances of successful integration.
Programme content
+ Pre-departure training is designed to help migrants with the logistical aspects of their travel abroad. Migrants learn about the required documentation and what to expect at each stage of their journey (departure, transit and arrival).
+ Cultural orientation is provided to educate migrants about the cultural norms and values of the host society and to acquaint them with the positive and negative aspects of living in a particular country. Young migrants often experience culture shock, and the training teaches them coping mechanisms that can facilitate their cultural adjustment.
+ Migrants are given practical information about the host country so that they are better prepared to deal with the requirements of daily living. Areas of focus within this framework include physical geography and the environment, legal rights and responsibilities, education and training, employment, banking and budgeting, housing, health care and transportation.
+ Prior to their departure, migrants are informed about the services they might expect to receive from (re)settlement agencies in their host countries.
+ The migrant training guide published by IOM includes additional guidelines for trainers addressing the needs of special groups of migrants, including youth, children, parents, the elderly, nonor less-literate individuals, women and escorts. The section relating to youth focuses on issues such as dating and sex, fashion and consumerism, illicit drugs and alcohol use, employment, education and family relations.
C H2A P T E R
Figure 2.1
The cost of intermediaries for selected migration corridors in terms of annual income per capita, 2006-2008
Philippines to Singapore
India to the united_kingdom
Colombia to Spain
China to Australia
Bangladesh to Saudi Arabia
Vietnam to Japan
0123456
Income per capita (in years)
illegal or irregular migration and fail to deliver the services promised, migrants have virtually no legal recourse.
MOHAMMED,
CURRENTLY A LAWYER (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 37) EGYPT          ITALY
The man told me he would act as a mediator, and that I needed to give him 5,000 Egyptian pounds. I arranged to pay him the money, and he did arrange a meeting with the intended person, who wanted 15,000 Egyptian pounds in order to help me travel to Italy. Of course, I paid the amount as agreed. The date of travel was set at two weeks after the payment day, then the date and the venue were selected and I was informed of those details. We travelled on a fishing boat to the [sea] border of Italy, then we were requested to get out in the middle of the sea and ... swim to reach the Italian shores. I reached the shore with Gods help; I was the only survivor from that illegal immigration trip. Because I was a good swimmer, I arrived in Genoa, Italy.
Mohammed was fortunate to have survived and reached his destination after the perilous journey and the fraudulent actions of the intermediaries. Young people such as Mohammed are often sought out by travel intermediaries or actively engage their services at the migration planning stage. Migrants in irregular situations, in particular, are often compelled to seek help through unofficial channels, and because they have little recourse against dishonest middlemen, they are in an extremely vulnerable position. The ignorance or desperation that drives the decision to rely on unknown intermediaries can literally cost some young migrants their lives.
Financing migration
Youth migrants finance their travel and resettlement in a number of different ways (see figure 2.2). Almost 60 per cent of the respondents to the Survey
C H2A P T E R
Figure 2.2
Sources of financial support for migration
Savings Support Other from sources relatives
Loans
Sale of household assets
Note: Totals exceed 100 per cent because respondents were asked to select all options that applied.
on Youth Migration and Development indicated that their main source of funding was their savings, while about 42 per cent received support from their relatives. Nearly 6 per cent of the respondents sold household assets to defray the cost of their move. Other sources of funding were often tied to the type of migration undertaken; student migrants were sometimes able to secure scholarships from their Governments or universities, while many young labour migrants relied on financial support from their employers or personal savings from their income.
The gap between migration dreams and reality
Gallup conducts ongoing surveys to provide up to date data on potential migrants worldwide. A recent study indicates that potential migrants are often young, educated, single,
underemployed and relatively financially well-off (Esipova, Ray and Pugliese, 2011). Findings from the studies reveal wide gaps between those who express the desire to emigrate, those who are planning to move within the succeeding 12 months, and those actively engaged in preparations to migrate.
A 2011 Gallup World Poll carried out in 146 countries estimated the number of individuals dreaming of permanently leaving their countries at a staggering 630 million. However, out of that total, only 48 million were planning to move within the year, and only 19 million were actively preparing to emigrate (see figure 2.3).
Features of young migrants mobility
Once youth migrants have secured the necessary travel resources, there are different ways they can proceed. Their move may be short or long in terms of time or space; some may choose to move internally before migrating abroad. They may use legal or illegal channels. Young migrants may travel by air, on water or on land, arriving after a comfortable one-day flight or an arduous months-long journey.
Percentage
C H2A P T E R
Figure 2.3
Global migration: the gap between desire and reality
Dreamers
Planners
Movers
They may migrate accompanied or unaccompanied. The migration journey significantly influences the extent to which they are vulnerable to or protected from risk. There is some evidence that young men often migrate alone, whereas many young women try to migrate with one or more friends or family members to limit their vulnerability to exploitation and abuse or due to cultural norms.
Depending on social and economic circumstances in the place of origin and the motive for migration, potential youth migrants may choose to relocate within their countries before moving across national borders. Young migrants who opt for temporary internal migration may be able to build social and financial capital that will support their international migration efforts.
There is some evidence that poor youth may be more likely to move shorter distances, as the costs tend to be lower. Consequently, those with limited financial resources often engage in internal (rural-rural, urban-urban or rural-urban) migration.
Age is another factor influencing the distance young people are willing to migrate. Younger migrants, particularly girls, tend to remain closer to their places of origin, while older ones often move farther away.
Challenges at the pre-migration stage
Many young people are excited at the prospect of leaving home to settle in another place. However, the period leading up to their departure may present a variety of challenges.
One of the challenges cited most often by participants in the online consultations and survey was the difficulty youth faced in obtaining accurate information about their
Millions intended destination. One refugee offered her views on what could be done to improve the pre-migration process for youth.
PAWSER, FEMALE, AGED 26-29 REFUGEE
Young people have no options [in terms of where they move]. It is the parents [choice], and they follow their parents. There is no education ... to teach them the process. There is no information ... to [help them] make a decision. Some time in the future, I think the united_nations should have a program only for youth, if they really want to support them, to teach them about the country they are going to. Not just a few weeks, but a lot [more, so they can learn about] the history [and] the people, and [they can take] people outside the camp so they can learn more. I want them to do that for refugee camps around the world.
Fulfilling practical requirements obtaining the necessary documents, engaging a travel agent or intermediary, and making arrangements for travel and accommodationscan be expensive and time-consuming. Young
C H2A P T E R
people trying to complete travel-related paperwork are often faced with delays; these may be caused by bureaucratic red tape but can also be linked to the payment of bribes for document processing. Young people who feel the need to engage a third party to provide migration assistance may be taking a huge risk, as there are numerous intermediary scams being perpetrated against vulnerable youth. Irregular migrants are particularly susceptible to fraud; they have little legal recourse if they are cheated or placed at risk, and many are unaware of the potential consequences of unofficial migration including increased vulnerability to human trafficking and criminal attacks, sexual and labour exploitation, the inability to secure decent work, deportation, arrest, low self-esteem, insecurity and deprivation.
Along with the practical challenges, young migrants must deal with the emotional anxiety of leaving their families and communities to face new responsibilities and unknown risks often alone.
RALUCA, FEMALE, AGE 26 ROMANIA BELGIUM
The first challenge young migrants need to face before starting their journey is to be prepared to adapt to a new culture, within a different environment from what they were used to, and to continually be informed about their rights and obligations as newcomers.
Once young migrants have overcome pre-migration obstacles and embarked on their journey, they face a new set of challenges in transit and at destination. Nicholas, a former child soldier forced to migrate, shares some of the challenges he faced and highlights some of the dangers and risks associated with migration. He also makes some useful suggestions to help migrants in similar irregular or forced migration situations.
NICHOLAS, MALE,
I faced unique challenges migrating as a young person. I was vulnerable to any situation at that time. People took advantage of me. I [travelled] with a former female child soldier named Sarah. Life for her was really difficult, and [I heard later] that she was murdered. From my experience, I would advise youth, if they have family, to get some bOx2.3
RECOMMENDATIONS by youth
Life does not necessarily get better when we migrate. The conditions surrounding us that make us want to leave may get better only if we try to improve them.  Rueben, Aged 30, Ghana
The recommendations belowoffered by youth participating in online consultations and a survey undertaken in support of the World Youth Report are intended to help other young people, youth organizations, and relevant stakeholders address the challenges associated with youth migration.
+ Readiness assessment tools need to be developed to facilitate decisionmaking and planning among young people considering migration. Potential youth migrants should complete a self-assessment to determine whether migration is the right option for them. During the pre-migration stage, they should take time to think through the entire migration process, developing plans for travel, settlement and (in some cases) return to their countries of origin. A pre-departure checklist might be developed for youth to support safe migration.
+ Youth-centred initiatives should be developed to ensure migration readiness. These might include peer-to-peer initiatives, pre-departure orientation programmes, and awareness-raising campaigns that inform potential youth migrants about the challenges and opportunities associated with regular and irregular migration. Information on international migrant rights and human rights should be integrated in such initiatives.
+ Potential youth migrants must carefully research all aspects of the migration process applicable to their particular circumstances so that they can make informed decisions. Any information they obtain should be verified with organizations dealing with migration or relevant government institutions.
+ Youth feedback indicates a general lack of knowledge about what youth organizations are doing in any given country to raise awareness about safe migration. If such organizations are to be effective in reaching youth, further research on migration trends and effective outreach methods must be conducted globally, as youth comprise a diverse group. Rueben, a 30-year-old respondent from Ghana, suggested that youth become part of the solution in addressing the challenges of youth migration, noting that life does not necessarily get better when we migrate. The conditions surrounding us that make us want to leave may get better only if we try to improve them.
advice from them concerning their decision to migrate. Also, reading some books and searching on the Internet to know more about the country you want to migrate to can help. If any citizens of that country are [available], try to reach out [to them] and ask them about migrants in their country and the laws about migration therehow life [is for] migrants and how are they coping. Make sure to have the cash and documents you need [for] that country, and try your best to stay there legally.
Young people relocating within their own countries, internal migrants, may face many of the same challenges as youth migrating abroad. Internal (especially rural-urban) migrants must often deal with the high cost of living in cities, increased noise
C H2A P T E R
and congestion, the unavailability of affordable and decent housing, and the lack of employment and economic opportunities. Female migrants may be subject to socio-cultural norms that interfere with their migration or settlement abroad. Once they migrate, they may encounter special constraints with regard to their movement or abuse in the workplace.
RAKESH, MALE, AGE 23, INTERNAL STUDENT MIGRANT EASTERN INDIA          DELHI
Many [Indian] youth who migrate from rural to urban areas for a better education or employment ... face problems such as a lack of decent accommodations and food. Some [of my friends who have come] from north-eastern parts of India to Delhi [have faced] sexual as well as racial harassment. Small living quarters usually cost $30-$40 per month, but as a young migrant you have to pay more than $100. Many times students ... who come from rural areas of the country need to pay illegally for basic [services such as] electricity or an Internet connection.
Recommendations for addressing the challenges facing youth migrants
The participants in the online consultations and Survey on Youth Migration and Development highlighted many of the challenges faced by young migrants, but they also offered a number of useful suggestions and recommendations for future action (see box 2.3).
C H2A P T E R 
This report examines migration trends among adolescent females, highlighting some of the unique challenges they face and proposing solutions. The primary focus is on establishing policies and programmes that are essentially aimed at building the protective assets of female youth throughout the migration process so that they remain safe and are able to benefit from the opportunities migration presents.
This journal article explores the role of social capital in the migration process, highlighting the importance of social networks during the predeparture and return phases of migration. One finding is that social capital in the destination society is positively correlated with migrants decision to return, while there is a negative correlation between social capital at the place of origin and return migration.
    opportunities of migrant youth in            
These discussions were part of a series of online consultations undertaken by the united_nations Focal Point on Youth to gather input for the 2013 World Youth Report. The summary includes the views and perspectives of youth worldwide on the factors influencing pre-departure migration decisions.
         Available from   
This working paper illustrates the challenges and risks associated with irregular migration. It highlights the experiences of Egyptian youth travelling illegally to Europe, showing how dangerous irregular migration can beespecially when the costs are high and migrants search for the least expensive routes. These experiences form the basis of recommendations on improvements that may be introduced at the predeparture stage to minimize irregular migration and its attendant risks.
This publication suggests various measures that could be undertaken at the pre-departure stage to reduce the risks and challenges associated with migration. It emphasizes the importance of information campaigns and explores how awareness-raising and information sharing might be useful at this stage.
C H3A P T E R
Migration does not necessarily involve a direct move from a home community to a final destination. Some international migrants transit through a third country on their way to a preferred destination. Many of them remain in transit locations for a considerable length of timesometimes several years. This is most apparent in certain migration corridors; for example, migrants from sub-Saharan Africa often transit slowly through North African countries as they make their way towards Europe, and South American migrants must endure a long journey through Mexico to get to the united_states of America.
Figure 3.1
Ceuta
Melilla
Adrar
Bengazi Shabha
Al-Jawf
Gao Bamako
NIGER MALI Agadez
Khartoum
Mogadishu Kampala
NDjamena
EU Joint Border Patrols Sahara Desert
Some researchers refer to transit migrants as sojourners, focusing attention on their journey and what happens to them during that period. In travel terminology, the term transit is typically used in contexts that imply a relatively rapid transfer; transit visas are usually issued for three days or less, and transit passengers generally expect to remain in an intermediate country for no more than 24 hours. These examples might suggest that transit migration is, by definition, a short-term phenomenona brief stop along a migrants pre-planned route. That is sometimes the case. However, with the increase in the scope and scale of human movement, transit migration has correspondingly become more complex and diverse, and there are now wide-ranging categories of transit migrants moving willingly or unwillingly, regularly or irregularly, from one country to another over a period of time. Such growing complexities have drawn increased attention to irregular migrationperhaps diverting attention away from regular forms of transit migration and the situation of youth migrantsand the risks to which transit migrants are exposed in the migration process.
This chapter focuses on the factors that
C H3A P T E R
influence the choice of transit countries in the migration process, the features of transit migration, and the challenges and opportunities young migrants are presented with while in transit. Special attention is given to the unique vulnerabilities of certain categories of young migrants in transit and how they should be addressed.
Whether youth migrants choose to transit through certain countries on their way to a final destination depends on factors such as available travel routes, travel and visa regulations, legal barriers to exit, travel costs, and the presence of family members, existing diaspora communities and organized travel networks they might rely on for support. Visa restrictions may compel migrants to resort to irregular migration, which may involve at least partial dependence on informal travel agents, including smugglers.
For many of the international youth migrants who shared their stories during the consultation on transit migration,
the choice of a transit country was often based on perceptions of sociocultural similarities and consequent expectations of an easy transition. Their transit decisions were also strongly influenced by factors such as visa costs and the processes associated with obtaining visas for transit and destination countries.
LONNEKE VAN ZUNDERT, FEMALE, AGE 34 YEARS
[One goes] by choice... because ... the transit country is visa-free, easy on issuing visas, or known to have a flexible entry policy. [It also helps if there is] a large community of citizens from the home country, or if the migrant has contacts. [It is best if the] the geographical location [of the transit country] is close to final destination (with the possibility of entering the destination country illegally), and if opportunities are available to save up/prepare for the final destination.
Young migrants who are aware of the support options available in transit improve their chances of safe travel. Youth often follow traditional migration routes where there are certain ethnic or transnational networks that furnish accommodations on arrival in a transit country and provide employment assistance to young migrants who have to work to finance the next stage of their journey. While in transit, youth migrants can maintain contact with their family members at home or with other contacts at various destination points along the way using mobile phones and e-mail. Financial transfer services are now widely available in most transit countries, making it easy for families to send funds to young migrants to help cover their expenses along the way. Young migrants should give careful consideration to their choice of travel mode; although air travel is comparatively expensive, it offers greater safety and ease, especially for those accompanied by young children, and it may even prove more cost-effective when the expenses of a long overland journey are factored into total transit costs.
Although careful planning may reduce some of the travel risks, evidence suggests that the transit journey can be the most dangerous part of the migration process, as many migrants have limited social networks and support and are therefore vulnerable
C H3A P T E R
to threats that could affect their well being and their ability to move to a destination country.
At the beginning of their journey, some young migrants are not sure what their final destinations will be. For others, countries initially intended as final destinations can turn out to be transit countries, as young migrants sometimes realize that other countries might offer them even better opportunities or easier integration. During the pre-migration stage, many young people decide on a destination based on a perceived sense of social and cultural continuity and similarity between the country of origin and the destination country. Such expectations can actually interfere with integration. For example, a young migrant may assume that a common language and shared history will make socio-cultural challenges easier to overcome; when they expect to be considered insiders but are instead treated as outsiders, they are often unable to develop a sense of belonging and may then decide to move againtransforming what was once considered the destination into a transit point. In the accounts below, several young migrants share their experiences of trying to find countries best suited to their needs.
On the 17th of April, 2008, I travelled to the united_states for the very first time. After a not-too-long flightit was one of the first direct Lagos-toAtlanta flightsI ended up at Disney World, where I spent an entire week. Before I knew it, I was back in Nigeria. A year after Florida, I was in Germany for three months. Seven months after Germany, I moved to Liberia for a year. Six months after that, I was back in the U.S. for a few months, and then I returned to Liberia for another year. After that, I returned to the U.S., where I currently live and study. All together, I was on the road for five years, which is not necessarily a long time, but in our jet age, where a day equals a decade, it is a long time to roam around away from home, and enough time to feel displaced and slightly disoriented. For free-movers like me, the prominence of ones place as an outsider leads to an overwhelming sense of displacementa feeling that is not necessarily the result of ones relocation, but an awareness of ones identity in a new place, and the urgent need to adjust in order to make progress.
AUSRINE, FEMALE, AGE 27 LITHUANIA          united_states
I call it my... journey in quest of finding myself in a best fit country.
VICTORIA, FEMALE, AGE 24 REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA ROMANIA
I am originally from the Republic of Moldova, and I moved to Romania, a neighboring country, for my studies. My home country is not part of the European Union, while Romania is. I chose Romania as a final destination, but I have been here for almost five years, and it has now become a transit country. The Republic of Moldova and Romania have the same historical background. At one point in history they were even the same country. So, the social and cultural life of these two countries is almost the same, and we are considered to be Romanians abroad. We speak the same language, but with different accents and even some different words. It seems [like it would] be easy to be integrated in this society, but it hasnt been. The fact that I have a
C H3A P T E R
different accent from the rest of the
Romanian population makes me feel like an immigrant all the time, even if we speak the same language and share the same ethnicity. Of course, [on paper] I am an immigrant, because I have different citizenship. However, because of Romanian citizenship policy, I have obtained Romanian citizenship. Now I am a citizen of this country, but I still do not consider myself integrated. I cannot say that this country is my home. I want to emigrate again.
Migrants can spend a day or several years in transit. Prior to their departure, migrants may have detailed travel itineraries with specific arrival times, a general idea of how long their journey should take, or a flexible schedule with no set end point. Even with the most careful plans, changes may occur. In some instances, as illustrated above, the intended final destination may turn out to be a transit country, while a planned transit stop might become a place of permanent or long-term settlement.
Migrants frequently find themselves stranded in certain countries because they run out of money, fail to make it across a border, or are abandoned by the smugglers transporting them.
Most of the participants in the consultation on transit migration confirmed that the time they actually spent in transit was not consistent with their pre-set plans. In their experience, the concept of being in transit took on different meanings, depending on the circumstances. As one participant pointed out, young migrants do not always choose to be in transit; for those seeking legal access to the next destination, bureaucratic red tape and the lack of essential information and support can result in their being stuck in transit for an indefinite period.
DANIELA, FEMALE, AGE 28 ITALY SWITZERLAND
I would like to focus on a new type of transitional migration: the one done because of university studies. In particular, I would like to focus on a situation experienced here in Switzerland. It is full of young graduates that keep moving from one place to another to study for years because this is the only legal way for them to stay in Switzerland.
A number of participants said they felt that they were in a constant state of transit as they sought the destination country best suited to their needs. For some, this might have reflected a degree of flexibility with regard to the final destination, while for those who had a preferred destination country in mind, lengthy transit stops were likely required until it became feasible to progress to the next stage. The amount of time spent in a transit country typically depends on a migrants ability to make use of available opportunities and support structures to prepare for travel to another transit point or the destination country. This may involve learning the basics of the language, working until enough money is saved for the next leg of the journey, acquiring the necessary legal documents, and re-establishing or strengthening social connections in the destination country.
C H3A P T E R
A common myth is that migrants are carriers of disease and are a burden on health services. The reality is that most migrants travel when they are young and healthy. Nonetheless, there are travel-related health risks, particularly for transit migrants living in distressed circumstances. Dealing with challenges such as substandard accommodations, poor sanitation, and food deprivation can take its toll on the physical and mental health of young migrants. In some cases, female migrants may be coerced into engaging in transactional and unprotected sex with unscrupulous individuals such as travel intermediaries and corrupt border officials in order to facilitate their cross-border passage, putting them at risk for sexually transmitted infections and unwanted pregnancy. In any case, few migrants utilize non-emergency health-care services while in transit because they are unsure about their health rights as non-citizens or do not know how to access the services they need. Many are unaware of the fact that countries often have policies covering the provision of certain services to all those in need, regardless of their legal status, language proficiency, or cultural background.
A number of participants in the online consultation affirmed that various forms of support had made a difference in their transit migration experience. Assistance ranged from strangers translating labels in the grocery store to others facilitating access to emergency health-care services and diaspora communities providing transportation and accommodations. Some help came from family and friends back home, but much of the assistance originated in the transit country.
NICOLA, FEMALE, REFUGEE GHANA          PHILIPPINES
In Ghana, the most useful support I received when I first arrived was a childhood friend I knew from Liberia sheltering me in his house. In the Philippines, [I was helped by] a friend
C H3A P T E R
I knew in Ghana. The Filipino guy I was sharing a room with stole my cell phone and money when I was ... taking a bath. When I told my friend about it, he sent me some cash.
ZANDILE, FEMALE, AGED 20-35 YEARS SOUTH AFRICA          THE NETHERLANDS
I had problems understanding the language in my transit country, but it was made pretty easy [for me] because the institution I was affiliated with handled all the paperwork.
DANIEL, MALE, AGE 35 NIGERIA
The most [valuable] support my wife and I received when we first arrived in Makurdi was care and concern. The family we met were so hospitable. This family helped us with health care, as we had had a terrible accident and they swiftly took us to a nearby hospital for immediate medical attention. Besides [that,] they helped us in getting around our transit community.
             Exploring Policy Routes. International       
This paper examines health within the context of Asian migration. It dispels a number of myths while addressing the real health issues associated with the migration process at every stage. It concludes with a concise five-step plan integrating policy solutions and improvements.
          from   
A number of case-studies highlight transit migration issues in the Middle East. The report defines the concept of transit migration and addresses the special risks and dangers associated with this stage of the migration process.
                      Development Alternatives and Area Studies, 
The article explores how sub-Saharan African migrants share information to ease the process of migrating to Europe. An effort is made to highlight the challenges faced by transit migrants as well as the role of travel intermediairies at this stage of the process .
This report summarizes the challenges and opportunities associated with transit migration as related by youth migrants around the world.
C H4A P T E R
The experiences of migrant youth in destination societies vary greatly owing to differences in migration motives, gender and migration status. Prearrival and post-arrival experiences are crucial, as together they determine whether the migration process will have a positive or negative impact on the migrants. Foreign-born immigrants, who come to a new country for education, employment, skill development, adventure, or family reunification, often encounter challenges ranging from communication barriers to exploitation and abuse. Internal migrants have very different experiences, with most challenges centred on an ambivalent sense of personal identity.
The difficulties youth migrants encounter on arrival or in the short term usually differ from the long-term challenges they face as they settle into destination societies. Recent arrivals are likely to experience culture shock and loneliness. They often face problems finding accommodations and employment, overcoming communication barriers, coping with different weather conditions, and dealing with transportation issues. In the long term, they may face stereotyping, discrimination and abuse at work or in society at large. These challenges may interfere with their social and economic integration and limit their opportunities for development on a multitude of levels.
Social networks, both personal and institutional, often play an important role in facilitating the social and economic integration of youth migrants in destination societies. Establishing connections in new places helps newcomers settle in, while maintaining ties with their countries of origin eases the transition to a new place and provides emotional continuity. Young migrants lacking access to such support systems tend to experience slower or less effective integration and are more likely to be subjected to abuse and exploitation.
In this chapter, young international and internal immigrants share the challenges they have faced in finding housing, securing employment, accessing healthcare services, and generally adapting to life in a new locale. The chapter also offers some insight into their remittance behaviour and the challenging decision to stay abroad or return home to their countries of origin.
Access to social networks
These stories illustrate how important social networks can be both for potential young migrants and for those who have already migrated. Immediate and extended family, friends and acquaintances, community groups, religious centers, and other individuals and organizations frequently help these young people adjust to their new surroundings by offering them a place to stay, information on how to find work, and an introduction to the lifestyle of their new community or country. Support from social networks is often temporary, with emphasis on meeting basic survival needs and facilitating the integration of newly arrived migrants. Such networks provide critical
C H4A P T E R
assistance, though they can also be a source of tension and conflict among young migrants.
Youth migrants perspectives on social networks
NICHOLAS, MALE, REFUGEE LIBERIA GHANA
Like some migrants, my movement was not voluntary but forced because of the Liberian civil war between 1999 and 2003. I was recruited as a child soldier, but thanks to my migration experience I have a relatively safe life and I am a child activist. My movement was not well planned; I had no information about how to move safely and no contacts in Ghana, my destination country.
ITZELFEMALE, ADVENTURE AND LABOUR MIGRANT MEXICO SPAIN
My name is Itzel Eguiluz, and I am a Mexican living in Spain. My journey to Spain began with internal migration to Mexico City. For 24 years I lived in the metropolitan area of Mexico City. When I grew up and completed my B.A. in International Affairs, I worked for a year, then took a postgraduate course and a language course for another year. I moved with my boyfriend to Cuernavaca and the move offered us a new life together. For us, migrating to the city didnt really represent a risk; it was an adventure for the two of us. It wasnt easy, but we did it. The challenges were simple: find a new home in a new city and understand the social construct of that city. Our experience was great. Thanks to the phone and the Internet, especially Skype and Google Talk, I was in touch with my family almost every day.
Access to adequate shelter
Securing appropriate accommodations is essential to the well-being of youth migrants and their ability to adjust to their new life. Although some youth are able to find a place to stay before they arrive, others may have to search for lodgings upon arrival. Finding decent and affordable housing may take time sometimes several monthswhich can affect their health as well as their educational or employment prospects. Because young migrants are often poor or have limited financial resources when they first arrive, cost is usually a major obstacle to securing decent housing,
The housing situation is particularly complicated for undocumented youth migrants. These individuals are vulnerable to abusive landlords who may threaten to report them should they attempt to exercise their rights, so they may hesitate to complain about their deplorable living conditions. Moreover, their migration status often makes them ineligible for participation in housing assistance schemes. Some of them end up homeless or living in slums, with limited access to heat, safe drinking water, hot water, sanitation services, and other basic needs. In fastgrowing urban areas receiving large numbers of international or internal migrants, homelessness among immigrant populations has risen.
Newly arrived youth immigrants may tap a number of different sources in their search for adequate accommodations. Some rely on relatives, friends, acquaintances, religious institutions, or diaspora community groups for help, while others obtain housing with the support of employers, educational institutions, or local authorities, or through the use of the Internet. Housing agents in destination societies may also provide assistance to young migrants looking for a place to live.
C H4A P T E R
As illustrated below, young migrants housing experiences have varied widely. Some have been able to negotiate fair terms for safe, comfortable accommodations, while others have been victimized by unscrupulous landlords preying on vulnerable newcomers. Discrimination, difficulty identifying genuine housing agents, and questionable legal and financial practices were only a few of the challenges voiced by youth immigrants.
Youth migrants perspectives on the availability of decent housing
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE, AGED 19-25 IRELAND SWEDEN
I was very lucky to find a place to live through a work colleague I met during my participation in the Erasmus programme. Stockholm has a huge housing deficit, and many people fall victim to scamming. The situation is so bad that it might lead me to leave the country if I ever have to give up the apartment I have now. Rents are extremely high, deposits are sometimes equal to two months rent, flats are sometimes of poor quality, and leases are often for only six months. It can be extremely stressful. I know several people that have had to resort to sleeping on a friends couch while theyve tried to find a new place to live.
JUNILTO, 24, WENT IN SEARCH OF BETTER OPPORTUNITIES GUINE BISSAU          PORTUGAL
To migrate always means to leave our home, people, and things and go in search of a better life or simply a different life. Its been four years that I have been living in Portugal. When I arrived here I was welcomed into a housing estate, where the quality of life was not the best and a lot of young people my age had accepted a way of life that I did not supportnot because it was bad, but just because I hold different values. This and my difficulty with the Portuguese language hampered my adaptation. I had little interaction with other people; I barely noticed them and they barely noticed me. Through a group of young people (JOC) who held the same values that had, I began to feel more at home. The light of life (God) has not left me alone and has guided me in the darkness of life. It is that truth that erases my pain and sustains my joy when I am here far away from my normal habitat.
AKHTAR, MALE, AGED 19-25 ASYLUM-SEEKER
I went to the Ministry of Immigration in Luxembourg; they asked me to come back in two weeks time. After staying two weeks on the roads, I was given a bed in a foyer. I am not homeless right now, but I was homeless for a period of two monthsNovember and December 2012. I used to keep my clothes with friends and sleep here and there.
As these stories suggest, securing housing can be risky, expensive and stressful for youth migrants. The young immigrant from Ireland alludes to the disadvantaged position of migrants in an already fiercely competitive housing market. Junilto and others like him have had to deal with language barriers, prejudice, and ethnic and gender discrimination in their interaction with landlords, housing agents, and members of the wider community in their destination societies. Akhtars experience is not uncommon among refugees. There is usually a lag between their arrival and the point at which they are able to identify their settlement needs and obtain the necessary support from institutions mandated to
C H4A P T E R
provide them with shelter and housing assistance. During this period, refugees may be homeless and especially vulnerable to various types of risks.
Access to labour markets
Many youth migrants move to urban areas within or outside their countries of origin in search of new employment and skill development opportunities. Although internal and international migration can increase young peoples access to work (including entrepreneurship opportunities) and facilitate social integration and maturation, it also carries certain risks, particularly for young women, those involved in irregular migration situations, and other vulnerable populations.
In recent years, the economic slowdown experienced by many countries has translated into reduced employment opportunities for migrants and, in some areas, has intensified negative public perceptions of non-native residents. Evidence from previous periods of economic downturn suggests that young immigrants are more likely than other workers to lose their jobs in a recession both because of their bOx 4.1
Statistics indicate that the current economic downturn has had a serious impact on employment among young immigrants living in certain Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries:
a share of the youth labour force totalled 16.2 per cent in the united_states,
14.3 per cent in Canada, and 16.3 per cent for the OECD countries as a group.
native-born youth but increased by 5 per cent among foreign-born youth.
low human capital (including limited educational attainment, pre-migration work experience, and proficiency in the working language) and because they are often employed in sectors that tend to be hardest hit in times of crisis, such as construction and manufacturing.
The importance of human capital
SILVIA,
ECONOMIC IMMIGRANT/JOB-SEEKER ITALY          TURKEY
I am a twenty-five-year-old girl from a well-off Italian family and have a masters degree in political science and international relations from a private university. I decided to follow the flow of opportunities my academic freedom was offering me and move to another country to find a job. The first problem I had to deal with when I got here was practical in nature and was a daily struggle: the language. Among
C H4A P T E R
all the social issues an immigrant has to face every day, the most awkward is that of employment. It is not easy to get a work permit, as a company must make a considerable investment in you. You might have a lot of advantages on your sidefor example, speaking languages others dontbut it isnt enough. Then you start asking yourself whether it is appropriate or not to struggle that much against a bureaucracy that is even tougher than your countrys.
For many youth immigrants, securing employment is a top priority. One of the first things they do when they arrive in a new place is look for work, but finding a job may take a considerable amount of time and can prove difficult. As mentioned, the human capital characteristics of young immigrants are likely to affect their employment prospects in destination societies. Their level of fluency in languages of commerce, their educational qualifications, and their work experience prior to immigration are all key factors in determining how quickly they can find a job and the type of employment they can secure.
Youth migrants from poorer economic backgrounds with fewer skills and lower educational attainment often remain unemployed or are forced to endure substandard working conditions. Many low-skilled migrants as well as first-time young migrant job seekers find work in what is sometimes termed as the 3 Ds (dirty, dangerous, demeaning) sector. Moderately or highly skilled youth with higher levels of education, knowledge of the working language(s), and some work experience stand a better chance of finding a decent job after migrating. Such youth are also more likely to come with the intention of pursuing higher education before integrating themselves into the labour market of their destination societies, which gives them a distinct advantage over their lower skilled counterparts.
Youth migrants perspectives on seeking and securing employment
LONNEKE, 34-YEAR-OLD FEMALE THE NETHERLANDS          HONG KONG
The kinds of jobs young migrants get at destination totally depend on their background and skill/ education levels and whether they are documented or undocumented immigrants.
EVA, LABOUR MIGRANT PORTUGAL          FRANCE
After a year without work, disheartened, I decided to move to France to work in my area of specializationphysiotherapy. Im well paid and have good working conditions, and my colleagues and customers are fantastic. Furthermore, the people of France and my hosts from Portugal say we have adapted well and that we are workers! It was difficult to leave my family. When asked about having to choose between my love for my family and chasing my future, I say that work is more important at this stage of my life.
CLAUDIA,
As an Italian, I migrated to the united_states, hoping to avoid the recession in my native country. With an official unemployment rate hitting 15 per cent, youth unemployment of up to 35 per cent, decaying pension plans, decaying ethics, and decaying politics, Italy was no longer allowing me to fulfil my ambitions, to dream big and be constantly learning. Like me, many young Italians have taken flight outside of their motherland to found a tech start-up in the Silicon Valley or to work for companies that still value meritocracy.
Young migrants with few marketable skills or those who are first-time jobseekers often find employment in what is sometimes termed the 3D sector, compelled to accept work that is dirty, dangerous and demeaning. Moderately to highly skilled youth immigrants with low-paid, low-status jobs may acquire some work experience and skills over time. However, this experience is often not recognized by potential employers when they try to find better jobs.
S.W., FEMALE, AGE 15-35, LABOUR MIGRANT CAMEROON FINLAND
Finding a job is a nightmare, and when you get one, you have to work twice as hard as the locals. Most often bOx4.2
children of immigrants DOUBLY DISADVANTAGED IN LABOUR MARKETS
Among young adults in their twenties living in European OECD countries (with the exception of Switzerland), education and labour market outcomes tend to be much less favourable for the children of immigrants than for those with native-born parents.
Controlling for socio-demographic characteristics, children of immigrants from Turkey and certain non-OECD lowand middle-income countries such as Morocco often have less positive outcomes than children of immigrants from high-income countries.
The female offspring of immigrants appear to be at a particular disadvantage. In 2009, OECD figures indicated that employment rates were lower for children of immigrants than for children of native-born residents, with gaps of about 8 percentage points for men and about 13 percentage points for women.
Social and economic factors aside, migrants and their children are likely to experience discrimination in labour markets. This sometimes reduces the incentive for parents to invest in education, with some repercussions for social cohesion in the long term.
you have to accept a job (such as cleaning or newspaper distribution) that is not linked to your field of study or qualifications so you can settle your bills.
Depending on the labour market conditions in destination societies, even highly educated and skilled migrant youth may be forced to take jobs that are not commensurate with their qualifications. The mismatch between the educational and skill levels of young migrants and the employment opportunities open to them, resulting in part from the failure of receiving countries to recognize foreign qualifications, amounts to what is often referred to as brain waste.
GEORGE TWENEBOAH KODUA, MALE, AGE 32
I know of endless lists of university graduates ... with backgrounds in engineering, to mention a few, whose migration situations have pushed them to work in salons or security jobs, as Internet cafe consultants, or as cobblers. Simply put, a lot of skilled migrants end up working in unrelated fields and eventually abandon their professions. Some have voluntarily gone back home, as situations have not been favourable.
Large numbers of young female migrants from developing countries are engaged in domestic work. While some will end up empowered by the migration experience, many of themparticularly those in irregular situationsendure abuse, violence, and physical and financial exploitation. Some migrants seem to be stuck in the destination country, often because their passports have been seized by employers, debt collectors or human traffickers.
LONNEKE, FEMALE, AGE 34
I know young women who are indeed stuck in some Asian countries and would love to go back to their home [but cannot do so] because [travel intermediaries]
bOx4.3
In acknowledgment of the numerous challenges domestic workers face, the General Conference of the International Labour Organization (ILO) adopted the Convention Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workersalso referred to as the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)at the 100th Session of the International Labour Conference in Geneva on 16 June 2011. The Convention entered into force on 5 September 2013.
The Convention delineates the basic rights of domestic workers, requiring that all signatories establish legal provisions for their protection. The 27 articles of the Convention address a wide range of issues, including human rights violations, age standards, mechanisms for dispute settlement, and terms and conditions of employment (work hours, remuneration, occupational safety, and health and social security).
The Convention is legally binding on countries that have ratified it (a total of eight had done so by 1 August 2013). Ratifying Governments are obligated to take measures, in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers, to ensure that national laws are in compliance with the Convention.
charged them enormous amounts of money (US$ 10,000  US$ 25,000), which they have to pay back. These youth migrants work under harsh conditions in destination countries. Theres often a thin line between the victims of legal migration and the victims of irregular migration.
Over the past several decades, there have been increasing numbers of youth migrating to other countries in pursuit of higher education. The UNESCO Institute for Statistics reported that the international tertiary student population jumped from 2 million in 2000 to 3.6 million in 2010, and was expected to reach 8 million by 2020.
The marked increase in international student mobility has been driven by the rise of a middle class with a strong interest in higher education in several developing countries. Other factors supporting this trend include the growing prevalence of English as the language of global communication, relatively low education costs in some destination countries (often through
C H4A P T E R
increased scholarship opportunities),
relatively easy and inexpensive transportation options for international travel, and the high value placed on multiculturalism among youth.
DANIELA DI MAURO, FEMALE, AGE 28 LABOUR MIGRANT
My name is Daniela Di Mauro, and Im a young, 28-year-old woman currently living and working in Geneva. I first arrived in Switzerland in 2006 because of a European exchange-student programme called Erasmus. Once I finished my studies abroad, I decided to go back to Italy to finish my bachelors degree and then to move again to Switzerland to study for a masters degree. One of the main reasons for that decision was the high level of education offered in Geneva and the fact that the cost of studying at a public university was much cheaper in Switzerland than in Italy, in spite of the higher cost of living. Once Id finished my masters, I couldnt find anything interesting because I was perceived as overqualified, having a graduate degree from a foreign country. Luckily, I found a job in Geneva, a very competitive city.
Like Daniela, youth who move to other places to study are likely to receive a higher-quality education than would be the case in their home countries. Those studying abroad benefit not only from higher academic standards, but also from broader social, cultural and economic exposure and expanded networking opportunitiesall of which enhance their employability. The migration regulations of several OECD countries allow foreign students to work while studying and for a specified period of time after they complete their studies. Student migrants who earn an income from work are likely to use those resources to finance their education. Some countries also allow foreign students to adjust their status to long-term migrant or resident if they find long-term employment.
Orientation and language services provided by educational institutions
Research has shown that international students provided with an initial orientation by their educational institutions tend to be much better prepared for their foreign academic experience and life abroad. Such support can make a critical difference to their adjustment to unfamiliar surroundings. A student migrant who feels disoriented or unwelcome is likely to have difficulty learning and is more vulnerable to risks within a new community.
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE STUDENT AGED 19-25
The orientation [I received] was detailed, informative and relevant. It covered all issues that were likely to affect a foreign student. The international office played an important role in my educational achievements.
SHANIQUE, FEMALE, AGED 19-25 STUDENT
JAMAICA          ST. KITTS
I attended a 2to 3-hour seminar on the school. I was told what to expect, cautioned about how to act on the island, and shown how to protect myself. I was also given a short tour around the islands main spots.
Student migrants, in particular those living in countries where English is not the official language, frequently benefit from language instruction offered on arrival. The cost can be a
C H4A P T E R
major obstacle for some, however especially those who migrate under forced circumstances with limited or no access to socio-economic resources.
PAWSER, AGED 19-25
I think that its not about where you come from; if you want to get a good job, you need a better education and to speak English well. Working in the library taught me that I need to get an education and get a better job. My community college has an English as a Second Language (ESL) programme for all foreign students to take before they go to regular classes with all American students. ... Now I work in the ESL office.
Recognition of qualifications obtained abroad
As noted in the labour section of this chapter, a key challenge for many student migrants is the non-recognition of qualifications across borders. Such students may face problems in both directionswhen enrolling abroad and upon their return home. Failure to recognize the validity or equivalency of their academic or professional qualifications can have a serious impact on their employment prospects, extending periods of unemployment or forcing students into work for which they are overqualified or poorly remunerated. Recognition of academic and professional qualifications is fundamental to reconciling the best interests of individual migrants with the development objectives of countries of origin and destination.
The level of access youth migrants have to affordable, quality healthcare has a direct impact on their socio-economic welfare. Other factors influencing their overall health and well-being include their migration status (regular or irregular, forced or voluntary) and how they live and work. Student and labour migrants who can avail themselves of healthcare services are more likely than those without healthcare access to stay healthy and be productive in school and at work. Those who have medical coverage through their employers or have access to free public medical care consider themselves fortunate.
bOx4.4
Recognition of higher education and academic qualifications
Recognition by education authorities of formal studies abroad and of foreign academic certification is critical for student migrants, facilitating the pursuit of higher education in other countries and improving long-term employment prospects.
UNESCO has supported the adoption, ratification and implementation of one interregional and six regional conventions on the recognition of studies/ qualifications:
+ International Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Diplomas and Degrees in Higher Education in the Arab and European States bordering on the Mediterranean (1976);
+ Regional Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Certificates, Diplomas, Degrees and other Academic Qualifications in Higher Education in the African States (1981);
+ Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Diplomas and Degrees concerning Higher Education in the Arab States (1978);
+ Regional Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Diplomas and Degrees in Higher Education in Asia and the Pacific (1983);
+ Council of Europe/UNESCO Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications concerning Higher Education in the European Region (1997);
+ Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Diplomas and Degrees in Higher Education in the States belonging to the Europe Region (1979);
+ Regional Convention on the Recognition of Studies, Diplomas and Degrees in latin_america and the Caribbean (1974).
These conventions are legal agreements between countries willing to recognize academic qualifications issued in other countries that have ratified the same agreements.
International agreements and regional exchange programmes represent progress in the right direction; however, implementation of these agreements have only been slowly or not at all been implemented, and problems with credit calculation, grade transfer, bureaucratic documentation, and perceptions and attitudes among professors often interfere with full recognition of academic qualifications.
EVA, FEMALE AGED 30-35
I have had private insurance when living in countries where it was essential, such as the united_states. Now that I am in the UK, the National Health Service provides excellent free health care.
A number of factors effectively limit young migrants access to healthcare services. Language difficulties initially constitute the biggest barrier to becoming aware of and using services. Some young migrants have foreign health insurance that is invalid or offers only limited coverage in destination countries, and out-of-pocket expenses can sometimes be very high. In extreme cases, access to healthcare can mean the difference between life and death. Migrants who are ill or injured may not receive the care they need, and those who are healthy worry about the potential repercussions of a health crisis.
RAYMOND, MALE, AGED 30-35 IRELAND
I dont have medical insurance; I have to stay healthy or else I die.
C H4A P T E R ITZEL, FEMALE, AGED 26-29
YEARS, STUDENT MIGRANT MEXICO SPAIN
I have private healthcare insurance that my scholarship pays for now. It was difficult, initially, to get healthcare because you need your resident number, which they give you six months after you arrive in the country.
ANA, FEMALE, AGED 26-29 MOLDOVA GREECE
Whenever I need healthcare, I pay. In 2008 I had an operation. I was on my mothers insurance, and the hospital said that I didnt have to pay anything. After four months, I received a hospital bill of 12,000. This came as a heavy cost to me.
Migrants in irregular situations tend to be especially vulnerable; even when they have the right to access to basic healthcare (and other services, such as education), lack of awareness or the fear of being arrested and deported may keep them from using available services in some countries. One young man, a migrant himself and coordinator of Bue Fixe, describes his organizations efforts to facilitate access to healthcare and promote awareness of sexual and reproductive rights among other young migrants in his host country:
DYNKA, MALE, AGE 28, MIGRANT AND ACTIVIST SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE PORTUGAL
Regular and irregular migrants are sometimes unaware of their right to health, so we work to inform and engage them on a wide range of HIV/ AIDS and sexual/reproductive health issues as well as their right to health using media platforms such as radio and social media.
Remittances
Immediate and extended family members from the country or community of origin usually bear at least part of the financial cost of migration for youth pursuing outside work opportunities. In return, these relatives expect to receive remittances once the young migrant is employed.
The money these youth migrants or migrant parents send to family members or youth left behind tends to improve their social and economic welfare. The funds are often used to pay school fees, purchase clothing, and cover healthcare costs. In return, the children or family members still at home occasionally send gifts or locally available goods and supplies to their migrant parents.
EMMANUEL, MALE, AGE 26, STUDENT MIGRANT
It has been 12 years since my father left the shores of Ghana. One positive effect of his migration is that he has been able to support our education through the remittances that he sends.
GEORGE, MALE, AGE 35,
FAMILY MEMBER IN THE COUNTRY OF ORIGIN, NIGERIA
I send my family members abroad greeting cards during festival periods and also send them music tapes. I receive money from my family once in a year, and it comes during the Christmas period.
C H4A P T E R
Although young people left behind recognize and appreciate the socioeconomic benefits deriving from remittances, many of them would gladly trade the financial gains for greater physical proximity to their parents.
B., FEMALE, AGE 29,
As we grew older, these gifts, though lovely and admired, were just gifts and didnt really make that much of an impact anymore, because what we needed then was the presence of the migrant parent, not the remittances sent to us.
The amounts, types and frequency of remittances vary widely. Migrants may send money home as often as once a month or as seldom as once a year. Transfer arrangements depend on a number of factors, including the young immigrants employment status and income level in the destination country, the needs of family members in the country of origin, the cost of sending remittances, and in some cases the availability of someone trustworthy to hand-carry the funds back home.
Migrants may send financial and nonfinancial resources to their immediate or extended families through formal or informal channels.
The decision to use formal or informal avenues for remittance transfer is guided by considerations such as the migrants immigration status, the cost of sending remittances, and the migrants relationship with individuals returning to the same country of origin. In some countries, migrants in an irregular situation may not have access to formal transfer systems. If the cost of sending remittances is prohibitively high, many migrants will resort to informal means.
PAWSER, AGE 19-25,
I save money here by myself and send money to my family and poor children at Christmastime. Sometimes it can be expensive to send it via formal means.
The decision to stay abroad or return home
Migration outcomes vary widely. Some young migrants return to their country of origin, either voluntarily or involuntarily, whereas others remain in the destination country.
To understand the dynamics of return migration, it is important to distinguish between voluntary and involuntary return. Voluntary return among young migrants tends to be linked to greater potential for development in countries of origin. Those who travel home on their own terms are often equipped with new skills, qualifications and economic resources that may generate long-term benefits for the returnees, their families, and the local community. Conversely, young migrants subjected to involuntary return frequently experience difficulties that increase their vulnerability and make their return and reintegration more challenging. This is particularly true for migrants in irregular situations subjected to deportation and perhaps less true for youth who are compelled to return home to fulfil contractual obligations linked to migration sponsorship programmes.
FILIGA, FEMALE, AGE 15-35, UNICEF RURAL VOICE OF YOUTH FOCAL POINT FOR TUVALU
One of the main reasons migrants return home is because they find
C H4A P T E R
life overseas harder than life at home. Others return because of their parents influence or instructions, which in Tuvalu play a significant role in the lives and choices of young people. Some have returned because their wives or husbands or children are still back home. Those who went overseas for education may have had jobs waiting for them in their country of origin, or they may have been required to return because part of the contract they signed with their employer was to return for a set period (especially in the case of sponsored students).
While migrants returning home voluntarily are generally at a relative advantage, they nonetheless require social support and reliable information on economic prospects to facilitate their reintegration. For returning youth, detailed and accurate information on development opportunities is essential to compensate for any loss of social capital upon return.
Some youth migrants approach both migration and repatriation with a clear purpose. Young student migrants from developing countries in particular often feel that their enhanced skills and qualifications will allow them have a positive developmental impact on their societies and countries of origin when they return. Most of the youth in this category were initially motivated to study abroad by an interest in acquiring new skills and ideas and in joining business networks that would be useful for their countries of origin upon their return.
LAZ, MALE, AGE 30,
It is my desire to return to my home country or Africa, live closer to my loved ones, and use my skills as a health expert for the benefit of a population that needs it most.
While some youth may choose to return home permanently, others might decide to settle in their destination societies. Those in the latter category feel that the factors that caused them to migratesuch as poverty, high unemployment and poor infrastructureare still prevalent in their countries of origin.
GEORGE, MALE, AGE
32, STUDENT MIGRANT GHANA          SOUTH AFRICA
Inadequate opportunities in Ghana [are] an issue of concern. The statistics for unemployed graduates (most of whom are my colleagues) have skyrocketed in recent years, and I simply cant add to the numbers. ... I literally packed my whole life up from Ghana to study and hopefully search for economic opportunities. I have made a huge investment in my studies as a self-funded student, and I feel it would not be economically wise to forfeit this effort.
Many of those who settle abroad permanently maintain ties with their origins through short, periodic visits to their native countries or communities. This group includes young migrants who are involved in diaspora-driven activities.
JAMES, MALE, AGE 20-35, COMMUNITY ACTIVIST KENYA          CANADA
When I got to Canada, I still wanted to continue with my passion: community work. In 2009 I formed Youth Initiative Canada, which is a diaspora-driven organization working to empower youth in Canada and Kenya through sports, education
C H4A P T E R
and entrepreneurship. What has kept the organization running is working closely with diaspora organizations and community partnerships with community-based organizations in Kenya. I try to travel back to Kenya every year. Id like to encourage young migrants to stay in touch and get involved in development in their countries of origin and also to preserve their culture as they integrate into the new country/ home.
Whether young migrants decide to stay in their destination societies or return to their countries of origin, they typically find that the migration experience has transformed them into third-culture youth influenced by experiences in both their home and host countries.
TIMOTHY, MALE,
I have never been more aware of my identity as a Nigerian. Unlike in Port Harcourt, where I could be mistaken for another youth down the street, I stand out in the small Texas town of Wimberley. I hear myself when I speak. I feel my own presence in a room. I get smiles and sometimes a little Hello, where in Africa are you from? The anonymity that others enjoy eludes me. But this awareness within a new society is my strength; it is my contribution to the melting pot. Knowing the importance of retaining my originality and staying in touch with the realities at home, I am cautious of the melting pot experience. It is a give-and-take situation, though; something must give way. What that something is, I do not know. As Derek Walcott said in one of his poems, Motion brings loss. The more one moves, the more difficult it becomes to reconnect with the realities of ones home country. Home, as it were, becomes a state of mind and a function of place and time.
A number of young returnees and immigrants report undergoing an identity crisis, which can be especially pronounced when they return home for visits or permanent resettlement. Youth migrants, especially those who left at a very young age and have been away for a long period of time, often have problems fitting in and feeling at home in their countries of origin as they tend to be viewed as outsiders, which can be a source of frustration. Third-culture youth feel that they do not really belong anywhereeither in the destination country or in the country of origin.
ESI, FEMALE, AGE 20-35 GHANA          united_states
Though I strongly identify as Ghanaian and have always had a desire to return, the lack of familiarity makes it hard for me to form new relationships and successfully integrate into a new environment in my home country. I find that most migrants (like me) are often treated differently (like outsiders) by others in their home country. There is a bit of difference in culture and experience. Ive been away for so long and Im often perceived as someone born in the U.S.
Maintaining contact with people in and from their countries of origin allows young migrants to keep abreast of social, cultural, political and economic conditions at home. Staying connected through various means, including diaspora-driven activities or the use of social media, e-mail and other forms of electronic communicationis critical for migrant reintegration and transmigrant identity formation.
C H4A P T E R MAGDALENA, FEMALE, AGE 15-35
MEXICO/CHILE AUSTRALIA
[It would be useful] to have a safety net of acquaintances to support you during the transition period of your return, including relatives that offer you safe and affordable accommodations, a friend that advises you on what is logical to locals but not so logical to you anymore, and/or a professional colleague or mentor to guide you on how to get a job and keep it.
THE MIGRATION EXPERIENCE: PERCEPTIONS VERSUS REALITY
Misinformation and misconceptions about migration and migrants still constitute one of the biggest challenges faced by Governments in countries of origin, transit and destination. The changing patterns of migration and the growing diversity of migrants whether regular or irregular, permanent or temporary, male or female, old or young, and across the skill rangehave further complicated migration issues and the lives of individual migrants and their families.
CLAUDIA, FEMALE, DAUGHTER OF A MIGRANT
Please follow me right this way, Miss...Miss...Sh-...Sheku.... How do you pronounce your last name? my doctor asked before my routine check-up, while hopelessly squinting her eyes in an attempt to read my name.
Shekufendeh, I corrected her with a smile.
Ah, yes. And where are you from, Ms. Shukoufenday? That would be my cue to take a deep breath and churn out a phrase that I have already recited many times. Well, Im originally from Italy, I would respond, ready for her suspicious face to start taking form.
Well, that doesnt sound very Italian, Shekufendeh.
And it isnt. It never was, as my elementary school peers would remind me on a daily basis, bombarding me with questions as to where I was really from. I am from Italy, born from an authentic Iranian father with the thick Farsi accent.
Public perceptions of migration vary with time and place and are often shaped by contextual factors. During periods of economic recession, when unemployment levels are high, migrants may be viewed with disfavour and even hostility, especially in transit and destination countries. In countries of origin, emigrants and their childreneven those born abroad may be considered unpatriotic and are seen by some to have abandoned their home countries. In certain cases, young migrants who come back must deal with the perception that their return is due to their failure abroad. In other settings, youth migrants living outside their countries or returning home are recognized as heroes. Positive perceptions about migration in countries of origin can also influence the decisions of potential youth migrants to venture abroad, especially when they are given the opportunity to interact with successful youth migrants and returnees.
Unfavourableand often biased media content can reinforce negative perceptions about migration. For example, mainstream and social media (ranging from news programmes to blogs) may link immigrants and migration policies in a destination country to security threats such as terrorism.
C H4A P T E R
Popular misconceptions surrounding migrants and migration can lead to harmful stereotyping, anti-immigrant discrimination, xenophobia, social exclusion, the abuse of migrants rights, and social unrest. Most young migrants are unaware of the full extent of these socio-cultural and political undercurrents prior to their migration and are thus unprepared to deal with the challenges they present.
Many youth migrants struggle through a period of adjustment in their countries of destination and often lack the time and resources to actively challenge negative perceptions about them. Even when they have met their basic needs and are better situated in their host countries, they may be unwilling or unable to internalize certain cultural values that are very different from their own; this may extend through several generations. All of these factors distance migrants from native populations, perpetuating bias, ignorance and suspicion among the latter and effectively creating resistance to change in societywhich can result in tougher immigration policies and more difficult migrant adjustment experiences. To disrupt this vicious cycle, young migrants need to make their voices heard, to create support networks for new migrants, and to become actively involved in facilitating greater intercultural dialogue and understanding.
NATALIA, FEMALE, AGE 22,
I am a 22-year-old student living in the Netherlands. I was 15 years old when I was forced to reunite with my parents, who had previously immigrated to the Netherlands. After a period of depression, an identity crisis, and many difficult years, I managed to find a way to be happy. I became engaged in various social/political projects in order to help and inspire others in similar situations and to make policy makers and immigration experts in the Netherlands and worldwide aware of the impact of immigrationnot only on youth [migrants], but also on secondand third-generation immigrants and even on those who are just young people living in a multicultural city.
Natalias experience inspired her to use political participation as an avenue to improve the integration of young migrants. She is a prime example of
C H4A P T E R
how youth can actively participate in advocacy to deal with the challenges of migration. Governments have responded to such efforts with policies ranging from addressing human trafficking to enhancing integration policies and cooperating with third countries to help control migrant flows. Migration policies and public perceptions can reinforce each other in both positive and negative ways; it is therefore essential that various stakeholders (including youth organizations, employers, labour unions, diaspora associations and international organizations) work to create positive perceptions about migration and migrants and that policy makers support and strengthen such efforts through the adoption of appropriate migration management policies.
            discussions. Available from   
This summary document presents youth perspectives on factors that influence young peoples decision to migrate for employment, factors or characteristics in young migrants that determine their employment outcomes in countries of destination, and challenges specific to young migrants that they or their migrant friends, relatives or acquaintances have faced in the labour markets of destination countries. Good practices on youth employment are presented, along with recommendations on what young migrants believe can improve labour migrants working conditions.
                      Available from   
The main reasons behind young peoples decision to return or not to return to their native countries are explored in this document. The development potential of returning youth migrants is also highlighted. Based on the combined perspectives of youth, the paper contends that creating an environment that facilitates the economic and social integration of return migrants and raising awareness about existing opportunities for return migrants in their country of origin is likely to stimulate return migration, and therewith development in countries of origin.
     challenges and opportunities of migrant            from   
The unique experiences of young migrants, including native-born and foreign-born immigrants, are related in this summary report. Based on an analysis of youth perspectives, the report underscores the importance of strengthening social and economic integration mechanisms to address the unique needs of young immigrants and of promoting youth participation in addressing challenges such as discrimination.
           Immigrants and Refugees. Prepared for the      Available from  
This report examines the living situations of new immigrants and refugees in the united_states. An effort is made in the report to highlight some of the social and economic challenges young immigrants face and how these affect their prospects for obtaining quality education, employment and housing. The report identifies
C H4A P T E R
a number of actions that could help immigrants and refugees overcome these challenges in order to live productive lives.
This participatory action research undertaken with females attending secondary school in Toronto examines the mental health situation of newcomer female youth. The study identifies a number of factors that influence the mental health of young female migrants and concludes that relationships with parents and friends play an important supportive role. The study advocates for measures that promote the mental health of newcomer female youth and their active participation in the design and implementation of such measures.
        worlds young developing country migrants.   Available from 
This discussion paper examines youth migration from a gender perspective. It presents a picture of youth migrants from developing countries,
focusing on how they move (accompanied or unaccompanied) as well as their participation in education and work in destination countries. Special attention is given to the return migration of young people and its potential for development in countries of origin. The study concludes that while migration is linked to the potential for human capital development among young people, their prospects for success are limited owing to the absence of economic and social integration measures.
This study is based on comparative data collected on the education levels and labour market outcomes of native-born offspring of immigrants and offspring of natives in 16 OECD countries. The study notes that in certain OECD countries, children of immigrants experience less favourable labour market outcomes, even at comparable educational attainment levels. Access to quality education is limited for children of immigrants owing to socio-economic background characteristics. A special effort is made to highlight gender-related education and labour market disadvantages young men and women face as immigrants in OECD countries.
The study reviews the lessons learned from the implementation of Millennium Development Goal Achievement Fund (MDG-F) joint programmes in 15 countries. It highlights some of the factors that have supported the formulation and implementation of programmes and policies on youth, employment and migration. Key insights are presented on how to target at-risk youth, including migrant workers. Efforts to reduce the risks of poverty and vulnerability among youth while empowering them towards greater social and economic mobility are documented in this report.
C H5A P T E R AWARENESS &
ON MIGRATIOver the past decade, evidence from around the world has shown that young leaders and youth-led organizations engaged in civic activities have influenced public policies through the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of initiatives that have direct relevance to their wellbeing and development. Young people have proven themselves to be a tremendous source of innovative solutions. Active citizenship shapes the identities of youth migrants and other youth affected by migration. Being an active citizen also constitutes a social good, as it tends to reduce idleness and fosters a sense of belonging and social cohesion. Government accountability and service delivery can also be enhanced through the active engagement of young people.
Young migrants face many challenges, but their meaningful awareness of and engagement in migration-centred initiatives such as policy and programme development allows them to facilitate their integration and assume ownership of their contribution to development. In addition, it facilitates the development of policies and programmes which accurately target the real issues being faced by young migrants.
First things first: awareness and engagement go hand in hand
In order for young people to be engaged in migration discussions, they first must be aware of their own circumstances as well as the circumstances of other migrants. But before all that can happen, they need to have basic, reliable information at all stages of their own migration process. During the pre-departure stage, youth need to understand their options and be aware of the potential risks and dangers associated with migration. Upon arrival in a destination country, they should strengthen social networks and know how to access local resources and services for health, housing and employment. Young people who intend to embark on voluntary return need reliable and accurate information on safe transit and on opportunities in their home countries.
Information can be especially critical during the decision-making, planning and preparation stages. Youth who lack reliable information on safe migration may resort to illegal travel options, which can expose them to risks including abuse, exploitation and even death. A number of organizations dealing with migration issues have made it a priority to develop information campaigns for youth. Young people today tend to have easy access to informationmuch of it inaccurate or deliberately misleadingand they may be persuaded by traffickers to pursue irregular migration.
Making reliable information readily available to prospective youth migrants is key to preventing and combating risky forms of irregular migration,
including trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants. The most effective way to protect potential migrants and trafficking victims is to ensure that they are conscious of the possible dangers. Some of the awareness-raising activities carried out by the International Organization for Migration and other international organizations in various countries target students through school exercise books, cartoons, posters, websites, T-shirts, youth radio stations and newspapers. There is some evidence that these activities have been effective in preventing irregular migration.
Youth-led awareness 101: Young people know how to reach other young people
Youth involvement in advocacy campaigns benefits both the concerned organizations and the young people themselves, as the latter have the opportunity to develop leadership and bOx 5.1
HIV/AIDS AWARENESS UNDERTAKEN BY AND FORYOUTH
is an initiative undertaken by Associacao Bue Fixe in partnership with the MTV Staying Alive Foundation and several non-governmental organizations in Portugal. The project uses contemporary media resources to promote HIV/AIDS prevention strategies and to help youth between the ages of 18 and 30 cope with being HIVpositive. It specifically targets young migrants from Portuguese-speaking African countries who are living in the disadvantaged neighborhoods of Amadora Village outside Lisbon. The tools this programme uses to get its message across include radio talk shows, text messages, a Facebook page, capacity-building workshops and condom distribution. The radio shows are broadcast not only in Portugal, but also in five African Portuguese-speaking countriesAngola, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau.
communication skills while promoting social change. Youth can be involved in advocacy campaigns in both countries of origin and destination that promote the rights of youth migrants, challenge negative public perceptions about migrants and migration, support safe migration among youth, and endorse public policies focused on the wellbeing of young migrants. Boxes 5.1 and 5.2 offer examples of how youth have contributed to making advocacy messages more relevant and accessible to targeted youth populations.
Sociocultural engagement among youth in destination countries
Various factors shape youth migrants engagement in sociocultural activities and activism, including their country of origin and background, their status in the destination country, time and resource availability, language skills, the social costs and benefits of participation, and their interest in intercultural relations. The personal attitude of young migrants can also mediate social and community relations. There are a number of young
C H5A P T E R
migrants worldwide who engage in social and civic activities such as fundraising for non-profit organizations, environmental conservation, migrant rights advocacy, and participation in national and community events such as festivals. Several young migrants share their experiences below.
PAWSER, FEMALE, AGE 19-25, REFUGEE
I [participate in] many community volunteer activities that are aimed at enhancing the capacity of refugees in Utica and at my school in particular.
FIONA, FEMALE, AGE 26-29 AUSTRIA SINGAPORE
I collect donations for abused migrant workers in safe-houses. I also participated in Ramadan on Wheelsan initiative supporting lower-income Malay Muslims in bOx5.2
In this age of mobility, as societies become increasingly diverse and cultural and religious intolerance poses a growing threat, youth can serve as agents of social change. The PLURAL+ Youth Video Festival, organized by the united_nations Alliance of Civilizations and the International Organization for Migration, has been held annually since 2009 to allow young people to share their perspectives on migrant integration, inclusiveness, identity, diversity, human rights and social cohesiveness at the local and global levels. The winning videos are broadcast on a number of platforms and have the potential to influence policies, challenge stereotypes and xenophobia, and promote migration and diversity.
Singapore during the Hari Raya festivities.
KELLY, FEMALE, AGE 26-29, MIGRANT WORKER
I am actively involved in global health and human rights activities within the community.
Although there is some evidence that migrant youth participate in social and civic activities in destination countries, there is little information about the level of youth engagement in migrationrelated activism in places of origin. Young people appear to be largely unaware of the role of youth and youth organizations play in such endeavours in their respective countries. Nevertheless, they have shown a strong interest in civic engagement as well as an awareness of their potential role in confronting the challenges and exploring the opportunities associated with youth migration.
RUEBEN, MALE, AGE 30 GHANA
Im not aware of what any youth organizations have been up to in
C H5A P T E R
terms of information dissemination to curb irregular migration or other social activities related to migration. However, I believe young people can play a critical role in information campaigns at the organizational level and through peer-to-peer mechanisms.
Barriers to youth engagement in destination countries
Although some young migrants participate in social and civic activities in destination countries, others are reluctant to do so because they feel that many of these activities are not immigrant-friendly. As shown below, some social activities are structured in a way that inhibits migrant participation.
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE, AGE 26-29 IRELAND NETHERLANDS
[There are] language barriers. Everybody speaks English, making it very difficult to practice speaking Dutch, yet sometimes, when you attend social events, you are made to feel as though you should be making a better effort to learn Dutch.
ANONYMOUS, AGE 26-29, STUDENT MIGRANT
Sometimes I felt I was not part of an activity, as it was designed mostly for local people.
Youth migrants also hesitate to become involved in social affairs because they have experienced unfair treatment in their host countries, including discrimination, xenophobic and racist remarks, and stereotyping.
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE, AGE 26-29 THAILAND          united_kingdom
I have experienced ... unfair treatment before in the united_kingdom in my attempts to participate in civic activities when people mocked my Asian language and some shouted at me to go home. Those [episodes] were not severe and did not involve any physical harm, but it hurt to hear such words.
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE, AGE 26-29 GERMANY FRANCE
They are generally an unfriendly people, and some are openly hostile to foreigners, making it difficult to engage in social and civic activities.
The lack of time and financial resources are factors that may limit social and civic engagement. Since most young migrants have an economic motive for leaving their places of origin, they generally choose to work and save their money rather than spending it on discretionary social activities.
ANONYMOUS, FEMALE, AGE 19-25 KENYA          united_kingdom
Time and cost limitations were some of the barriers to my effective participation, and I have observed this same challenge for other immigrants.
MURSI, MALE, AGE 26-29 ROMANIA          SUDAN
Sometimes there are fees required before participating, which is a challenge.
GIEDRE, FEMALE, AGE 19-25 LITHUANIA          AUSTRIA
I dont have time [for civic participation] because I have to work and study.
The value of youth engagement in migration policy and programme development
Young immigrants (internal and international) and other youth affected by migration possess valuable experiential knowledge. In some countries, Governments and relevant development partners recognize the importance of engaging young people in the process of developing national planning strategies and policies. A number of national youth commissions, youth-led organizations and other youth civil society networks have been directly involved in official decision-making structures at the highest levels. Studies have shown that public policies and organizational policies are more effective when young people are involved in the planning and design. Youth engaged in migration and development policy processes can share the perspectives bOx5.3
The exodus of trained, experienced professionals from Zimbabwe is a growing national concern, as it is affecting the countrys ability to achieve its development goals. The Government of Zimbabwe, in collaboration with the International Organization for Migration, organized a dialogue with Zimbabwean youth between the ages of 10 and 30 in order to explore ways to strengthen migration management and diaspora engagement in national development.
The event sensitised children and youth to the risks of human trafficking and irregular migration and the benefits of safe migration. The organizers solicited the young participants views on migration policy and practice with the aim of formulating and endorsing an action plan (or recommendations)
on youth migration issues that would be integrated into the broader national migration and development strategy. The dialogue produced priority areas for consideration in the national strategy, including employment and economic development, education and skills training, facilitating safe migration, and expanding the contribution of diaspora youth to the development of Zimbabwe.
and life experiences of young people and articulate their needs (see box 5.3). Genuine consideration and integration of their input can increase young peoples trust in development mechanisms. Political participation among young people can be effective if youth share in decision-making and are recognized as partners in migration policy and programme development.
Youth-led organizations are at the forefront
Youth organizations can be the mechanism through which such knowledge is marshalled and mobilized. These organizations are an effective avenue for building the capacity of youth migrants and youth civil society to engage in public debate over migration and development (see box 5.4). A number of organizations involve youth in the design, implementation and evaluation of youth-centred programmes. This approach needs to be followed for advocacy campaigns in the area of migration and development. Youth engaged in the initial stages of an initiative can provide valuable insights and perspectives that can inform the development of policies and programmes. They can help attract a broader constituency of young people to build an organic advocacy network and make communication more youthfriendlyand therefore more effective and efficient.
Engagement must include disadvantaged youth
Within the migration framework, certain categories of youth such as girls and young women, youth left behind by migrant parents, and forced migrants (including refugees) are especially vulnerable to the risks of exploitation and abuse. Others who also may be susceptible to such risks include rural youth, out-of-school youth, and informal workers. Some programmes target these groups; however, many fail to classify them as groups at special risk and therefore make little effort to understand their experiences and the special challenges b O x 5 4.
Since 2009 the African Diaspora Youth Network in Europe has organized a number of training events for African diaspora youth living on the continent. The training programme is being carried out in partnership with the NorthSouth Centre of the Council of Europe. This initiative is aimed at strengthening the role of leading African diaspora youth groups and movements and of youth leaders and youth workers active in youth organizations in European host societies. It focuses on empowering youth by fostering political participation and active citizenship, promoting their capacity to organize and take action within the framework of Africa-Europe youth cooperation and global youth initiatives. More than 400 youth leaders have developed their competencies and strengthened their role in Euro-African cooperation while developing the capacity of their organizations as well. Priorities for future action include facilitating the exchange of youth experiences and empowering the young African community living in Europe to take local action relevant to the Millennium Development Goals and other international development objectives.
they face in their daily lives as migrants or as individuals affected by migration. In programme design and delivery, it is important to consider background characteristics such as age, gender and socio-economic status, and to identify the unique needs of each group based on their shared experiences. To achieve the latter, efforts need to be made to engage vulnerable youth in dialogue and to facilitate their participation in migration-support activities and policy development. Box 5.5 illustrates how refugee youth in Uganda are beginning to make their voices heard.
Young people can support local, national and global efforts to mitigate the risks associated with migration through short-term and long-term interventions, and at the same time enhance the development impact of youth migration. Youth-led interventions should concentrate on the needs of the marginalized and most vulnerable young migrants (including irregular migrants, domestic workers, female migrants, forced migrants and refugees).
Figure 5.1 presents some ideas young people have identified as entry points for youth-led organizations in addressing various trajectories of the migration process. The nature of the intervention
C H5A P T E R
to be developed for a particular aspect of the migration process will depend on the context and the expected outcome.
THE JOURNEY FORWARDTOGETHER WITH YOUNG MIGRANTS
Young people can and do engage in social and political activism through informal and organized youth advocacy structures. However, they will have a greater impact on influencing policies and programmes that enhance human development among migrants if structural barriers to their participation and recognition are eliminated in countries of origin, transit and destination. Currently, youth participation in migration policy development and in migrant support in the field is the exception rather than the rule. Few initiatives promote bOx5.5
GIVING FoRCED MIGRANTS
a "VOICE" THROUGH
PHoTOGRAPHY
PhotoVoice is an initiative designed to help marginalized groups gain control over the creation of their individual and collective narratives. The PhotoVoice project implemented in northern Uganda targeted young refugees who had been displaced as a result of the countrys internal conflict. Through this project, young people were provided with the opportunity to photograph their daily lives, to develop their leadership, communication and decisionmaking skills, and to improve their individual well-being and that of their community. The primary goal of the initiative was to give participants the chance to reflect on their experiences and the needs of their community and to become advocates for social change.
meaningful and inclusive participation of youth migrants and other youth affected by migration in origin, transit and destination countries.
An increased commitment among young people (especially youth-led organizations) and the political will of decision makers at all levels are required for meaningful youth participation in migration and development policy planning. Governments can include migrant youth in policy-making processes, strengthen mechanisms that promote and protect the rights of young migrants, and promote institutional arrangements that enhance the capacity of youth to participate at the local and national levels. Without a major shift in perspective on youth involvement, young migrants will be unable to fulfill their potential role as partners in the articulation and implementation of inclusive, equitable and sustainable development policies.
The migration process can be extremely difficult for youth migrants and youth left behind by their parents. Young migrants and returnees face many challenges for which they are often ill-prepared, so it is important that they receive support and assistance in their countries of origin, transit and destination. Although youth are especially vulnerable to the risks and dangers associated with migration, their capacity as agents of social change and development should not be underestimated.
bOx 5.6
The adoption of the Dream Act in the USA was significantly influenced by the successful campaigning of youth and youth-led organizations. Thousands of youth migrants and DREAMers (potential beneficiaries of the legislation) were organized under the coalition United We Dream, which eventually became the largest immigrant youth-led organization in the united_states of America, to engage young migrants for their rights.
United We Dream (UWD) started in the mid-2000s to advocate for the DREAM Act (Development, Relief, and Education for Alien Minors), but became more result oriented after the Dream Act failed to pass in the U.S. Congress in 2007.
Since 2007, UWD organized and advocated for the rights of undocumented youth immigrants, especially through their campaign, Right to Dream. They mobilized thousands of youth immigrants as well as other stakeholders including leaders from labour, civil rights, and other sectors to demand the end of detaining and deporting youth migrants. As a result of their work, in 2012, the US Government announced that it would grant temporary relief from deportation for eligible undocumented youth through Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA), commonly referred to as Dream Act.
