
INTRODUCTION
THE World  Youth  Report  on Youth  Civic Engagement  has been prepared in response to growing interest in and an increased policy focus on youth civic engagement in recent
years among Governments, young people and researchers. It is intended to provide a fresh perspective and innova- tive ideas on civic engagement and to serve as an impe- tus for dialogue and action. The objective of the Report is to provide a basis for policy discussions around youth civic engagement in order to ensure that young people are able to participate fully and effectively in all aspects of the societies in which they live.
Local volunteers plant trees in a school yard as part of activities for International
Volunteer Day in Goma, eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).
SITUATION OF YOUTH
The transition from youth to adulthood marks a key period characterized  by greater economic  inde- pendence, political involvement, and  participation in community life. However, the  socioeconomic and political environment  in  which young people live can have a serious impact on their  ability to engage.
Unemployment is a concern almost everywhere, affecting more than 73 million young people around the  world in 2014.1  Although the  global economy has shown fairly consistent growth over the past two dec- ades, young people entering the  labour market today are less likely to secure a decent job than labour mar- ket entrants in 1995. Economic growth has in many places not translated into sufficient levels of jobs cre- ation, especially for youth. In addition, in some parts of the  world, young people's ability to engage  and become economically independent has been affected by the 2008/09 economic crisis and, more recently, by a slowdown in global economic growth.
In some developed countries, the  youth unem- ployment rate  has climbed  above 50  per  cent.2   In
low- and  middle-income countries, underemploy- ment in the  informal sector is the  primary employ- ment challenge faced by young people. Statistics for
2013 indicate that  an estimated 169 million employed youth were living  on less than US$ 2 per day, and 286 million lived  on  less than US$ 4 per  day. According to the  International  Labour Organization  (ILO),  an estimated 600 million jobs would need to be created over the  next decade to absorb the  current num- ber  of unemployed young people and  provide job opportunities for the  approximately 40  million new labour market entrants each year.
A staggering  number of young people  are  not in education,  employment or  training,  and  many of those who do find  work are employed in precarious and/or informal situations, delaying their  full soci- oeconomic  integration.  The lack  of effective  eco- nomic and  employment policies and  insufficient job creation has left many young people with no option but  to accept part-time, temporary or informal work.
At the  same time, outdated education systems are ill- equipped to meet the  changing and  diverse needs of today's labour market. Inadequate training and  skill obsolescence translate into limited job prospects for youth--even when the  economy improves.
Further exacerbating the situation, many Governments have responded to the economic slowdown by cutting
spending on social services and  provisions, often with little transparency or accountability. Such actions have led  many youth to question the  legitimacy of those in power. The resulting trust crisis has revealed itself online and  in the  streets via protests and  demonstra- tions--often youth-led--that demand more open and effective governance.
ADDRESSING THE P OLIC Y CHALLENGES
Addressing youth unemployment and underemploy- ment has become a priority for Governments world- wide. A number of Member States have developed targeted youth employment policies and  strategies aimed at promoting job creation and  strengthening youth skill development and  training. In many cases, actions  aimed  at  combating  the  youth unemploy- ment and  underemployment challenge constitute a central element of Member States' national youth pol- icies, strategies and plans.3
In spite of such efforts, young people remain three times more likely than adults to be without work.
Policymakers  have responded by focusing  atten- tion on  alternative  approaches that  place  greater emphasis  on  young people's  role in creating  their ow n   employ ment  opp or t unit ie s .   Inc rea singly, Governments are moving towards the  promotion of youth entrepreneurship and  the  creation of intern- ship programmes for young people to acquire mar- ketable skills.
National  policies  and  programmes are  also  being developed to promote youth involvement  in  vol- unteering  and  sporting  activities.  Such activities are  seen as a means  of integrating young  people into their  communities while also allowing them to develop skills and  attributes that  prepare them for life. They also create an environment in which young people may be  less likely to engage in negative and risky behaviours. However, while such programmes have value,  they have so far fallen  short of meeting
 		the  real challenge of creating decent jobs for young
people and  ensuring their  meaningful involvement and  representation in governing structures and  deci- sion-making bodies.
YOUNG PEOPLE TAKING AC TION
The failure  of Governments  to effectively  address many of the  challenges  facing  young people has led  to widespread discontent among youth. Young people often feel  disenfranchised and  have become disillusioned  with  governing  structures incapable of providing them with the  opportunities and  sup- port they need to progress from youth to adulthood. Stuck in a period of "waithood" (a time of stagnation in  the  transition  from youth to adulthood),  grow- ing  numbers of young people are  initiating pro- tests and  demonstrations, demanding change. Such protests have largely been driven by young people demanding a greater say in governance and  policy development,  better economic  and  employment opportunities, and  equal participation in society. Youth are calling for increased transparency, greater inclusion, and  enhanced engagement. Their efforts are being bolstered by the  use of new information and  communications technology (ICT) and  social media, which have been used to drive  and effectively reshape activism both within and  across borders.
Well-intentioned policies are often inadequately funded or face delays  in  implementation,  leaving young people  disappointed,  disillusioned  and  frus- trated. Youth demanding change have responded to this reality by becoming proactive in addressing the challenges themselves. Engaging at the  grass-roots
and  community level, young people are  addressing structural and  systemic problems through volunteer- ing and  peacebuilding activities. Similarly, through var- ious entrepreneurial endeavours, youth are  actively creating their  own employment opportunities where Governments have failed. At the same time, the chang- ing  nature of employment contracts and  conditions has changed the  playing field for youth when it comes to internships and engagement in trade unions.
Within this context, the  World Youth Report exam- ines the  positive and  negative aspects of both tradi- tional and  emerging forms of civic engagement in the  economic, political and  community life of youth. It is intended to contribute to the  dialogue on  how youth civic  engagement can serve as an  enabling force for young women and  men in  the  develop- ment and  formulation of youth-related policies.
HEIGHTENED INTEREST  IN YOUTH CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Over the  past two decades, youth civic engagement has acquired some prominence in research, policy and  practice in many parts of the  world. At the  inter- national level, the  World Bank has identified the  exer- cise of active citizenship as one of the most important activities  for a healthy  transition  to adulthood for both the  youth of today and  the  next generation.4
Interest in civic engagement has been spurred by a range of factors, including concerns about the perceived decline in the  levels of civic and  political engagement among young people worldwide and about the  poten- tial negative impact of this decline on the governance of society. The focus on youth civic engagement is driven in part  by the  assumption that  young people who are more involved in and connected to society are less likely to engage in risky behaviour and  violence--and are likely to stay engaged as they grow older.
Youth engagement may be considered an end in itself, but  it is also a means to achieve other objectives and benefits in society. Its potential to contribute to the personal development of young people, to improve their  welfare, and  to address injustice in society also provides an impetus for promoting civic engagement as a component of youth work and youth action.
Interest in youth civic engagement is also linked  to increased public awareness of the  right  of children and young people to have their voices heard. Growing numbers of adults are coming to recognize the  need to support and  encourage  youth  participation and
FOCUS AND STRUC TURE OF THE RE P O R T
The World Youth Report comprises five  chapters; an introduction and overview is followed by three sections respectively focusing on  the  economic, political and community-based engagement of youth, and  a final chapter offers key conclusions and recommendations.
Each chapter provides a thematic overview followed by expert opinion pieces on  the  highlighted topic5. The contributing  authors,  who include  esteemed youth researchers, activists and  academics, address specific  aspects of youth-driven  forms of civ ic engagement (see below). Each section is intended to stand alone and  concludes with recommendations and suggestions for further reading. It is intended that these thought pieces be used to promote and  inform policy dialogue and  discussion between young peo- ple and  Governments.
social action. There has essentially been a paradigm	 	
shift  in how adult society views the  role of young people--one that  challenges age-old stereotypes of youth efficacy and  commitment. It calls on  societies that  have traditionally viewed youth as "adults in wait- ing" to be open to the  engagement of young people as active contributors to social change.
Introduction (chapter one)
The current introductory chapter provides a broad overview of the  topic of youth civic engagement. Pat Dolan and  Mark Brennan explore various discourses to civic engagement such as engaged citizenship, pos- itive  youth development, belonging, care and  social justice. They set out key recommendations for  suc- cessful youth civic engagement programming.
Economic engagement (chapter two) Chapter  two of the   Repor t  examines  chang ing trends in economic participation among youth and the  relevant policy context, focusing primarily on the period since the  global economic crisis. The chapter addresses the  impact of the  crisis on  the  economic life  of young people and  explores the  normative shift  from stable  and  permanent employment  to flexible and  part-time  work.  The authors describe how young people are responding to this changing context through engagement in internships (Gianni Rosas), entrepreneurship (Claudia Pompa), and  trade unions (Amy F. Huziak).
Political engagement (chapter three) Chapter three focuses on  changing trends, policies and  patterns relating to young people's political par- ticipation. It addresses the reasons for declining levels of youth involvement in institutional politics (includ- ing  voting,  running  for  office,  and  participating in
party politics) and  examines alternative approaches to political participation that  have emerged among youth--exploring how  traditional forms of political expression such protests and  demonstrations have merged with ICT and  social media to create a new form of political engagement. The authors analyse how emerging forms of youth political engagement are shaping the  political landscape, focusing on  top- ics ranging from their  involvement in legitimate gov- ernance structures to their  participation in extremist activities. The opinion pieces in this chapter highlight youth electoral participation (James Sloam), transi- tions in power (Nur Laiq), negative engagement (Akil N. Awan), and  digital  activism (Erhardt Graeff).
Community engagement (chapter four) Chapter four explores the  various ways young peo- ple  participate in and  engage with their  communi- ties, specifically through voluntary activities (Sarah Huxley), peacebuilding initiatives (Lakshitha Saji Prelis), and  participation in sports for  development (Selina Khoo and  Andre Matthias M\0xFCller). The chapter explores the  evolution of community engagement among youth, highlighting both the  increased recog- nition of the  value and  skills young people contribute to community development and  the  benefits accru- ing to youth themselves from strengthened commu- nity connections.
CIVIC ENGAGEMENT: AN OVERVIEW
Pat Dolan and Mark Brennan
Civic engagement is not a neutral concept, but  rather encompasses a variety of forms and  perspectives sur- rounding relationships  between the  individual,  the community and  broader society. Various discourses and  viewpoints carry particular messages and  reflect differences in understanding with regard to the purpose and nature of youth as citizens. To fully understand the significance of civic engagement to youth and  society, it is necessary to examine how particular forms of civic engagement relate to the  experiences and  social posi- tioning of young people and what the objectives are.
Throughout the  research and  literature on youth civic engagement, five key discourses present youth civic engagement/action as desirable activity in their  analyses and  underlying assumptions about youth and  the  purpose of their  engagement. While these discourses  are  not mutually  exclusive,  they each contain dominant strands demonstrating their distinctiveness. An overview of the  five  discourses is provided in table  1.1.


TABLE 1.1.
DISCOURSES INFORMING CIVIC ENG AGEMENT\0x0D
DI S CO URS E\0x0D
KE Y A IM\0x0D
CONCE R N\0x0D
DE S IR E D O U TCOM E\0x0D
Engaged
citizenship\0x0D
Participation\0x0D
Recog nition; voice;
human rights\0x0D
Engaged in decisions and inf luence\0x0D
Positive youth development\0x0D
Idealized adulthood\0x0D
Adaptation; behav ioural /
cog nitive/moral
adaptiv ity; acq uisition of life  skills\0x0D
Becoming more socially adapted indiv iduals for f uture adulthood; social conformity; less risk y behav iours\0x0D
Belonging\0x0D
Cultivation of affective social inclusion\0x0D
Increasing attachments to place and others;
building social capital (trust, network s, norms); finding spaces for a sense of inclusion\0x0D
Stronger connectedness; better interactions; stronger youth-adult
interdependencies\0x0D
Care\0x0D
Strong social support and
resilience\0x0D
Building strengths in adversity; preventing escalation of  problem s; increasing protective factors\0x0D
Supportive/more effective network s; relevant
programmes\0x0D
Justice\0x0D
Understanding and addressing injustice\0x0D
Ack nowledging root causes of str uctural
ineq uality\0x0D
Social justice\0x0D
ENG AGED CITIZENSHIP
The discourse on  engaged, democratic citizenship views citizenship primarily in terms of how political and  civic  identities  are  activated  through engage- ment and  influence in the  public sphere. The liter- ature on  engaged citizenship therefore revolves largely around opportunities  for  youth to demon- strate their  capacities to participate as political and social actors in society. It suggests that  civic engage- ment begun in  adolescence is more likely to con- tinue  throughout the  life course. Because of this, it is argued that  civic attitudes, beliefs and  skills should be nurtured among young people.6
With engaged citizenship, civic education and civic skills development, focused both on the exercise of rights and responsibilities, are seen as the  basis for active engage- ment among youth in policy processes. Schools play an important role in this approach as the primary venue for developing the  skills, values and  behaviours needed to participate in public life. This is achieved both through formal  civic  education and  through extracurricular and  community-related after-school activities. It is also argued that  schools may serve as a learning ground for understanding and  practising participation and  social responsibility and  for exercising rights. While this tradi- tional framework offers the  fundamentals, it is generally acknowledged that  the  potential of civic education and civic skills development has not been fully tapped in either the formal or the informal education and learning system as a means of engaging youth in developing more responsive policies and  services.
A more direct mechanism for linking  young people to community  needs and  developing  the  sensitiv- ities required for  greater political participation can be  found in programmes that  involve  participants
in projects incorporating elements of deliberation, decision-making, and  political advocacy or activism.
POSITIVE YOUTH DE VELOPMENT
In the  early 1990s, several Western countries began moving away from a problem-prevention approach to youth issues--fixing problems such as substance abuse was no longer  seen as enough--towards  a positive youth development framework that  empha- sized skills development and  competency-building. There is a wide body of literature supporting the  the- ory that  civic  engagement activities  constitute  an effective means of strengthening the  development and  capacity of individual youth  at the  emotional, cognitive, academic, civic, social and  cultural levels.7
The positive youth development approach focuses on making young  individuals  stronger and  more resourceful,  as ref lected  in  their   behav iour and mindset. Positive youth development is linked  to five key characteristics:
1.    Competence
2.    Confidence
3.    Character
4.    Connection
5.    Caring
P roponents of the   model  assert that   increased strength and  resourcefulness among youth lead  to enhanced community engagement, which further contributes to positive youth development--and the cycle continues.
Positive youth development frameworks are designed to benefit young people and  society simultaneously; young men and  women with sufficient skills, a sense of belonging  and  attachment,  and  clearly  defined roles in the  community are better prepared for adult- hood and  find  themselves  empowered to act  on behalf of their  societies.
BELONGING AND COMMUNIT Y
CONNEC TEDNESS
Against the backdrop of what is viewed as an increas- ingly individualized society, civic engagement is sometimes  seen as a way for  youth to strengthen connections with others in the  places they live and in the  spaces in which they interact, including online spaces such as social media, increasing their  sense of social attachment and  belonging.
There are two key theoretical positions supporting this discourse: social capital and  interaction theory.
Social capital is the  collective value of the  benefits accruing from social connections and  trust between people.8  Empirical research has shown that  the  fac- tors contributing  to social  capital,  such as social support networks, civic engagement in local insti- tutions, trust and  safety, and  the  quality of schools and   neighbourhoods,  are  associated  w ith  posi- tive  outcomes for children and  young people.9  One
conclusion  that  may be  drawn from social  capital research is that  community connections are impor- tant to adolescent well-being because they broaden networks and  provide opportunities for  interaction with others, often through local groups and  activi- ties.  Intergenerational  relations  are  one important component of this  dynamic.  Children  and  youth need positive adult attention to feel a sense of safety and  security--to feel  that  they are cared about and cared for. Relevant studies suggest that  the  incidence of child neglect is higher in neighbourhoods with a poor social capital base.10
Social  capital  comprises  not only  the  value  of an individual's social relationships but  also the  quality of the  groups, networks, institutions, communities, and  societies in which these relations are developed. Civic  engagement  is viewed,  then,  as that  which builds and  strengthens trust, a sense of safety and security,  support networks,  and  information  shar- ing--as constitutive elements of social capital-- effectively providing young people with a feeling of belonging in a society in which they have a stake. Engagement and  interaction and  corresponding youth development can take place in a variety of for- mal and  informal settings, including those in which governance, education, and  cultural and  recrea- tional activities occur.
Interaction theory posits that  the  behaviour of young individuals is largely influenced by social relations and the  strength or weakness of the  social bonds within their  respective  communities.11   The emergence of community is viewed as a dynamic process of bring- ing  people together by focusing on  the  general and common needs of all residents. The key component of this process is diverting action that  would other- wise be invested in more individual interests towards the  creation and  maintenance of channels of inter- action and  the  development of informal positive relationships  among groups.  Through these rela- tionships, individuals interact with one another and develop a mutual  understanding  of their  common needs. Where this can be established and  sustained, local adaptive capacities increase, resiliency becomes possible, and community can emerge.12
As community  residents  and  groups interact  over issues  of importance  to all of them,  they develop what has come to be known as community agency, or ways for local action and  resiliency to emerge.13
Community agency reflects the building of local rela- tionships that  increase the  human capacity of local people. Agency can therefore be seen as the  capac- ity of people to manage, utilize, and  enhance those resources available to them  in addressing issues in the  local community. The application of agency can be seen in civic engagement at all levels. Of particu- lar importance is the  fact that  such engagement and interaction can define a clear  place for youth in local society, strengthening their  sense of self and identity. Enabling youth to be  visible and  empowering them to be active constitute a key component in commu- nity development efforts.
C ARE AND RESILIENCE
A fourth discourse--which has received less atten- tion but  is currently gaining momentum--sees civic engagement as a means of creating a more caring, empathic and  supportive environment in the  lives of young people, especially those who are  vulner- able.  Whereas the  positive youth development dis- course applies to all young people, the  care factor is particularly relevant to those  experiencing chal- lenges such as poverty, health issues, disability and exploitation.  Traditional  youth services typically emphasize  the   need to address young people's problems (such as poor academic performance or social  isolation)  before they deem them ready to take  on  leadership roles or engage collectively with others to bring about social change. Proponents of the  care approach argue that  the  assumption that young people  need to be  "fixed "  before they can be developed runs counter to what is known about human motivation  and  adolescent development. They believe that  all youth need to be challenged as well as cared for, and  that  there is a need to weave together opportunities  to develop  and  engage. In particular, they assert that  civic engagement offers
a means through which the  needs and  rights of vul- nerable young people can be addressed.14
The study of resilience focuses on  how some indi- viduals exposed to a series of adverse experiences manage to escape serious harm.15  Longitudinal studies of risk and  resilience have shown that  many young people cope well and  demonstrate positive outcomes in adulthood despite having been exposed to serious risks during childhood. These studies have attributed such  resilience  to the  presence of pro- tective factors that  help mitigate against the  effects of early disadvantage. Significant protective factors include problem-solving skills, external interests or attachments, support from non-familial adults, and a defined purpose in life and  sense of self-efficacy.16
Social  or  political activity  among youth--or,  more
specifically, their  engagement in civic action about which they feel  passionate--can act  as a protective factor that  supports young people becoming resil- ient  to the  challenges they face in life.17
SOCIAL JUSTICE
The social  justice approach is distinct  from other forms of youth development in that  it calls for explicit acknowledgement of the  seriousness of the  socioec- onomic challenges facing young people. It includes elements of youth development frameworks such as emotional and  social support as well as positive adult relationships, yet it also encompasses a socio- political element linked  to a critical understanding of the  root causes of social and  community problems. The social justice approach derives from the  propo- sition that  youth can be  active agents of social and political change in their  own environment once they are equipped with the  sociopolitical competencies
necessary to articulate social and  community prob- lems and  propose solutions.
Social justice youth development includes practices and  programmes that  foster a positive sense of self through exploration of one's racial, ethnic and  sex- ual identity; increase social awareness through the acquisition  of knowledge  about social  issues;  and strengthen skills that  promote inquiry, analysis and problem solving. More succinctly, this approach can be  used not only  to identify  problems,  but  also  to activate mechanisms through which adversities can be addressed in real and  tangible ways.
ADULT VIEWS A S A
CHALLENGE TO YOUTH
CIVIC ENG AGEMENT
Adults tend to have low and  often negative expec- tations of young  people, focusing  on  their  risky behaviour,  destructive  peer influences  and  resist- ance to adult authority; few see youth as individuals with the  positive motivation and  skills to contribute to their  communities. A body of research highlights how young people sense that  their  participation is not valued in society, which makes them less likely to engage in collective activity in the  first place. The extent to which young people feel  they can influ- ence their  local school and  community experiences reveals  much about their  level  of recognition  as
social  actors.  It has been argued that  young peo- ple, especially those from low-income backgrounds, are conditioned to believe that  nothing they do will make a positive difference in society.
Another obstacle to the  civic engagement of young people is "adultism", or the  tendency of adults to con- trol the  nature and  content of youth civic engage- ment. Typically, civic engagement among young people replicates the  structure of adult democratic institutions and  tends to be based on adult notions of what constitutes appropriate forms of participation for youth. As a result, marginalized youth and  other young people lacking the  "necessary" qualifications and  resources are less likely to volunteer. Studies have found that  some young people see "volunteering" as something imposed upon them by adults rather than as something they really want to do.
There is ample evidence from research indicating that while young people are  capable of developing pro- jects that  can bring significant positive change to soci- ety, they are not encouraged to do so because these projects may challenge existing institutions. Hence, prevailing forms of civic engagement often focus on the  maintenance of these institutions rather than pro- moting action for change. This may contribute to the apparent reluctance, or even unwillingness, of youth to engage in the  existing civic and  political framework.
CIVIC ENG AGEMENT
PROGR A MMES: FIVE KE Y
RECOMMENDATIONS
It is worth noting that  it is widely acknowledged that organised efforts are required to promote youth civic engagement. Research suggests that  young people are
more likely to become civically engaged when they are in setting such as schools, workplaces and  com- munity organizations where they are asked to take part because their  friends are, or because they learn  about issues that  concern them (Flanagan and Levine, 2010).
The following recommendations are set out for the development of both policy and  youth civic engage- ment programmes,  practices  and   inter ventions. They can be adapted to the  community, national and international levels. These recommendations should be  included  in  any,  and   all,  youth prog rammes where a  legitimate desire  for  youth involvement exists. Regardless of whether these are designed at the  local, regional, or national level, and  are deemed as promising or proven in terms of evaluation and renown, a youth voice and  representation is essen- tial. However to maximize effectiveness programmes should  be  implemented  locally.  These local  efforts can utilize consistent curriculum/methods designed at extra-local levels (Universities, Governments, NGOs), but  it is essential that  youth in the  context of their  environments help decide how these are deliv- ered and implemented based on their  unique needs.
This  approach benefits  Member  States and  locali- ties that  embrace youth in such a manner. Examples where this approach has effectively worked include Youth as Researchers18  (where groups of youth raise issues, answer these through rigorous research, and communicate the results to a wider audience, and add to body of knowledge), Leadership for Life19   (where local youth defining problems and  how to develop plans  to address these),  and  the  Communities that
Care20  (this UK program focuses are developing local civic engagement to address unique local needs).
Be  explicit  regarding  the degree  of youth par ticipation.  Some studies  have emphasized  the  importance  of involving  youth in all aspects of programme design  planning,  devel- opment and  execution,  which can provide  them w ith  oppor tunities  to practise  their   leadership skills, determine the  responsiveness of the  pro- gramme to the  needs of all its  beneficiaries,  pur- sue social  justice, and   understand methods  for effective implementation. All allow for increased youth ownership of the  process and  the  long term commitment  of young people to such efforts.  It is argued that  a youth-driven  or  youth-led  model w ill y ield  the   most  tangible results  in  ter ms of youth development and   youth empowerment. 21
A youth-driven model may not necessarily be run by youth, but  the  adults administering the  programme can ensure that  many aspects are shaped by youth and  that  there is a significant level  of youth owner- ship. It is important that  civic engagement initiatives explicitly define the  degree of youth ownership and the  decision-making authority young people have with regard to programme activities. Successful civic engagement programmes,  as widely  recognised
best practice, include youth involvement in moni- toring and  evaluation. This should be  included as a norm in all youth engagement efforts.
Be  relevant  to  young people's  own interests and lived experience.  Young people are  more likely to be  engaged by and  pas- sionate about issues that  are  relevant to their  own culture and  lived  experience. This does not suggest that  youth should  be  driven  to action  by carefully selected information given to them by adults. It is about youth being more likely to be  committed to something that  directly impacts their  well-being and individual passions. The knowledge youth possess must be valued, and  young people need an enabling environment that  allows them to develop a certain level  of expertise on  the  issues that  influence their lives. This approach is consistent with Article 12 of the  United Nations Convention on the  Rights of the Child, which affirms the  right  of children to express their  views freely and  to have those views taken into account in all matters that  affect them.22
Be  action-oriented.  Research has shown that   young people are  committed  to social  jus- tice  but  often do not consider themselves respon- sible for the  injustices they see, nor do they believe
 		they are  in a position  to do anything  about them.
Therefore, it is important that  the  ideals of civic engagement programmes are  grounded in action and  in the  establishment of processes for  ensuring action.  Organizations  and  agencies  working with youth on  civic engagement initiatives should clearly specify the  civic goals they wish to achieve and  pro- vide  real opportunities for young people to engage in action directed towards meeting those objectives. They must also  ensure that  youth engagement is
23
real,  substantial,  and  significant.  If engagement is "tokenistic"  it will not  propel  further involvement. Similarly when assessing the  success of engagement efforts it is important to understand that  the  success of establishing a process for engaging youth in long- term activities matters. Establishing the  process, framework,  and  methods is the  measure success. This allows for long-term capacity building and  sus- tained engagement, not just one off activities that are abandoned after  a single success or failure.
Value and foster analysis and reflec- tion.  While action is essential in developing civic skills and  experience, the  importance of reflecting on civic activity is also emphasized in the  literature. For example, young people may be trained and  engaged in designing, implementing and  evaluating research, conducting surveys and  interviews of their  peers, and presenting findings and solutions in public forums.
P rov ide oppor tunities   for youth- adult partnership. While youth ownership of civic action is important, this does not mean adults should not play a role. Youth leadership emerges out of a complex set of skills,  behaviours,  actions  and attitudes that  are  best developed through appren- ticeships  and  other experiential  processes  requir- ing  close partnerships between youth and  adults.23
Adults often play a key role as mentors and  motiva- tors in youth leadership programmes.24
ECONOMIC
ENGAGEMENT
THE transition to the world of work marks a cru- cial stage  in young people's  lives. It extends the possibility of independence, the application of aca- demic learning, and social and economic productiv- ity, and it sets the stage for defining an individual's potential in terms of earning capacity, job options and possibilities for advancement. When and how young people enter the labour force can have life- long implications for their employment experiences and can impact the well-being of those individuals as well as their relationships with family, friends, the community and society.25
Young people typically experience the  greatest diffi- culty finding work. Youth are three times more likely than older adults to be  unemployed. Their relative lack of skills and  experience puts them at a disad- vantage, but  it is also often the  case that  in times of economic hardship it becomes easier for employers to retain existing older staff than to hire  new, often younger, workers.
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT AND UNDEREMPLOYMENT
Young people have been disproportionately affected by unemployment,  underemployment,  vulnerable employment and  working poverty. Even during peri- ods of robust economic growth, the  labour market is often unable to assimilate large numbers of youth. In recent years, the  situation has been exacerbated by the  lingering effects of the  global financial and  eco- nomic crisis, with declining numbers of youth able to find decent work.26
Recent estimates indicate that  73 million youth, or
13 per  cent of all young people worldwide,  were unemployed in 2014.27  While joblessness is a con- cern almost everywhere, in low- and  middle-income countries it is underemployment in the  informal sec- tor  rather than unemployment in the  formal sector that  constitutes the  primary employment-related challenge faced by youth.
According to the  International Labour Organization (ILO), an estimated 600 million productive jobs would need to be  created for  young people over the  next decade to absorb those currently unemployed and provide  job opportunities  for  the  40  million  youth expected to enter the  labour market each year.
REGIONAL DISPARITIES
In  many respects,  the  economic crisis  is global  in nature; regardless of a country's level  of income or educational attainment among youth, young peo- ple  are being disproportionately affected. However, worldw ide  f ig ures  mask w ide-rang ing  reg ional differences in  the  employment  challenges  facing young people.
Although since 2012 there has been a decrease in youth unemployment rates in many regions, this has not been the  case everywhere. In 2014, youth unem- ployment was highest in the  Middle East, rising from
CHAPTER
2
27.6  in 2012 to 28.2  per  cent in 2014 and  in North Africa, rising from 29.7 to 30.5 per  cent during the same period. Increases also occurred in South-East Asia and  the  Pacific (12.7 to 13.6 per cent).28
At the  same time,  the  youth unemployment  rate decreased in:  Central  and  South Eastern Europe (non-EU) and  the  Commonwealth of  Independent States (CIS) (17.4 to 17.2 per  cent), Latin America and the  Caribbean (13.5 to 13.4 per  cent) and  sub-Saha- ran Africa (12.1 to 11.6 per  cent).29  The lowest youth unemployment rates are found in South Asia (9.9 per cent) and  East Asia (10.6 per cent).30
When broken down the  statistics highlight diverse regional and  national situations and  challenges when it comes to youth unemployment.
In developing countries, a particular challenge is the large  numbers of youth who, working irregularly in the  informal  sector,  cannot escape from working poverty. In 2013, it was estimated that  286  million employed youth were living  on  less than US$ 4 per day, and  169 million were subsisting on less than US$
2 per day.31
BOX 2.1.
YOUTH NEET
Increasing use is being made of the  NEET rate--the  proportion of young people not in employment, education or training--to measure and  gauge the  economic partici- pation of youth who are the  least educated and  most likely to be socially excluded.
According   to  the   Inter national   L abour Organization, the  NEET rate for Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)  countries as a group rose 2.1  per cent between 2008 and  2010,  to 15.8  per cent, which translates into one in six young people not engaged in work, academic pur- suits, or skills acquisition. Particularly affected have been Spain, Ireland and  Denmark, with youth under the age of 25 and young women identified as the  most vulnerable. Although the  figure remains high, the  share of young NEETs in the  European Union has declined in recent years, falling  from a high of 13.1 per cent in 2012 to 12.4 per cent in 2014.
M eanwhile,  develop e d   e conomie s h ave   b e en among those hit  hardest by the  global  economic crisis.  As noted,  while  youth unemployment  rates have started declining in the  European Union, they continue to exceed 20  per  cent in two thirds of EU countries.32 Indeed, the  aggregate youth unemploy- ment rate of 16.6 per cent across the  EU's 28 Member States masks w ide  ranging differences  between countries. In 2014 youth unemployment levels were still at worryingly high levels in Spain (53.2 per cent), Greece (52.4 per  cent), Croatia (45.5 per  cent), Italy (42.7 per  cent) Cyprus (35.9 per  cent) and  Portugal (34.8 per cent).33
Sustained high rates of unemployment and  under- e m p loy m e nt   h ave   h a d   a   s e r io u s  i m p a c t   on young people's  economic  engagement,  and  with
employment trends likely to continue in many parts of the  world,34 prospects for  the  full economic par- ticipation of young people seem bleaker than ever.35
Addressing youth unemployment is difficult because the  problem is multidimensional in nature. It is driven by both job scarcity  and  skill scarcity  (skill mismatches and  shortages). Too few jobs are being created for  new entrants to the  labour market, and many young people, including those with a tertiary education, do not possess the  skills required to meet today's labour market needs.
DECENT JOBS
With more than 87 per cent of the  world's youth living in developing countries, efforts to address employ- ment challenges must include not only generating more job opportunities  for young people, but  also improving  the  quality  of work and  working condi- tions. As noted previously, many youth in developing economies are underemployed, working in the  infor- mal economy and often holding multiple part-time or temporary jobs in precarious conditions for little pay; this is particularly true for young women (see box 2.2).
Even with a job in hand, many young workers con- tinue to experience job vulnerability and  instability. Youth may find  few opportunities  for  skills devel- opment and   advancement,  and   they are  of ten
BOX 2.2.
GENDER DISPARITIES IN YOUTH EMPLOYMENT
Although important gains have been made in edu- cation worldwide, labour market prospects continue to be more unfavourable for young women than for young  men  virtually everywhere.  Women are  also disproportionally involved in part-time and/or infor- mal and  precarious work and  are overrepresented in sectors with exploitative working conditions and  low labour union density. While the  male-female pay gap is closing in certain developed contexts, persistent earning disparities between young men and  young women in some regions continue to interfere with women's full economic engagement.
Globally,  young women are  also  less  likely than young men to become entrepreneurs,  in part  due to cultural and  societal barriers in some countries, which further limits  the  employment options for female youth.
subjected to long working hours; insecure, infor- m al  and   inter mit tent work ing   condit ion s; and periods of joblessness.
In  low-income  countries,  nine  in  ten  workers are employed in the  informal sector. At least three in four youth are irregularly employed, frequently combin- ing  own-account and  family work with casual, and often part-time, paid employment.36
ILO school-to-work  transition  surveys conducted in 28 low- and  middle-income countries show that three quarters of young workers aged 15-29 years are engaged in the  informal economy as either wage earners or necessity-driven  self-employed.  T he incidence  of informal  employment is even higher among young women. 37
Job quality is a concern in developed countries as well. A marked erosion in employment conditions-- including a shift from long-term employment con- tracts to short-term and/or part-time contracts and temporary work, the  loss of entitlement to insurance and benefits, and longer working hours--has changed the  playing field  for  young labour market entrants, compounding the  youth employment challenge.
Most  developed countries have experienced an increase in both voluntary and  involuntary temporary and  part-time work among youth. The proportion of
BOX 2.3.
TRAINING AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT: PASSING THE COST-BENEFIT TEST
When equipped with relevant skills and  education, young people become better positioned to secure decent work. Investment in skills training and  devel- opment  is an  increasingly  popular programmatic and  policy  response to tackling  the  youth unem- ployment challenge.  However,  the  costs of devel- oping skills training programmes versus the  benefits gained, particularly in times of long-term and  persis- tent youth unemployment, are a consideration.
For   example,  a  delayed  tran sition  f rom school to work can lead  to the   erosion of skills,  result- ing  in decreased benefits from skills development schemes.  The International  Labour Organization notes that  overeducation and  overskilling coexist with undereducation and  underskilling, in that  so far as long-term unemployment is the  norm for young people, their  skills and  education gradually become obsolete.a  Ensuring that  skills training programmes
are  linked  to job placement  is therefore a facet of successful skills programmes, and  this may balance the  cost-benefit equation as well as ensure that  the skills mismatch is reduced.
In conflict and  fragile  State situations, this is also the scenario. A study looking at entrepreneurship pro- grammes in poor and  fragile  States concludedb that it was difficult to find  a skills training programme passing a simple cost-benefit test, and  that  the  injec- tion of capital, in the  form of cash, capital goods, or livestock, had  a greater positive impact on long-term earning potential and  the  tendency towards entre- preneurship than did skills training programmes.
young people working less than 30 hours per  week increased from 21 to 30 per  cent in OECD countries between 2007 and  2014, with the  average for the  28
European Union countries reaching 43.3 per cent.38
MITIG ATING THE IMPAC T: ADDRESSING THE
CHALLENGES
Persistent unemployment among young people can have a lasting impact on society. Relatively high levels of youth unemployment are linked  to reduced economic
growth and  in many places  have led  to civil unrest and  the  disruption of traditional power structures.39
However, the  costs of joblessness go beyond macroe- conomic considerations and interference with the status quo. Long-term unemployment and underemployment can also adversely affect young people's health, well-be- ing  and  self-esteem  and  can diminish  their  future earning potential and  employment prospects.
Many Governments have acknowledged the  devas- tating long-term consequences of  unemployment for both young individuals  and  society and  have placed dealing with the  youth unemployment crisis at the  top  of both national and  international agendas in a bid to keep  the  possibility of a "lost generation of young workers" from becoming a reality. Investing in skills development and  training, establishing intern- ships, and  promoting entrepreneurship have been identified as key tools in addressing the  crisis.
Although legitimate efforts are being made to miti- gate the  effects of the  crisis through the  types of tar- geted programmes and  schemes mentioned above, many young people  still fall  through the   cracks and  are left  to navigate the  employment landscape themselves.  The present chapter highlights  how through internships (Gianni Rosas), entrepreneurship (Claudia Pompa), and  participation in trade unions (Amy F. Huziak), young people are navigating their engagement in a changing labour market.
INTERNSHIP S
Young people are increasingly turning to internships as a gateway to the  labour market. With limited employ- ment opportunities available, internships can provide an excellent opportunity for young people to gain occupa- tional knowledge and  develop skills and  capabilities to better equip them for a career in their  desired field.
Historically,  internships  have been linked  to either educational  or  policy  outcomes,  with  many youth undertaking internships as part  of their  educational curriculum. In such placements, a primary focus  is placed on the learning outcomes for the young person.
In  recent years,  the  economic crisis  has brought about a shift in the  role internships play within the employment framework in many areas. Increasing numbers of companies and  organizations are offer- ing, often full-time and  unpaid, internships for recent graduates.  In  such incidents,  the  internship  is not necessarily linked  to specific educational outcomes, and  in many cases the  work of the  young intern is replacing that  of regular staff.
In  developed countr ies in  par ticular,  would-be interns  are  facing  a new dynamic.  Whereas tradi- tionally an internship would have been the  first step towards a paying job within a company or organi- zation,  there has been a trend in  recent years for employers to offer unpaid internships with no pos- sibility of career progression within the  organization.
Today, it is not uncommon for young people to undertake numerous back-to-back unpaid or low- paid  internships as they struggle to gain  a foothold on the career ladder. Far from better preparing young people for  economic life,  unpaid  internships  have the  potential to leave youth in an economically more
CHAPTER
2
vulnerable position than they would be  in had  they never undertaken the  internship in the  first place.
Amplifying the  precarious situation of many young interns  is the  lack  of strong regulation  and  safe- guards surrounding internships. In many cases, young unpaid interns are  not entitled to the  basic benefits and  entitlements of regular staff, including health insurance. As such, many young people are calling for stronger regulations and  the  development of benchmarks for quality internships so that  young people struggling  to gain  a foothold  in the  labour market, can do so without exploitation.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Globally,  young people are  1.6  times  more likely than  older  adult s  to  b ecome  ent repreneurs .40 
As young people face delayed or fractured entrance to the  labour  market,  Governments  (often facing severe economic  and  financial  cutbacks  and  con-
straints) are focusing on  promoting youth entrepre-
excessively on encouraging youth entrepreneurship and  fail to stimulate wider employment and  job cre- ation through broader and more robust employment strategies are, in effect, unfairly shifting much of the responsibility  for  job creation and  healthy  labour market performance away from the  larger  public and private sectors to young people, which can leave many youth vulnerable.
Indeed, though young people are  more likely than adults to start their  own businesses, they face a host of special challenges that  vary across countries and regions. The obstacles faced by those setting up and running a new business may be intensified for youth, whose age  and  inexperience  can place  them at  a disadvantage, and  young entrepreneurs must also deal  with  less-than-optimal  labour  market condi- tions deriving from the  global economic crisis.41
Among the  particular barriers they face, young peo- ple  trying to start a business may find  it especially
neurship. Likewise, many young people themselves	 	
have become more realistic  about their  job pros- pects in an uncertain economy and  are starting their own enterprises.
Entrepreneurship has the  capacity to provide many young people with real employment possibilities and opportunities.  However,  Governments  that  focus
difficult  to secure credit,  loans or  other types of financing and  often lack the  knowledge and  skills to use financial services efficiently. Because few finan- cial service institutions adequately cater to the  needs of young entrepreneurs in  many regions,  young people often rely on  family and  friends to obtain the funding they need for their  start-ups.42
TR ADE UNIONS
With dauntingly high youth unemployment and underemploy ment in  many par ts of the   world, young people are  finding it increasingly difficult to secure quality  jobs that  offer benefits and  entitle- ments. Employers have the  advantage of being able to offer young workers contracts that  provide little in the  way of career security, health-care benefits or pension schemes, knowing that  young people with few other prospects are not in a position to bargain and  are  poorly  aligned  to organize  into  collective bargaining units to try and  improve their  situation.43
As a consequence of this vulnerability, many young people end up  in precarious work situations, with a short-term or  non-employee contract (or  no con- tract), little or nothing in the  way of pension benefits, and  no health  insurance  or  unemployment insur- ance.44 This interferes with a young person's ability to plan  for the  future and  become financially secure. The expansion of precarious work means that  more
young workers are  stuck in non-standard employ- ment than was the  case in previous generations.45
As the  number  of youth  lacking a firm foothold in secure, long-term employment has declined, so has their  participation in trade unions.  At present, engagement in economic life is occurring largely on the  terms of employers and  not young employees.
As the  number  of youth  lacking a firm foothold in secure, long-term employment has declined, so has their  participation in trade unions. Not only can such employment precarity make joining a trade union seem futile, but  many fear that  defending their  rights will further jeopardise their  already shaky prospects. Intergenerational  divides  within  trade unions can compound the  situation. Many trade unions oper- ate  on  a two-tier system, where older workers with more secure contracts and  robust entitlements sit at one level, and  young workers with less secure con- tracts and  conditions on another.
IN SEARCH OF BENCHMARKS FOR QUALITY INTERNSHIPS
Gianni Rosas
bIxNtx TRODUC TION
An internship  involves  short-term  exposure to a work setting--a "practice period" during which the learner receives training and  acquires experience in a specific field or career area.46  This institution is rel- atively new but  is becoming increasingly important as a means of obtaining  workplace-based  experi- ence and  thereby easing the  school-to-work transi- tion, particularly in countries where education and training systems tend to rely primarily on  theoretical training and  offer little  or no exposure to the  world of work.
Over the  past few years, recourse to internships has steadily  increased  in  a number of countries,  par- ticularly those affected by the  global economic and financial crisis. This can be  partly attributed to the need for young people to stay engaged in the  labour market and  improve their  prospects for employment when the  economy rebounds. The unprecedented youth employment crisis  has become a stubborn reality in  most countries and  in  all regions.  It has resulted in  increased  vulnerability  among young people, who  are  now faced w ith  higher unem- ploy ment,  lower q uality  of work and   str uctural underemployment for  those who find  jobs, greater labour market inequalities among different groups, a longer and  less secure school-to-work transition, and  increased detachment from the  labour market.
Currently, two out of five young people in the  labour force are either unemployed or working but  poor. Of the estimated 200 million unemployed in 2014, about
37 per cent (or around 73 million) were between the ages of 15 and  24.47  In  that  year,  the  global  youth unemployment rate  was 13 per  cent--nearly three times the  adult rate.48
Work experience is highly valued by employers, and the  lack of such experience constitutes a major obsta- cle for first-time job seekers. Companies often hesitate to recruit young people because the  return on  invest- ment from inexperienced youth may be uncertain.
Together with programmes offering summer jobs and part-time employment to students, periods of work- place-based practice in the  form of internships have helped many young people escape the  "experience trap" (a lack of work experience linked  to the  inability to find a job in the first place). Although data on intern- ships are scant, available evidence from a number of countries points to the  increased likelihood of former
interns finding a job.49 In some cases, however, intern- ships run  the  risk of being used for  purposes other than learning. The surge in the  number of internships over the  past five  years has heightened debate over the  conditions under which internships take place--in particular the  unpaid ones, which in some countries have been the  subject of scrutiny  for  their  alleged use as a way of obtaining cheap labour and  replacing existing workers or entry-level jobs. Against this back- drop, a number of national and  international institu- tions,  youth organizations,  researchers and  media entities have started looking into the  benchmarks and elements that  define  quality  internships  and  iden- tifying mechanisms to ensure that  internships are a valuable learning experience and  that  the  rights and entitlements of young interns are respected.
THE RISE OF INTERNSHIP S: A GLOBAL TREND
Internships were first introduced in the  United States of America in  the  nineteenth  century.  They later spread to other developed countries and  have more recently been established in several low- and  mid- dle-income countries.
Until the  1930s, internships in the  United States were only offered in the  medical profession. They were then extended to liberal-arts-based professions and later  to white-collar  occupations in public  admin- istration and   political organizations.50  From the
1970s onwards, internships spread throughout most
advanced economies and  are  now increasingly  a feature of the  education and  labour market systems of low- and  middle-income  countries.  Internship arrangements can be  found in  several  industries and   occupations,  in  for-profit  and   not-for-profit
organizations, and  within both the  public and  pri- vate sectors. The number of young people partici- pating in internship programmes has also drastically increased. In the  early 1980s as few as 3 per  cent of college  students in  the  United  States secured an internship before graduation. Today, that  figure is as high as 75 per cent.51 Similarly, in France, the  number of young people taking on  internships has more than doubled in six years.52  In the  United Kingdom of Great Britain  and  Northern Ireland, the  Chartered Institute of Personnel and  Development estimated that  more than one in five  employers planned  to hire  interns between April and  September 2010; this represented a potential offer of a quarter of a million internships.
MAIN TYPES OF INTERNSHIPS There are  three main  types of internships  whose features are worth analysing to identify what consti- tutes a quality internship. They include those form- ing  part  of education programmes, those linked  to youth employment policy, and  those offered in the open market.
Inter nships  linked  to  educational prog rammes.   T hese ty pes of inter n ships are part  of a school's curriculum, be  it higher voca- tional education or academic education. Young peo- ple alternate between studying in an institution and learning practical, job-related skills in the  workplace and  often receive learning credit for the  time spent as an intern. In France, for instance, an internship must be  an  integral part  of a learning activity associated with an educational programme. A negotiated agree- ment (convention de stage) is signed by the  sending educational institution and  the  internship provider. This agreement should include a work plan, the  start and end dates of the  internship, the  hours spent at the workplace, the stipend that will be provided, the social protection entitlements, and  the  supervision arrange- ments.53  Similar programmes exist in most European
countries, in Northern America and  Latin America, and  in several countries in Asia and  the  Pacific. The educational institutions involved in the  negotiation of internship programmes usually specify the  learn- ing  purpose and  other conditions under which the internships take  place. Typically, both the  institution and  the  enterprise have a certain level  of bargaining power, and  this ensures a balance of the  interests of both parties in the  negotiation. Educational institu- tions also participate in the  monitoring of the  intern- ship, though as the  numbers of internship positions rise, institutions have less time to devote to monitor- ing  during implementation,  which can reduce the learning value of these programmes.
Internships linked to youth employ- ment  policy.  Government policies  and  pro- g rammes  targeting the   employ ment  of young people are increasingly including measures that  pro- mote internships as a way for young people to gain
practical experience. The extent to which these kinds of internships are regulated varies across countries.54
In Portugal, the  Programa de  Estagios Profissionais
(Professional Traineeship Programme) targets young people who have completed secondary or tertiary education. The programme lasts from nine to twelve months and is regulated by law, with monitoring pro- vided by labour market institutions.55  The National Internship Programme in Botswana provides work experience for unemployed graduates.
Legal and  administrative procedures are usually detailed in standard agreements that  specify the  con- ditions under which these internships take place. The conditions apply to all enterprises participating in the programme. Like many youth employment interven- tions, the  internship programmes are usually mon- itored  by institutions  governing  the  labour  market (such as employment offices and  labour inspector- ates), which can also write off implementing partners that  do not respect the  terms of the  agreement.
Internships  in  the open market.  In recent years there has been an  upsw ing  in  the internships  young people  undertake in  the  open market after  graduation. These internships are usu- ally advertised by enterprises, and  their  terms and conditions are negotiated directly between the employer and  the  intern. The latter  usually has little
bargaining power. These kinds of internships tend to be less regulated and  are more difficult to monitor in comparison  with  those organized  by education or labour market institutions.56  Open market internships are  available on  every continent. Several countries have started to develop laws and  regulations defining internship content and  implementation modalities, with a view to protecting young people. For instance, in 2014 the  Council of the  European Union adopted a recommendation on  a quality framework for trainee- ships.57  This recommendation focuses on the learning and training content of internships and the  conditions under which internships should be  implemented in the  28 member States of the  European Union.
WHAT ARE THE
BENCHM ARKS FOR
DEFINING QUALIT Y
INTERNSHIP S?
Various institutions  have undertaken analyses  of existing data, national practice, and  regulations gov- erning the  three types of internships, and  their  find- ings  have been used to identify  benchmarks for quality internships. Quality assurance standards may be compulsory or voluntary. In Europe, for instance, a number of Governments have enacted internship-re- lated legislation or adopted quality frameworks. The latter  have also been developed by non-governmen- tal organizations and  promoted on  a voluntary basis by enterprises, employer organizations and  profes- sional  bodies.  The different regulatory approaches provide useful insights on  the  essential elements of a quality internship.58  The quality components outlined below are based on  the  analysis of those regulations and  frameworks and  on the  findings of surveys con- ducted by various organizations.
Purpose of the internship. The objective of an internship is to gain  occupational knowledge, skills and  experience. Learning must be primary and job performance secondary. There are different ways experience may be  acquired during an  internship; some interns shadow an  experienced worker who acts as a trainer, while others are given work-related tasks and  learn  by trial and  error. Because internship programmes are less systematic and  structured than other forms of education and  training, and  because the  intern is learning-by-doing in a real workplace situation, the  boundaries between learning and work often become blurred, particularly when the  intern- ship conditions are not clearly established. In many countries, internships are helping growing numbers of young people get  a foothold in the  labour market, but  there is also increasing controversy over prac- tice,  particularly with respect to the  real purpose. It is becoming  increasingly  common for  fair labour advocates--at the  request of individuals or through class action  or  other collective  mechanisms--to call on  labour courts or institutions governing the labour market to clarify the  purpose of internships
and  create more detailed guidelines. Box 2.4 shows the  criteria applied in the  United States to determine whether interns qualify as trainees or as employees.
Recruitment.  The intern recruitment process should be  transparent.  The advertisement  should specify  the  main  requirements and  tasks and  the conditions under which the  internship is being offered (including  duration,  supervisory  arrange- ments, and  expected outcome). In Europe there are various recruitment channels, including educational entities, labour offices, employers and  professional associations, social networks, websites, and interme- diary organizations. In Italy, for instance, internships linked  to educational  programmes are  managed by placement  offices that  advertise  the  positions
and  handle the  matching  process.60   In  the  United Kingdom, the  Government has encouraged enter- prises  to subscribe  to the  Common  Best-Practice Code for  High Quality Internships and  make a vol- untarily  commitment  to follow  certain  standards, including those relating to recruitment processes that  should  be  the  same as those applied  for  the recruitment of workers.61   A similar voluntary com- mitment  to transparency in recruitment has been made by several enterprises in respect of the  quality elements included in the  European Quality Charter on  Internships  and  Apprenticeships  developed by the  European Youth Forum.62
Wr it ten ag reement.   Although  circum- stances vary considerably from one place to another, formalizing internships through written agreements is becoming  an  increasingly  common practice in many parts of the  world.  Educational  institutions, labour  offices and  individuals  often enter into  for- mal  internship  agreements with  enterprises,  and
similar arrangements are  made between employ- ers'  organizations  and  trade unions.  These agree- ments clearly specify the  obligations of both parties as well as the  conditions governing the  internships (including learning content, duration, compensation, and  social  security  entitlements).  In  Burkina Faso, the  law requires a written contract to be  signed by the  employer and  the  intern prior  to the  start of an internship.63 In the Netherlands, a standard internship agreement has to be signed by employers who take on  trainees as part  of an  educational programme. These agreements may also  be  accompanied by workplans  that  define what the  intern  is expected to achieve during the  internship period. Such plans provide a better understanding of the  tasks and  also facilitate monitoring of the  quality of the  internship. In Greece, all internship agreements linked  to educa- tional programmes include a detailed description of trainee-related tasks.64
BOX 2.4.
THE PURPOSE OF AN INTERNSHIP: THE SIX-PART TEST IN THE UNITED STATES
In the  United States, the  determination of whether an  internship  or  training programme falls outside the  scope of labour legislation is based on  six crite- ria that  courts have often referred to when render- ing decisions on  specific cases. These criteria derive from the  United States Supreme Court case Walling v. Portland Terminal Co., in which the  Court was called upon in 1947 to determine whether yard brakemen engaged in a short training course organized by a railway company were to be  considered  trainees/ learners or employees. The six criteria, which have since been applied to similar cases, are as follows:
1.    "The  internship    is similar to training which would be given in an educational environment;
2.    "The internship experience is for  the  benefit of the  intern;
3.    "The intern does not displace regular employ- ees, but  works under close supervision of exist- ing staff;
4.    "The employer that  provides the  training derives no immediate advantage from the  activities of the  intern;
5.    "The intern is not necessarily entitled to a job at the  conclusion of the  internship; and
6.    "The employer and  the  intern understand that the  intern is not entitled to wages for  the  time spent in the  internship."
Supervision.  Supervision and  mentoring are critical in  achieving  a quality  outcome for  intern-
ships. As mentioned previously, workplace-related skills and  experience are transmitted through obser- vation of experienced workers and  through learning by doing. For  this reason, interns should always be supervised, with a specified amount of time devoted to mentoring the  trainees. The supervisor should set learning objectives,  conduct reviews,  and  provide feedback to the  intern.  Legislative  and  regulatory frameworks do not necessarily guarantee the  quality
of internships. It is the  implementation of these reg- ulations, sound monitoring and  strong supervision of the  entire process that  play a key role in ensur- ing  quality placements.65   In Sweden, the  employer is directly responsible for ensuring that  trainees are under the  direction,  supervision  and  support of a person who is adequately trained for the  intern-re- lated assignments and  has enough time to accom- plish the  task.
Duration.  The duration of an internship should be  determined  based on  the  time  needed to fulfil the  training requirements. The limited duration and the  explicit  mention  of start and  end dates in for- mal  internship  agreements are  considered  impor- tant to prevent the  substitution of regular workers with  trainees.  On average,  internships  last  from 3 to 12 months. In Argentina, the  duration of intern- ships linked  to educational programmes can range between 2 and  12 months, with a weekly load  of up to 20 working hours.66  In Rwanda, by law an intern-
ship cannot exceed 12 months,67  while the  average period of an internship in Botswana is 24 months. In France, the  law limits the  duration of an  internship to six months.68  Although not linked  to the  duration of a single internship experience, the  succession (or carousel) of internships in which some young peo- ple get  trapped has been identified as one of the  fea- tures of the  recent global job crisis. The practice of engaging in consecutive internships prolongs the learning  period for  young people  and  postpones their  entry into remunerative employment.
Compensation.  Internships  can be  paid  or unpaid. An internship agreement should clearly specify  any form of compensation offered to an intern.  In  general,  it is recognized  that  the  intern should be  offered compensation  or  a  stipend  to cover living  expenses (including the  costs of trans- portation, meals and  accommodation). This is often provided for internships linked  to youth employment policy, particularly when the  programmes are target- ing  disadvantaged youth who have limited financial means. The issue of pay is, however, related to the purpose of an internship (see the  section on  written agreements and  box 2.4). In recent years, there has been controversy in many countries over the issue of
compensation in internships, with increasing num- bers of former interns claiming they were engaged in routine tasks with little learning content or in per- forming the  same work as that  of regular employ- ees.69 In France, the  law stipulates that  students undertaking an internship lasting for more than two months should receive minimum compensation.70
In  Greece, students who undertake a compulsory internship  are  entitled  by law  to compensation.71
In the  Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the  law requires that  interns be paid the  minimum wage.72 In some countries, the  type of organization offering the service is taken into account for the  determination of paid  versus unpaid internships. In the  United States, for  instance, an  unpaid internship with a for-profit organization is allowed only if there is no immedi- ate  advantage for  the  organization in question. An intern engaged in profit-generating activities would be  considered an employee (see box 2.4). Likewise,
where sponsorship  is provided  by labour  market institutions  in  the  context of youth employment policy, appropriate compensation makes internship positions accessible to all young people, particularly those coming from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds. The international principle of "equal remuneration   for  work of equal  value"  should apply when interns perform the  same duties as reg- ular employees.73
Social protection. Interns should be covered by social  protection,  at least in the  form of health and  work accident insurance. The lack of social pro- tection is often the  most serious issue reported by interns.74  In France, a trainee has automatic access to social  security  coverage.75 In  Greece,  students who undertake a compulsory internship  are  enti- tled  by law to health and  work accident insurance.76
In the  Netherlands, students have a specific recog- nized legal  status during the  internship period and are  covered by health,  liability,  and  work accident insurance.77
Certification.  Upon completion of the  intern- ship, the  enterprise should provide the  intern with a certificate  or  reference letter detailing  the  dura- tion of the  internship, the  tasks undertaken, and  the skills and  experience acquired. This allows the  intern to demonstrate what he  or she has achieved when applying for  prospective jobs. In France, the  intern must be  provided with a certificate upon comple- tion of the  placement.78  In Peru, the  host company
or  organization  has to provide  certification  at  the conclusion of an internship linked  to an educational programme.79
WHAT ARE THE RISKS A SSOCIATED WITH INTERNSHIP S?
The conditions  for  internships  vary substantially across the  contexts in  which they take  place. In many cases, the  lack  of regulations or  their  ambi- guity and  weak enforcement can lead  to results that are not consistent with the  purpose of an internship. Because of the  adverse effects of the  global  eco- nomic  crisis  on  young people,  as well  as the  lack of a clear definition of the  rights  and  duties asso- ciated with internships, young interns face certain risks.  In some countries there have been growing numbers of class action suits and  complaints, often led by youth organizations or trade unions, and  the problems associated with internships have received increased attention from the  media.
In many European countries, as well as in Australia, Canada and  the  United States, the  number of intern- ships has increased considerably over the  past dec- ade.  This has coincided with the  worsening of the economic situation and  the  disproportionate impact
of the  global jobs crisis on  young workers in recent years.  In  several  sectors and  occupations (includ- ing  media, arts, fashion, public relations and  public administration), there has been a significant increase in alleged cases  of regular staff being replaced with interns. Although surveys have been carried out by some organizations to monitor the  quality of intern- ships being offered, the issues surrounding this emerg- ing phenomenon have proven difficult to pin down.80
Although no global estimates exist, some national surveys have provided information on  the  exponen- tial growth of internships. The purpose of internships and  the  issue  of compensation are  the  two areas that  have received the  most attention. In the  United Kingdom, it was estimated that  there were around
100,000 unpaid interns in 2010.81 Usually, unpaid internships are justified as being part of an academic programme.82  However, paid  interns have a distinct advantage in the  job market, according to a survey conducted in 2012 by the  National  Association  of Colleges and  Employers. Approximately 60 per  cent of college graduates who participated in paid intern- ships in 2012 received at least one job offer, while unpaid interns fared  only slightly better than gradu- ates who had  not served internships; overall, 37 per cent of unpaid  interns  received  offers of employ- ment,  while  the  same was true  for  36 per  cent of graduates with no internship experience.83
In  some cases,  the  lack  of compensation  makes internships de  facto exclusive, as they  limit partic- ipation to those  who  are  able  to cover their  own living  expenses, effectively institutionalizing soci- oeconomic  disparities.  A study published  by the Trade  Union  Cong ress  of the   United  Kingdom found that  only 12 per  cent of the  youth surveyed
in London  said they could afford to live  away from home to participate in an unpaid internship; 16 per cent responded that  they would  probably  not be able  to do so, and  61 per cent said they definitely did not have the  financial  means to live  in the  capital and  take on  unpaid work.84 If internships are unpaid, there is also a greater risk that  trainees will not be treated like other workers within  an  organization. Among the  analyses that  are  available, many  indi- cate that--all else being equal--internships that  offer compensation and  relate to the  participant's field of study best facilitate the  school-to-work transition by serving as a stepping stone to regular employment.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Young people deciding on  an internship or engaged in an internship experience should do the  following:
Review  internship  offers  by using the main   benchmarks   for   qualit y internships as a point  of  reference. Although the  benchmarks outlined above may not be  universally applicable, they can provide a refer- ence point for determining the  relative quality of the internship positions offered. Young people who are intending to take  on  (or are actually involved in) an internship could review the  terms and  conditions of each offer  to ascertain the  extent to which quality elements are incorporated in the  agreement or are part of the  internship experience.
Collect  information  on the regula- tor y and monitor ing   f rameworks gover ning   inter nships   in   a given country, sector or occupation. Many countries have adopted a set of minimal regulations to protect interns and  trainees. There are also several codes of conduct that  have been voluntarily adopted by many organizations  offering internships.  Prior to undertaking an  internship, young people should collect relevant regulatory information in order to check whether the  internships are in line with these regulations.
Contact  organizations  that repre- sent  the interests  of  young people to  obtain  advice on the conditions governing  internships.  Youth organiza- tions, employers' organizations and  trade unions and   are  usually  involved  in  the   promotion and
monitoring  of quality  internships.  They can help provide a better understanding of whether the  basic conditions are being met and  the  rights and  entitle- ments are  being respected. They can also provide advice and  support with regard to the  process to be followed in cases where these conditions, rights and entitlements are not applied.

INTRODUC TION
In modern history, entrepreneurship has never been more important than it is at present. Societies today face complex challenges  requiring strategic poli- cies that  extend beyond traditional economic solu- tions. Entrepreneurship and  innovation can address these challenges  by strengthening  sustainability, creating jobs, generating economic opportunities and  advancing human development. With the  pres- ent  concurrence of globalization, technological innovation and  demographic trends, much greater attention is being focused on the  role and  potential impact of entrepreneurship.
Persistent  unemploy ment among young people remains a problem, and  youth entrepreneurship can play an important part in facilitating economic devel- opment, structural change and  job creation. Around the  world,  entrepreneurship  and  small  and  medi- um-sized enterprise creation constitute sources of sustainable economic growth, driving innovation and  structural changes in the  economy while con- tributing to job creation and  increased productivity. While young people often turn to self-employment because they cannot find  jobs elsewhere, entrepre- neurship can provide them with valuable skills such as critical thinking,  decision-making,  leadership,
teamwork and  innovation--all of which remain rel- evant for the  rest of their  lives. In general, they gain expertise  in  areas not incorporated  in  traditional education, constructing unique careers that  reso- nate outside the  typical economic model by pulling in talent from their  peers and  fostering positive com- munity development.
YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP TRENDS
While  entrepreneurship  is not new,  the  increased momentum behind its promotion and  growth is indicative of unanswered needs in the  global econ- omy. It is likely that  increased insecurity, diminished prospects for obtaining gainful employment, and  the realization that  the  global economy does not have the  capacity  to create a sufficient number of jobs have all contributed significantly to the  noticeable upsurge in the  entrepreneurial aspirations of youth.
Most new businesses worldwide are started by indi- viduals between the  ages of 25 and  34, and  younger people in general tend to support entrepreneurship
47
BOX 2.5.
YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN NUMBERS
According to the  2013 report Generation Entrepreneur? The State of  Global Youth  Entrepreneurship,  the number of 15- to 35-year olds who would actively consider  becoming  entrepreneurs  varies widely. In sub-Saharan Africa, 60  per  cent of young people would consider self-employment, while in Asia and the  Pacific, Southern Asia and  the  European Union, the  number drops to roughly 17 per cent.a
One important  factor influencing  this  disparity is the  poverty level. In poorer regions, young people are more likely to actively pursue entrepreneurship because it often constitutes the  best way to generate an income, while in richer countries, the  likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurial activity depends largely on  whether opportunities  arise or  are  believed  to exist, with the  fear  of failure  weighing more heav- ily on the  decision. The countries most affected by the  global economic crisis, particularly those in the European Union, have seen a decline in the  number
of youth starting their  own businesses, likely owing to the  perceived lack of opportunities.b
In the  European Union,  young people  aged 20-30 years are  far more interested  in  entrepreneurship than are older adults; however, only 4 per cent of 15- to 24-year olds are self-employed, compared with 15 per  cent of the  general population.c The youth fig- ure is low in part because young people tend to face greater obstacles than do older adults when starting out in business.
as a good career choice. A recent Deloitte survey85 of 7,800  youth from 29  countries indicates  that  70 per  cent see themselves working independently at some point. However, there are  important regional differences; only 52  per  cent of the  respondents in developed economies expect to be  self-employed, as opposed to 82 per cent in developing economies. Such findings highlight the huge potential of entrepre- neurship in emerging economies. Similarly, research conducted by Youth Business International (YBI)  and the  Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) reveals that  sub-Saharan Africa has a significantly  higher proportion of potential entrepreneurs than any other
region.86  The research shows that  60 per cent of the
18- to 34-year olds there believe they are able to per- ceive opportunities in their  country and  are confident in their  ability to create and manage a new business.
Young people constitute an incredibly diverse group, and  the  different approaches and  business models they use are  a reflection of this.  In  the  developed economies  of Asia  and  the  Pacific,  the  European Union,  and  Southern Asia,  the  majority  of young
entrepreneurs are driven by perceived opportunity, whereas in regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle  East and  North  Africa,  and  Latin  America, entrepreneurs tend to be  driven  by necessity.  Not surprisingly, most youth entrepreneurs are own-ac- count business operators, though many youth also practice part-time and  collective entrepreneur- ship. Many of these businesses are in easy-to-enter sectors  and  require low levels  of skill since  youth often  lack the  experience and  expertise necessary to build  complex businesses. It has been noted by some researchers that  highly skilled  youth tend to be snapped up by competitive businesses and  there- fore  rarely participate in entrepreneurial ventures. It is essential to provide young people with the  tools, skills and  support they need to become successful entrepreneurs and  thereby ensure that  youth entre- preneurship represents a viable path.
A UNIFIED VOICE FOR YOUTH
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
One way to provide the  necessary tools, skills and support  is through  organizations  established  by and  for  young entrepreneurs. As the  entrepreneur- ial aspirations of youth  have continued to expand, young entrepreneurs have joined  forces and  are working together to engage with and  make rec- ommendations to policymakers, Governments and civil society on  the  issues that  affect them and  their enterprises. By banding together, young entrepre- neurs have become a recognized and  powerful con- stituency that  policymakers can no longer ignore. The G20 Young Entrepreneurs' Alliance (G20 YEA) is a global network of young entrepreneurs working to strengthen international cooperation and  promote
BOX 2.6. WHO WANTS TO BE AN ENTREPRENEUR?
Evidence  indicates  that  entrepreneurship is more common among older male youth than among younger youth, with self-em- ployment being least likely among younger women. In addition, entrepreneurship is often intergenerationally transmitted, with those whose  parents are  entrepreneurs being more likely to work independently.
open and  constructive discussion on  key issues relating to the  support and  growth of youth entre- preneurship. Another unified voice is the  Federaci\0xF3n Iberoamer icana de  J\0xF3venes  Empresar ios (FIJE), an  association  working with  over 150,000  young entrepreneurs from 20 different countries in the Americas. By reaching out to Governments, policy- makers and  international  organizations,  FIJE  pro- vides  representation for  young entrepreneurs and is able  to directly affect the  environment in which youth operate. In addition, FIJE works closely with member nations by assisting them in the  creation of new businesses, helping them develop networking opportunities, and  providing training and  business development support to both urban and  rural youth.
49
Of equal importance are  those associations work- ing  to mobilize the  power of female entrepreneurs. Global  Entrepreneurship  Week,  a huge event held in November  each year to celebrate and  promote entrepreneurship, continues to feature programming entirely devoted to women entrepreneurs and  their successes and  challenges. The Third Billion  index, created by Price-Waterhouse Cooper, ranks the com- petitiveness of 128 countries across the  globe based on their  integration of women and  female entrepre- neurs into the  general economy. Entrepreneurship think  tanks such as the  Global Entrepreneurship and Development Institute and  GEM have all promoted the  acceptance and  participation of women in the economy as key to growth.
The examples  above reflect the  enormous poten- tial youth entrepreneurship  has to generate more and  better economic opportunities at the  commu- nity, State and  global levels. Organizations support- ing youth entrepreneurship can work to change the way the  standard economic model views working with and  for young people. As both individual entre- preneurs and  advocates for  youth entrepreneur- ship, young people have the  power and  capacity to change the  role they play in the  economy.
KE Y CHALLENGES
Considering the  enormous entrepreneurial potential of youth, Governments and policymakers around the world would be  wise to focus greater attention on the  barriers and  challenges that  prevent young peo- ple from starting and  growing successful businesses. While  limited  access to capital  still constitutes  a major hurdle for young entrepreneurs to overcome, other barriers may be  just as detrimental  to the
development of a business. In fact, capital without an adequate support system, know-how and  mentor- ship can quickly become lost investment. Obstacles tend to mount against young entrepreneurs, exac- erbating their   difficulties  and  effectively  barring their  entry to the  workplace. Traditional education systems, a lack of access to knowledge and  experi- ence, a dearth of investment capital, negative soci- etal attitudes, and  market barriers can all undermine a young would-be entrepreneur's  efforts to enter the  marketplace; these challenges are addressed in some detail  below.
A   t r adit ion al    e duc at ion    sy s tem that discourages  entrepreneurship. Unfortunately, traditional education and  training do not encourage an  entrepreneurial mindset, focus- ing  instead on  preparing students  for  paid  work. In regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, poor numeracy and  literacy skills, low levels of secondary and  ter- tiary education, and  high dropout rates hinder entre- preneurs and  their  ability to compete in local  and global markets.
Lack  of  access to  experience,  net- works  and capital.  While young entrepre- neurs may be able to learn  a new set of skills, limited access to knowledge and  networks  can adversely affect their  initiative. The success of a business  is often determined  by prior  experience, knowledge and  managerial skills, which young people have typ- ically had  little time or opportunity to acquire. Young entrepreneurs also have limited or no access to the networks and  social capital necessary to run  a busi- ness. They may have little knowledge about business development  schemes and  support systems from which their  businesses  could  benefit.  This  limited
access to networks plays itself out in a fundamen- tal scarcity of capital. Securing financing remains a major hurdle for young entrepreneurs, who are often denied traditional sources of funding because they lack collateral and  a credit history and  are perceived by financial markets to be a higher risk.
Societal attitudes towards entrepre- neurship.  Capital may be  crucial to the  imme- diate success of a business,  but  deeply  ingrained societal views of entrepreneurship may have an even greater impact in the  long term. Common bar- riers young entrepreneurs face are negative attitudes towards entrepreneurship and  the  stigma of failure. The cultural perception of entrepreneurs is a deci- sive factor in promoting youth entrepreneurship. In cultures that  perceive business failure  as negative, young people may not be  as receptive to entrepre- neurship.  In  certain  cultures,  perceptions regard- ing  gender can also have an  impact on  the  uptake of youth entrepreneurship.  In the  Middle  East and North Africa, for  example, men are  2.8 times more likely than women to start a business. This derives from societal views and  customs relating to the  role of women in business, in the  economy and  in the community.
Market  disruption.  Young people are  not insulated  from the  circumstances  and  challenges that  affect the  business sector as a whole, including political instability, poor infrastructure, unfavourable legal and  regulatory frameworks for small and  medi- um-sized enterprises, limited market opportunities, and  corruption. In developing countries in particular, entrepreneurs tend to operate in the  informal sector, where they are especially vulnerable to abusive and corrupt practices.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
How  can young people, their   Governments and the  international community strengthen entrepre- neurship development and  support? Policies and practical  programmes should  focus on  expanding the  development of entrepreneurial skills, providing mentorship and  support systems, increasing access to financial capital, and  fostering an  enabling envi- ronment that  favours youth entrepreneurship.
Unfortunately, there is little definitive evidence sup- porting or refuting the effectiveness of different youth entrepreneurship  suppor t  models.  Deter mining what works best across a range of contexts and  situ- ations is especially difficult. Only by acknowledging that  there is no one-size-fits-all approach can pol- icymakers begin to strengthen entrepreneurship in diverse markets and  cultures. While several recom- mendations are  offered below on  how to improve entrepreneurship, the  jury is still out on  which pol- icies  have the  greatest impact.  Would  creating  an environment in which entrepreneurial businesses can thrive be  more effective for  combating unem- ployment than direct assistance to would-be entre- preneurs? Would  better transpor tation  options, improved markets and  greater security create more beneficial conditions for entrepreneurism than large public policy interventions? At the  moment there are no conclusive answers to questions such as these, as entrepreneurship is still evolving and  the  relevant data  analysis has not yet caught up.
Expand and enhance entrepreneur- ship education. In order to better prepare the next generation of entrepreneurs, Governments, the   e duc at ion al  communit y and   c iv il  so c iet y
51
need to work together to improve entrepreneurship programmes and  expand their  reach. Effective pro- grammes not only raise awareness of entrepreneur- ship as a career path but  also play a crucial role in helping youth overcome obstacles deriving from their lack of knowledge  and  experience. Programmes in primary school often help create awareness of entre- preneurship and  highlight some of the  skills and  atti- tudes that  are important for entrepreneurs to develop, while those provided during secondary education are more focused on  the  development of specific techni- cal skills. Although these programmes are most easily delivered through formal education, they should also be developed outside the  education system in order to reach out-of-school and at-risk youth.
Design  suppor t systems  w ith tar- get populations in mind. Youth are often viewed as a single entity with similar needs and wants across borders and  cultures,  when in  fact they are  an  incredibly diverse and  dynamic group. In designing support systems, policymakers and practitioners  should  take  into  account this  dyna- mism  as well  as the  local  context in order to best serve the  needs of young entrepreneurs. The situ- ation of female entrepreneurs offers a case in point. Young female entrepreneurs often do not face the same challenges  or  have the  same needs as their male counterparts.  In  some cultures,  for  example, women may need safe meeting spaces or  socially
acceptable methods of entering the  economic sys- tem. Programmes supporting young entrepreneurs should incorporate  mechanisms  that  address the specific needs of targeted groups of youth.
Involve the private sector and exist- ing entrepreneurs through men- torship  programmes.  The "soft  support" provided by mentors is just as important as the  tech- nical  skills young entrepreneurs need to start, main- tain  and  grow their  businesses. Almost 50  per  cent of entrepreneurs fail without this support, while 88 per cent of those with business mentors survive. The Global Youth Entrepreneurship Survey  2011 reveals that  nonfinancial support such as mentoring is one of the  most critical factors influencing business per-
formance.87  In the  2013 Start-Up Generation report prepared by the Prince's Trust in the United Kingdom, a third  of the  young people surveyed claimed that having  a mentor would  make them  more  likely to consider self-employment.88  The crucial role men- tors play in establishing networks and  connections and  serving as positive models for young entrepre- neurs cannot be overstated.
Increase access to capital. Increased access to financial resources  is necessary  to foster successful entrepreneurship across all economies. Typically,  young entrepreneurs rely  on personal or  family  funding  to start their  businesses,  espe- cially in developing countries, as access to finance is often constrained  by requests for  collateral and credit  records.  Almost  three q uar ters of young entrepreneurs rely  on  their  immediate  network to fund their  businesses. There is significant space for Governments and  the  financial sector in general to work together to develop better and  smarter policies
to improve access to financing mechanisms tailored to the  specific needs of young entrepreneurs. The development of a range of financial instruments that  take  into account the  type of entrepreneur, enterprise and  capital needed would provide young entrepreneurs with  more direct  access to funding and  lessen their  reliance on local networks.
Foster  an enabling  youth  entrepre- neurship   ecosystem .  Young entrepre- neurs are utilizing their  own time, labour and  ideas to change the  status quo and  redefine the  economic rules of the game. This massive movement needs the support of all stakeholders if the  larger  unemploy- ment issue is to be addressed through the  develop- ment and  strengthening of an enabling environment for youth entrepreneurship.
Countries across the  world need to realize that  pro- moting entrepreneurship is essential for developing human capital.  For  entrepreneurship  to flourish,  it needs an ecosystem in which multiple stakeholders play key supportive roles. Policymakers, academic institutions,  the   business  community,  and   oth- ers need to work together to take  advantage of this opportunity to fuel  the  engine of future economic growth. Empowering entrepreneurs improves social well-being  by preparing young  people  to thrive and  succeed in a globally competitive and  dynamic world. Policymakers at all levels have an  important role to play in establishing appropriate legal  and  fis- cal frameworks to encourage entrepreneurship and to fill market gaps as necessary. Educational institu- tions play a critical role in developing the  appropriate learning environment and  utilizing relevant learning methods. Engagement of the  private sector is abso- lutely necessary; companies and  entrepreneurs play
instrumental roles in promoting entrepreneurship by providing  knowledge, expertise, social  capital  and financial support.
Continued economic growth and  innovation depend on  the  ability of the  global economy to ensure that youth have the  skills and  confidence  to move for- ward as entrepreneurs. The promotion of entrepre- neurship across the  globe, especially in developing nations, is essential to unleash the  potential of youth and  encourage sustainable development. As the  pop- ulation grows, more and  more jobs will be  required to keep  the  world employed; without entrepreneurs, those jobs may never exist. Entrepreneurship is key to generating new jobs and  ensuring that  youth remain invested in a positive future.

INTRODUC TION
T here  ha s been a  global  shif t  f rom long-ter m employ ment contracts and   per manent  work to short-term contracts, temporary employment and casual  work,  and  growing  numbers of youth are turning to self-employment or the  informal sector for  lack  of other options. These trends have effec- tively  limited  youth access to labour  rights,  bene- fits and  entitlements (including social supports and public services), as precarious workers have few job prospects and  are not in a strong position to bargain.
The marked increase in precarious work has affected young people's  access to labour  rights,  including the  right  to join a union. Youth participation in trade unions and other workers' organizations has declined, and  trade unions--institutions traditionally organized by workplace or sector--are struggling to adapt to the changing nature of how young workers interact with, or are excluded from, the  labour market.
The recent trends relating to labour market par- ticipation among youth and  their  access to labour rights,  trade union membership,  job security  and employment benefits show that  the  labour market experience  of young people  today is vastly  differ- ent  from that  of the  older population. The present thought piece examines the precarious state of youth employment and  the  lack of protection mechanisms for  young workers,  and  argues that  strengthening
labour rights and  labour market outcomes is crucial to the  current and  future well-being of youth. It con- cludes with recommendations  for stakeholders on strengthening the  labour rights of young workers to better ensure economic and  employment stability.
BOX 2.7.
WHAT IS
PRECARIOUS
WORK?
The definition of precarious work is contex- tual,  depending  largely on the  economic, social  and  political structure  in  a particu- lar country or region. In general, however, precarious work is characterized  by one or  more of the  following  descriptors:  low wages or no wages (as in the  case of unpaid internships); undefined work hours (casual, part  time or zero hours); short-term or tem- porary employment;  the  lack of a defined relationship with an employer (as is the  case w ith  temporary work agencies); and  the inability to exercise  labour  rights  or  over- come barriers to trade union representation. Precarious work may also be  referred to as atypical, non-standard or non-decent work.
55
L ABOUR M ARKE T TRENDS A MONG YOUNG WORKERS
As new labour market entrants, young workers have seen relative wages fall and  employment conditions deteriorate since the  1980s. Over the  past 30 years, growing numbers of young workers have come to occupy the  sphere of flexible,  casual  and  precari- ous work, operating on  the  periphery of more sen- ior workers whose employment is relatively secure. Youth find themselves at a disadvantage even before they start looking for work, as they face higher skill requirements and  high tuition and  education costs, which serve to delay their  entry to and  full-time par- ticipation in the  labour market. With such uncertain labour market conditions, the  number of young workers who are mired in non-standard employment is much higher now than in previous generations.
Young and  new workers are the  most vulnerable to changes in the  labour  market,  often because they lack seniority, experience and  training opportunities. This is apparent in the  job markets of today, where statistics indicate that  the  youth employment situa- tion has simply not recovered from the  2008 global recession.  In  2014,  world  youth unemploy ment stood at 13 per  cent--nearly three times the  corre- sponding rate  for older workers.89  Youth unemploy- ment is expected to worsen in many countries over the  next five  years, even as the  rates of those who have completed tertiary education  increase.90   The fact that  higher education sometimes fails to prepare students for gainful employment means that  a skills mismatch or skills shortage may be part of the  prob- lem, but  an even bigger issue remains the  lack of job creation for new entrants to the  labour market.
Unemployment rates tell only part of the  story, how-
 		ever. What is arguably even more troubling is under-
employment.  There are  huge numbers of young workers--not  ref lected in  unemploy ment statis- tics--who  are  involuntarily  working part-time,  are doing unpaid internships or other unpaid work, have returned to school because they cannot find  work with the  qualifications they possess, are coping with an illness or disability that  prevents them from work- ing, or have stopped looking for work because they have become discouraged.91
Although  the  proportion of the  population  work- ing  part-time  varies widely  across advanced and developing economies, rates of part-time and  tem- porary work have increased overall. In OECD coun- tries,92  the  share of those engaged in part-time work rose from 20.8 per  cent in 2000 to 29.3 per  cent in
2011.93   Precarious work and  part-time  work also
disproportionately affect women, who are overrep- resented in sectors with exploitative working condi- tions and  low union density.94
The quality  of jobs  available to young  workers  is also  declining. Although  temporary contracts and internships provide some work exposure and  expe- rience and  are therefore often considered a step on the  pathway to stable, full-time employment, many young workers, especially women, find  themselves unable to move out of the  realm of precarious work to secure permanent, decent, family-supporting employment.95   The new emphasis  on  a "sharing" economy and  the  widespread  use of zero-hours contracts means that  young people are on  the  verge of not even being able  to conceptualize their  labour as "a job". This is increasingly leaving young work- ers in sectors where they are poorly paid, vulnerable to exploitation, and  unlikely to become members of unions that  could work with them to address injus- tice  in the  workplace.
Unemployment and  underemployment also restrict young people's access to benefits, entitlements and social  supports.  Shorter contracts and  precarious employment mean that  fewer young workers have access to health-care benefits through their  employ- ers or any type of company pension savings plan  for
retirement. In addition, part-time workers who need full-time work to survive often cannot claim unem- ployment benefits,  even if they are  not earning a high enough wage to make ends meet.
TR ADE UNION TRENDS
A MONG YOUNG WORKERS
Worldwide  trends in trade union membership  and collective bargaining coverage are difficult to analyse owing to the  vast differences in trade union, govern- ment,  and  employer  structures across countries-- including the  variances in how union membership is measured against formal and  informal employment. Broad trends suggest that  advanced economies tend to have relatively high union density, as demonstrated by the  unionization rate  in OECD countries (17.1 per cent for 2012).96  Developing economies tend to have lower  union coverage due to the  limited  reach of formal  sector employment,  and  legally enshrined labour standards and  collective bargaining rights are generally weaker in these areas as well. Such dispar- ities notwithstanding, data  on  membership in global labour  institutions  such as the  International  Trade Union  Confederation  (ITUC),  which represents 176 million union members in 162 countries and  territo- ries worldwide,  paint a picture  of broad economic and social influence by trade unions.
Gender- and  age-disaggregated data reveal wide dis- parities in trade union participation among women and youth across countries. In developing economies such as the Philippines and Zimbabwe, women repre- sent a small minority of union members. In advanced economies such as Australia, Canada, and  the  United Kingdom,  trade union density  among women is on  par with, or even exceeds, that  for men.97  Union
membership for young workers is similarly disparate across countries; however, the  overall trend is that youth are less likely to work in industries well repre- sented by trade unions and  are more likely to work in precarious jobs without union representation.
Another clear trend is the  recent decline in overall union density.98  Two major factors have contributed to this downward trend; union growth has not kept up  with population growth, and  constant attacks by anti-union employers and  anti-worker Governments have made it more difficult to organize those work- ers entering  the  labour  force.  In  addition,  shorter job contracts are  forcing workers to move quickly between many employers, which hinders their  abil- ity to unionize or improve working conditions in any single workplace.
CHALLENGES AND OPP ORTUNITIES
Expanding  youth  participation in  trade unions is a challenge worldwide, given the  increase in pre- carious work and  the  corresponding  decrease in decent, permanent employment in both advanced
and  developing economies. This pronounced shift represents a major challenge for labour unions and workers' organizations, whose traditional models of organizing by workplace or occupation may need to give  way to different models that  better facilitate worker participation and  the  collective exercise of workers' power.
Unions  face three major challenges  in  motivat- ing  young workers to organize in their  workplaces. First, young workers often lack knowledge of labour standards and  their  rights  on  the  job.  Second,  the precariousness of the  current job market effectively discourages workers from defending their  rights, standing up  for  injustice, going on  strike, or taking any other action that  might threaten their  employ- ment because finding a new job might be difficult or impossible. Third, the  intergenerational inequality that  has become institutionalized within the  labour market has expressed itself within trade unions in the form of two-tier  contract arrangements,  in which concessions are made for  young and  new workers so that  senior employees may retain their  terms and benefits. These arrangements have reinforced gen- erational differences in collective bargaining and workplace activism.
Faced with these obstacles, youth within trade unions have been working to challenge  models  of trade unionism  and  to organize  to adapt to the  chang- ing  nature of work--which presents an opportunity for  change within trade union structures. Over the past 15 years, youth have achieved representation in international trade union structures such as ITUC and  its regional bodies, the  International Transport Workers' Federation (ITF) and  national trade union centrals,99  and  in the  ILO through mechanisms such
as the  Youth Employment Forum. Representation in these bodies means that  youth themselves have a voice in setting national, regional and  international priorities within the  labour movement, ensuring that youth issues, representation and  organizing feature prominently on union agendas.
At the local and regional levels, youth have also devel- oped labour rights activist organizations and  young workers' committees that  inform youth of their  rights and  teach them how to exercise collective power in the  workplace. These entities also work to facilitate the  political engagement of youth in the  democratic processes of unions, as well as in local, national and regional politics. Among other things, young work- er-activists have moved to build  solidarity through intergenerational alliances to combat two-tier con- tracts and precarious work arrangements.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Quality employment is proving elusive for many young people today.  Youth  seeking to enter the labour market are confronted with high rates of unemployment and  underemployment and  a sys- tem that  has failed  to create decent work or  good jobs.  The global  shift  from long-term,  permanent, high-quality employment to precarious, short-term, low-paid work means that  the  labour market experi- ence is vastly different for young workers nowadays than it was for previous generations when they were young. An analysis of youth unemployment trends and projections indicates that  the  situation is likely to worsen before it improves.
These trends have a huge impact  on  young peo- ple's access to labour rights, including the  right  to join and  participate in trade unions. As competition for work increases, access to labour rights tends to decrease. However, this new dynamic also presents young people with the  opportunity to redefine their role in workplaces and  unions so that  they are in a better position to strengthen labour rights for them- selves and  the  next generation of workers.
That young workers have the  power to create good jobs and  ensure successful economic engagement through their  participation in trade unions is not a revelation,  but  it is something  that  must be  rec- ognized  by each new generation of institutions, Governments, employers and  workers.
How can young workers,  unions and  global  insti- t u t i on s  p rom ote  a n d   s u p p or t   th e   e c on om ic engagement of youth in trade unions and  workers' organizations? To ensure that  young workers have access to decent work, consideration must be given to the  broader question of how to empower young people  to  participate in  work places  and   labour unions, and stakeholders must be made to recognize that  there is no single solution to the  economic chal- lenges young workers currently face.  As the  nature of the  labour  market shifts,  so must the  response of young workers, labour unions, educational insti- tutions, Governments, employers, and  other stake- holders at the  local, national and  global levels. Below are several recommendations for improving young workers' access to their  labour rights worldwide.
E n s ur e t h at  y o un g p eo p l e ar e informed of their labour rights. Young people must be  made aware of their  labour rights
if they are to participate fully in the  labour market. Labour unions often assume the  role of educating members on  how to exercise  their  labour  rights; however, since the  majority of workers are not union members, the  labour-related information individ- ual workers receive varies greatly. Government and trade union partnerships with educational institu- tions (from primary to post-secondary levels)  can empower young people to learn  about their  labour rights even before starting their  first job. The devel- opment of a standardized labour education curric- ulum is key to improving the  well-being of youth in the  workplace early on.
C h alle n g e p o lit ic al  ap athy an d empower young workers  to  guide l e g i s l at iv e c h an g e .  T h e   de mo c r a t i c self-gover nance and   par ticipator y str ucture of labour unions offers an ideal  environment for chal- lenging political apathy among youth. Unions are a democratic vehicle for young workers' participation in economic decision-making in the  workplace and in  society as a whole.  For young workers,  unions provide  the  space and  resources to organize  on workplace, political and  policy issues that  are impor- tant for young people.
Governments must consult with young workers and unionized  youth and  empower them to contrib- ute  to improving labour legislation so that  the  pri- orities attached to youth employment are reflected in minimum workplace standards. The priorities of older workers and  legislators may not be  the  same as those of young workers or  new entrants to the labour force, and  fair legislation is designed to meet the  basic needs of all workers. It is also important to create mechanisms for political inclusion to ensure
that  young people themselves are represented in the democratic  structures of government at all levels, effectively empowering them as decision makers.
C r e a t e d ec e n t  j o bs  f o r  y o u t h . Governments have a responsibility to ensure that  the rights and  potential of youth are taken into account in the  development of national education and  labour policies, including policies on  internships, appren- ticeships and  vocational training. Policies aimed at creating jobs for youth and  matching skilled  workers with available employment need to be a priority for governments at all levels as global unemployment rates worsen. These policies must incorporate provi- sions recognizing the  labour rights of youth and  the rights and  roles of trade unions in both traditional and  more precarious settings.  For example, initia- tives such as the  European Union's Youth Guarantee, which identifies the  input and  support needed from trade unions  and  workers'  organizations,  must be developed to increase young workers' awareness of their  labour rights and  to ensure that  those rights are respected in the  workplace.
Unions can use the mechanism of collective bargain- ing  to reduce intergenerational  and  gender-based inequalities. Unions are in a unique position to nego- tiate  for the  equal treatment of their  members, work- ing  to minimize or eliminate wage and  entitlement differentials between workers who are experiencing discrimination based on  gender, age  or experience. Although trade unions do not play the same role gov- ernment entities do in job creation, they are able  to push for decent conditions in the  workplace--which benefits all workers, but  particularly those  who  are traditionally marginalized in the  labour market.
Increa se   re search   and dialog ue. Global stakeholders such as the  United Nations and ILO should continue to provide support for research on  young people's labour rights and  to create space for  a broader discussion  about strengthening  the collective power of youth to assert those rights.
Increa se unionizat ion . Union s mu st engage with young workers to organize in new work- places and  sectors while simultaneously defending and  expanding legislated labour rights. Union struc- tures must ensure that  resources are prioritized for the  organization  of new workplaces,  especially  in the  retail, service and  informal sectors, where young workers are increasingly employed. The advantages to increasing  union membership  are  clear  in both developed and  developing nations. Union mem- bers have the  collective ability to negotiate for better working conditions, higher wages, increased atten- tion to occupational  health  and  safety concerns, and  employment benefits and  entitlements. In short, unions have the  ability to create decent jobs where only  precarious work existed  before. The labour movement is perhaps the  only mechanism that  can definitively empower young workers themselves to create change in the  labour market and  help ensure the  labour rights of this and  future generations.
Governments also have a key role to play in increas- ing union density. Legislative change that  facilitates the organizing of workers by workplace or sector is key to ensuring that  the proportion of workers covered by col- lective agreements is as large as possible. Private sector employers also play an important part in terms of their obligation to deal fairly with workers and  unions and to prioritize the  creation of fair and  safe workplaces.
POLITICAL
ENGAGEMENT
GLOBALLY, youth   participation  and  repre- sentation in institutional political processes and policy-making is relatively low. As a group, young people are not adequately represented within for- mal political  structures, as evidenced  by the low rates of parliamentary involvement, political party participation  and electoral  activity  among youth worldwide. One aspect of the problem is the lack of regulatory mechanisms facilitating youth partic- ipation; in many countries, for example, only indi- viduals aged 25 years or above are eligible to run for parliament.100
With  the  global  youth population  standing  at  1.2 billion, the  exclusion of young people from formal political processes threatens the  legitimacy of politi- cal systems and structures, as a huge cohort remains unrepresented or underrepresented--which in many cases leads young people to find  alternative means of political engagement.
T his  chapter examines  the   reasons behind  the changing  trends in youth  participation in political and  electoral processes (James Sloam) and  explores the role young people now play in defining emerging political landscapes (Nur Laiq), in particular through digital  activism (Erhardt Graeff), as well as through engagement in negative or extremist activities (Akil N. Awan)
ELEC TOR AL PARTICIPATION The past several  decades have been marked by declining  levels  of youth  participation in electoral processes.  Voter  turnout tends to be  significantly lower among youth than among the  older  popu- lation, and  young people are  less likely to become members of political parties.101  Exacerbating the  sit- uation is the  fact  that  in many of these structures,
young people are not visible; typically, for example, individuals under the  age  of 35 are minimally repre- sented in top  political leadership positions.102
The lingering impact of the  global financial and  eco- nomic crisis--in particular high unemployment and its disproportionate effect on  youth--has intensified the  feeling  among many young people that  tradi- tional institutions of governance and  electoral par- ticipation  provide  ineffective  tools  for meaningful political engagement. This feeling of disconnection has led to disengagement from institutionalized processes  and  widespread  apathy among young voters,103   with the  result that  many have turned to alternative methods of political participation.
THE P OWER OF PROTEST
One avenue of political expression has been protests and  demonstrations, through which young people have found a vehicle to voice their  dissatisfaction with and  grievances against the  political establish- ment. While protest and  demonstration are not new phenomena,  through the  advance of newer ICTs and  social media more young people are becoming mobilised to actively engage.
Discontent  with  the  status quo has been articu- lated--via  both  traditional and  contemporary pro- test for mats--across  the   Middle  East and   North
Africa (MENA), Europe, Latin America and  elsewhere. Spain's 15-M Movement (Movimiento 15-M), Mexico's Yo Soy 132, the  global Occupy movement, and  other youth-led protests and  movements have challenged the  political elite in a number of countries.
Through protests and demonstrations, young people have been instrumental in bringing about change and  forcing authoritarian regimes from power, and in  doing  so have successfully  challenged  existing structures and  rule  and  redefined the  role of young people in governance.
TRANSITIONS IN POWER:
THE ROLE OF YOUNG PEOPLE
Although youth have played a visible and  prominent role in demonstrations and  protests and  have often been instrumental in bringing about changes in gov- ernance, the  position of young people following polit- ical transition remains largely undefined. In part  due the complexities involved in democracy and institution building, there is often no mechanism for the meaning- ful inclusion of young people in the new and emerging political landscape. As such youth are often still not fully involved, represented or regularly consulted.
One important reason for their  lack of political inte- gration is that  while youth are instrumental in break- ing  down existing structures, the  same blocks and
foundations are  being used to rebuild those struc- tures. What is needed in many cases is a whole new framework for political participation and governance that  can bring about the  type of political structures and  processes that  are genuinely responsive to and inclusive of young people.
Even the  passive  exclusion  of young people  from governance structures is not without consequences. There is evidence  that  failing  to purposefully  and meaningfully include youth in the  building of new political processes and  institutions can lead  to increased frustration and  resentment among young political activists, destabilizing democratization and accelerating conflict dynamics.104
Finding a way to facilitate youth engagement through institutionalized processes while also inte- grating less traditional forms of political engage- ment is an emerging challenge for Governments and policymakers--one which, if left unresolved, may threaten the  stability and  security of countries.
NEG ATIVE ENG AGEMENT
When young people feel  that  their  grievances and frustrations are  being  ignored  or trivialized and are  not given  adequate consideration  in  govern- ance and  decision-making, they may in some cases resort to violent and  extremist activities. As Akil N. Awan notes,  "where  \0x2018 legitimate'  forms of protest prove unsuccessful, individuals may begin to coun- tenance illegitimate and  violent  forms of protest, including rioting, public disorder, sabotage, and  even terrorism."105
Countries experiencing power vacuums are particu- larly susceptible to the  infiltration of violent groups and  extremist  elements.  Young people can often be  coerced  or  otherwise  forced (out of economic necessity, for  example) to join groups or organiza- tions that  espouse violence.
From young neo-Nazis  and  urban gang members to those  joining extremist  religious  groups,  youth involvement in negative and  even violent forms of social  and  political expression  is not a new phe-
Therefore, no discussion of youth political engage- ment can take  place  without  acknowledging  and examining the  various ways in which such political engagement can be  not only negative but  harmful, as well as the  myriad circumstances that  might lead a young person towards such engagement.
In recent years, such groups have become more and more adept at using and  manipulating social media and  leading online campaigns. Having expanded their  reach to a global level, they are able  to attract young  people from all  over the   world,  draw ing them in through a false glamorization of what their involvement entails.
Although considerable attention has been focused on the  role of these youth in the  past few years, most youth who engage politically and  socially do so in a positive manner, many working to counter extrem- ism through activities such as peacebuilding.106
nomenon. As with other cohorts of society, young	 	
people's  views  are  far from homogeneous.  Youth who hold  extreme or  fundamentalist  views can and  do engage in youth structures, advancing ide- als and  undertaking activities  that  run  counter to efforts aimed at promoting human rights and  peace.
ONLINE AC TIVISM
The availability of ever-growing numbers of online and  social media outlets and  other web-based tools has played  a huge role in  bolstering  young peo- ple's activism and  participation, providing a vehicle for young people to learn  about, participate in, and mobilize around political and  social issues.
Through the  power of social  media  sites  such as Twitter, Facebook and  other sharing platforms, infor- mation on protests and demonstrations beginning in one country can now spread quickly, triggering mass activism and  similar demonstrations elsewhere.
The reach of young people's  online  presence and activity is broad and extensive. The ability of youth to develop and  utilize online tools and  forums to create spaces and  respond to needs in the  local and  global community has allowed them to engage in a multi- tude of ways and  on  a variety of topics at any given time. However,  while  the  number of "connected " youth throughout the  world  is high,  there are  still many who do not have adequate access to broad- band and  open Internet or to the  mobile tools and devices needed to make participation possible. The Broadband Commission for Digital Development notes that  while 3.2 billion  people (43% of the  global population) were connected in 2015, Internet is only accessible to 35% of people in developing countries.
Moreover,  90%  of people  in  the  Least Developed Countries (LDCs) do not have access to any kind  of Internet connectivity. Ensuring the  active inclusion and  involvement  of "unconnected "  youth as the "connected" world forges ahead remains an impor- tant challenge.107
Widespread  Internet connectivity  and  web access have changed the  game in the  most fundamental way. For  those who are  connected, it has become easier to engage in  a variety of causes and  cam- paigns from local to global level. However, the  extent to which cyberactivism  translates  into  sustained political engagement over one's lifetime is unclear owing to its nascence and  to the  dearth of research on   the   long-ter m outcomes of par ticipation in online media and  web-based engagement. Ongoing research is needed to determine the  impact of ICT on  political participation, with particular attention given to the  extent and  long term sustainability of such engagement.
YOUTH ELECTORAL PARTICIPATION
James Sloam
INTRODUC TION
Democratic societies need to provide opportunities for each new generation of young people to express political opinions and  to represent younger citizens' interests  in  policy making processes.  Across  the world today, many young people feel  disillusioned with mainstream politics and  disadvantaged by pub- lic  policy.  The Millennial  Generation  is much  less likely than older cohorts to be interested in electoral politics and  to vote in national elections. The World Values  Survey data  presented below illustrate this point and  identify groups of younger citizens that are particularly disengaged.
Young people are interested in "politics" in the broader sense, however, and  participate in a wide array of political activities--at the  ballot box, in the streets,  on  the  Internet,  within  political parties,  as members of student associations and  environmen-
offered for  Governments and  public institutions to rejuvenate the  democracies of the  world.
DECLINING YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN
ELEC TOR AL P OLITICS
In recent decades, academics and  policymakers have become increasingly concerned about declin- ing  levels of youth participation in electoral politics. Many have viewed this decline as representative of a crisis in citizenship.108  Others have argued that  polit- ical participation has evolved rather than declined.109
Disillusionment with electoral politics is certainly not confined to younger citizens.  In  most established democracies, declining voter turnout is a long-term trend, as each generation of young people becomes less likely to vote than the  last. What is known is that voter turnout has decreased in almost all democra- cies since the  1980s, and  that  this "turnout decline
110
tal groups,  and  in rallies and  demonstrations.  The
is concentrated in the  youth".
These changes have
problem, then, is not an  all-encompassing political apathy, but  rather a disconnection between youth politics and  electoral politics.
This thought piece examines in some detail  the  pat- terns of youth political participation across different regions of the  globe. These trends are largely related to the  impact of the  financial crisis and  the  subse- quent wave of youth protest.  Emphasis  is placed on the  dangers of denying young people a political voice.  Finally,  four practical  recommendations are
been accompanied  by a process  of voter dealign-
ment, as many of those young people who do vote have turned away from mainstream political parties.
Data from Wave 6 (2010-2014) of the  World Values Survey indicate  that  relatively  poor voter turnout among youth is a global phenomenon. Survey results from a sample of 33 countries111  indicate that  close to
44 per cent of young adults aged 18 to 29 years "always vote", compared with almost 60 per cent of all citizens (see table  3.1 and  figure 3.1); among those over the age  of 50, the  corresponding rate is more than 70 per cent. Although voter turnout is almost equal among young men and  young women (45.2  and  43.9  per cent respectively), educational status does make a dif- ference;112 52.8 per cent of young graduates say they always vote in national elections, in comparison with
43.6 per cent of all 18- to 29-year olds.
There are  some important  regional  variations in political participation among the  countries sur- veyed. Young people are most  likely to vote in South
America  and  least  likely to vote  in  Africa  and  the United States.113  In almost all areas, the  propensity to vote is greater among  the  general  voting-age population than among youth alone, with the  larg- est gaps found in the  United States, South-Eastern Asia  and  Europe (see figure 3.2).  India  is the  only country among the  33 surveyed in which younger citizens are  more likely than older citizens to cast their  ballots.
The Survey findings show voting rates to be roughly equal among young men and  young women across all regions  except Africa,  where 37.7  per  cent of young men and  only 32.3 per cent of young women say they always vote. Voting is highly correlated with education level  (and, by extension, socioeconomic status) in the  developed industrial democracies of the  United States and  Europe; around three quarters of young graduates always  vote in  these regions, which is double the  overall rate  of youth participa-
 		tion. Elsewhere, voting appears to be a socially equal
political act.
Another recent feature of electoral politics in mature democracies has been the  sharp decline in political party membership--particularly  in  Europe, where membership  numbers have fallen  by almost  half since the  1980s.114   Young members of the  present generation are reluctant to commit to centralized and hierarchical political institutions, which they believe do not represent their  interests--largely  because such institutions are dominated by older people, and quite often by men with a middle or higher income background. Youth wings of political parties can play a pivotal role in channelling youth engagement into political parties.  However,  these groups are  often closely controlled by older adults and  are frequently
FIGURE 3.1.
composed of young people from a narrow range of social backgrounds who are "encouraged" to toe the party line.115
Data from the   33  countries sur veyed show that active political party membership is less prevalent among those under the  age  of 30 than among older adults (see table  3.1 and  figure 3.2). Only 4.1 per cent of 18- to 29-year olds  are  active  party members, compared with 5 per cent of all adults. Another area of concern is that  party membership, unlike voting,
varies with gender. Worldwide, 5.2 per cent of young men but  only 3.1 per  cent of young women claim to be  active party members. Similarly, young grad- uates are  much more likely than all 18- to 29-year olds  to join a political party.  The issues  of youth
FIGURE 3. 2 .
activism and  gender activism are particularly impor- tant when one considers the  underrepresentation of young people and  women in national parliaments. According to recent international reports published by the  United Nations Development Programme and Inter-Parliamentary Union,116  only around 5 per cent of parliamentarians  are  under the  age  of 35,  with figures ranging from to just 2 per  cent in Northern America to more than 10 per cent in Africa. Likewise,
in spite of recent improvements in female rep- resentation in parliaments, the  world average is only around 20  per  cent,117   ranging from 12 per  cent in
Asia to between 20 and  25 per cent in Africa, Europe, Northern America and  South America. This matters because of what Anne Philips has described as the "politics of presence",118  which posits that  if women and  youth are not well represented in national par- liaments, they will not see politicians as "people like them" and will therefore not aspire to those positions.
There are  some interesting  variations in  political party involvement across the  different countries and regions. Party membership is highest in India, where
18.1 per  cent of youth claim to be  actively involved. Again, India  is the  only country among the  33 sur- veyed in which 18- to 29-year olds are  more likely to participate than older citizens (see table  3.1 and figure 3.2).  In  Africa  and  the  United  States youth party membership is relatively high (7 and  8 per cent respectively),  but  the  gap  between 18- to 29-year olds and  older adults is much  higher in the  United States than in any other region (see figure 3.2).
Gender plays a significant role in defining party activ- ism throughout much of the  world. In Africa, Europe, South Amer ica  and   South-Ea ster n  A sia,  young men are  about twice  as likely as young women to become active in a political party. In India  and  the United States, however, these gender disparities are not seen. Educational status has a particularly strong correlation with party activism in the  United States, South America  and  Europe. In  these areas,  young graduates are more than twice as likely as all young adults to be active party members.
ISSUE-BASED ENGAGEMENT: "REINVENTING POLITICAL AC TIVISM"
Over the  past few decades, the  world has witnessed a shift in focus from politics to policy--from engage- ment in institutionalized electoral processes to greater involvement  in cause-oriented activism.119
As a consequence, young people's  repertoires of participation have expanded to include many alter- native forms of political engagement such as e-pe- titions, fair trade "buycotts", poetry slams and  flash mobs. Young people engage in politics on a case-by- case basis, embracing personally meaningful causes or issues120  that  are  often manifested through peer networks supported by new communication tech- nologies.121,122    Young people  are  clearly  interested in politics but  are often disillusioned with, alienated from, or even intimidated by electoral politics.
National economic issues are the  predominant concern for older generations and  therefore define their   political engagement.  In  recent times,  cit- izen s'  values  and   interests  have become  more diverse, and  the  geographical boundaries that  once
circumscribed political action have become blurred. Today's  young people are  much more concerned than previous generations  with  human rights  and environmental causes--though material interests remain central.123  Owing to social and  technologi- cal changes, the  Millennial Generation is also more likely to view political issues as "glocal" or "intermes- tic". For  example, recent youth-led protests in Brazil used the  upcoming 2014 FIFA World Cup as a focus for  action and  drew on other international  move- ments  for inspiration (including Outono Brasileiro) but  mobilized locally on  the  domestic issue of trans- port costs.124
The data in figure 3.3 highlight three of the most com- mon forms of non-electoral participation--petitions, boycotts and  demonstrations--in order to provide a snapshot of issue-based political engagement. These modes of engagement are  well-established (rather than new) and  are used by all generations. Figure 3.4 indicates that  there is little difference between youth and  older adults in terms of their  involvement in tra- ditional forms of issue-based political activism. Young adults are less likely than all adults over age 18 to sign a petition (15 versus 20.9 per cent), marginally less likely to join a boycott (6.1 versus 6.5 per cent), and  slightly more likely to participate in a peaceful demonstration (14.3 versus 13 per cent).
Gender plays a variable role across these three types of political action. Young men are much more likely than young women to participate in a demonstra- tion (16.7 versus 11.8 per  cent) and  somewhat more likely to join a boycott (6.9 versus 5.4 per  cent), but young women are marginally more likely to sign a petition (15.3 versus 14.6 per  cent). This shows that styles of participation are important. Young people
in general are  more likely than older adults to par- ticipate in overt and  perhaps more radical forms of issue-based engagement such as demonstrations, but  this is particularly the  case for young men.
Participation in issue-based politics is roughly equal across age  groups and  varies minimally across gen- ders but  diverges more noticeably across education levels. Young graduates are  somewhat more likely than all 18- to 29-year olds to participate in boycotts and  demonstrations and  much more likely to sign petitions (see table  3.1). Indeed, youth with higher levels of education are more likely than the  general adult population to engage in all three modes of par- ticipation (the reverse is true  for  voting). Given the solid correlation between education and  socioec- onomic status, this supports existing evidence that such forms of engagement are strongly linked  to an individual's economic resources.125  The participation gaps based on  educational attainment and  socioec- onomic status are  large  in Europe, South America, South-Eastern Asia and  the  United States. In South- Eastern Asia, young graduates are more than three times as likely as their  non-graduate peers to engage in these three types of political activities.
FIGURE 3. 3.
FIGURE 3. 4.
Regional variations across these issue-based forms of participation are particularly wide, and  it may well be that  other issue-based forms of participation not included  in the  World  Values  Survey are  relatively common in the  low-participation areas identified in figure 3.4. Nevertheless, some countries may be said
to specialize in the  particular forms of political par- ticipation highlighted here.  For example, demonstra- tions  and  boycotts are  comparatively  common in India, while petitions are very popular in the  United States. Age is a much less important indicator of par- ticipation across these three forms of engagement
than is the  case for electoral politics (see figure 3.4). In issue-based political activism, youth participation again surpasses the  participation of older adults in India--but this is also true for 12 of the other 32 coun- tries. The gap between youth participation and  over- all adult participation is well under ten  percentage points in all of the  regions except the  United States (where the  gap is almost 30 percentage points).
YOUTH PROTEST
Youth  participation in  electoral  politics  has been declining  for  several  decades in  most established democracies. Younger citizens feel increasingly disil- lusioned with mainstream politics and disadvantaged by public policy. These problems have been greatly exacerbated by the  global financial crisis, with young people disproportionately affected by increased lev- els of unemployment and  underemployment.126
Young people have also borne the brunt of severe cuts in public spending, experiencing increased university tuition fees, the  closure of youth centres, and  reduc- tions in youth social services. Given the  relatively low levels of youth voter turnout described above, there is a suspicion that  cuts in youth-oriented public ser- vices are viewed as politically expedient.
In this context, the  recent wave of youth protest is hardly surprising. Uprisings in the  Middle East and North  Africa,  protests  against the  rising costs  of higher education, rallies by the  Spanish Indignados against youth unemployment and  political corrup- tion, and  the  Occupy movement against social ine- qualities  and  corporate greed that  started in New York and  spread across the  world are all manifesta- tions of young people's anger at public policies that
have favoured older generations and  established elites. Since 2011, youth protest has filled the  political landscape as young people have engaged with one another through hybrid media systems127 and  across hybrid public  spaces,128   from Twitter  to the  town square129.
However, in line with the  findings articulated above, a large  proportion of these young people hail from middle-income or more economically advantaged backgrounds. In this sense, the  economic crisis has provided the  ideal conditions for a quickening of youth protest--an intensification of political partici- pation (through digital  engagement) among young, highly educated citizens in search of a mouthpiece for their  "indignation".130  These youth movements have also fuelled support for alternative political parties.  Europe has witnessed  the  growth of par- ties (such as Podemos in  Spain  and  the  Five  Star Movement in Italy) that  oppose economic austerity and  rail against the  political establishment.
W hile  many highly  educated,  relatively well-off young people have found a mouthpiece for  their indignation, the  lack of effective political representa- tion has led  to the  radicalization  of many young people from less privileged backgrounds. This has fuelled the  rise of populist and  nationalist anti-im- migration parties in  Europe (such as the  National Front in France) and  the  rise of religious and  political extremism in other areas of the  world. The dangers of marginalizing young people from electoral poli- tics are clear  and  present.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In this thought piece, it has been shown that  youth political participation is evolving rather than declin- ing. Although young people vote less and are unlikely to be active members of political parties, they partic- ipate in a wide range of alternative political activi- ties. However, there is a worrying disconnection between young people and  electoral politics. Low voter turnout can lead  to a vicious circle of political disengagement; if young people do not vote, they are more likely to be ignored by politicians and  pol- icymakers,  which leads to greater disillusionment among younger citizens--and the  cycle continues. The situation has deteriorated further in the  after- math of the  global financial crisis, with high levels of youth unemployment and  government efforts to rein  in public spending contributing to even greater political disenchantment among young people.
Disillusionment with electoral politics is not confined to younger citizens; indeed, it is a recurrent theme across all age  groups. However, focusing on  youth political participation offers a glimpse of the  future
of today's democracies.131  If existing political institu- tions are decreasingly fit for the  purposes for which they were created,  undermined  by a lack  of pub- lic engagement, they may need to incorporate the emerging forms of political participation introduced by young people in order to stay relevant. Clearly, there is a dire need for democratic institutions to find ways to communicate and  interact better with citi- zens, and  for political and  State institutions to offer stakeholders more effective opportunities to influ- ence politics at local, regional and  national levels. These adaptations can be  supported by new infor- mation and  communications technology (ICT) and channelled through civic institutions.
Of course, not all young people are  the  same. The study shows varying levels of gender and  socioec- onomic inequalities in youth political participation across different regions of the world. In a broad sense, there is worrying evidence of a lack of engagement in political parties among young  women, which is probably connected to the  persistent gap  between male and  female representation in national parlia- ments.  By and  large,  youth turnout in elections  is socially equal in many newer democracies and  less socially equal in established democracies. However, there is a stronger and  more consistent link between socioeconomic  status and  non-electoral  forms of political participation. If young people are voting less and  engaging more in alternative political activities, it is a concern that  young people from less privileged backgrounds are being left without a political voice.
Governments, public institutions and  non-govern- mental organizations need to harness the  political energy that  has been so visible  in  the  recent and ongoing wave of youth protest. The following rec- ommendations are offered for key stakeholders:
Strengthen interactive communi- cation.  Pay more attention to youth issues and prioritize younger citizens' concerns; communicate interactively with them face-to-face, via the  Internet, and  through various social  media;  and  enlist  the support of young people  (including  youth protest activists)  in finding solutions  to the  problems that affect them most.
Empower   young people   through social   net works.   Use peer-to-peer con- tact--young people's social networks--to promote and  facilitate  youth engagement.  Barack Obama's
2008 presidential campaign in the  United States empowered  many young  Americans to work for the  Democratic Party and  mobilize their  friends132. "Champion  schemes",  which  involve  recr uiting enthusiastic  young people to encourage "people like them" to become politically engaged, have also shown great promise.
Improve  youth  representation  and the  politics  of  presence.  Consider meas- ures to improve youth representation and  the  rep- resentation of young women in national parliaments and  other decision-making bodies. This may be achieved in a number of ways; for  example,  steps can be  taken to establish quotas, to develop all-fe- male  candidate  shortlists,  and  to ensure a  more equal  presence for  women and  lower  socioeco- nomic groups in youth wings of political parties and youth representative bodies (such as youth parlia- ments and  councils).
Educate on democracy. Ensure that  effec- tive  standardized citizenship education is provided at  the  primary,  secondary and  tertiary levels.  It is well known that  greater knowledge and  the  practice of democratic politics in supportive environments can foster civic and  political engagement. This can be achieved through the  implementation of evi- dence-based citizenship education in schools and colleges.133

INTRODUC TION
Youth comprise a quarter of the  Earth's population. In the  global South, this figure rises to between 60 and  70 per  cent, resulting in a "youth bulge". Young people make up  a significant proportion of the world's population, but  they are marginalized both politically and  economically and  have been taking to the  streets in ever-growing numbers to voice their aspirations. Youth-led protests have been occurring in countries across the  world.
Young people have been the  driving force behind the  Arab uprisings, Occupy Wall Street and  its sat- ellite  demonstrations, the  anti-corruption rallies in India, the  demonstrations for political rights in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, and  the  protests for  economic justice in Brazil, Chile, Spain, Greece and  Israel. The last five  years of youth protests mark youth out as group drawn together by shared anxie- ties and  shared aspirations.
The protests reflect a new geography of discontent that  cuts across old divides of rich and poor countries, of North and  South, where youth are the  contesting actors. In taking on  political and  economic inequal- ities, youth through activism have re-energized the notions of public empowerment and  citizenship at a moment when many across the  world feel the  social contract between citizen and  State is broken. They
are a compelling force because of both their  demo- graphic weight and their  mobilizing power.
However,  can youth deliver  change,  especially  in the  post-transition period? How do they engage on the  street and  within institutions, and  what are the ideas that  drive  them? How sustainable is their  polit- ical activism? And finally, how can youth and  other stakeholders ensure the  meaningful participation of young people within governance structures?
The trajectory of youth engagement in Egypt and Tunisia  is reflected  in  two  rich and  very different accounts of activism and  political participation in a transition environment. Egypt witnessed a focus on building the  machinery of civic engagement through protest politics, while Tunisia saw an  emphasis on the  institutionalization of power through the  build- ing of structures within political parties.
Egypt and  Tunisia are  used as case studies here in order to explore the directions youth participation can take and  to identify relevant challenges and  opportu- nities. On the basis of this analytical review, the author offers policy options for  the  creation of sustainable frameworks for  the  meaningful long-term involve- ment of youth in decision-making and politics.
The present thought  piece is based on  the  author's fieldwork  conducted in  Egypt and  Tunisia  in  the
post-transition  period and  draws upon dozens of interviews conducted with youth politicians and activists. Zooming in at the  ground level  provides a more concrete understanding of youth political par- ticipation.  It also  offers an  authentic  context from which to identify lessons learned and  best practices, even though the  Egyptian and  Tunisian transitions have since taken different directions and  represent significantly different political environments. While the  focus is on  a specific region, the  implications for building  venues for  genuine  youth  participation in governance and political life are universally applicable.
In  Egypt and  Tunisia,  young people  engage polit- ically both within formal structures and  through informal channels. The majority of youth  still view formal  politics  with  antipathy  and  contempt and prefer to engage on  governance issues through civil society activism or informal political activity.
MANOEUVRING WITHIN THE FORM AL POLITICAL ARENA
In  Eg y pt  and   Tunisia,  political parties--both  old and  new, State sanctioned and  independent--are perceived to function along vertical lines, with lit- tle  horizontal decision-making or idea  generation. Egyptian youth have not been integrated into party structures, as few parties have given any thought to including them in committees  or creating a youth wing. Most youth in political parties have been left to fend for themselves, which for some has had  its own appeal for  the  autonomy it has allowed. Within the realm of political activism, youth have placed greater emphasis on the  importance of protest politics and have focused less on building structures, messaging, or positioning themselves within the  party.
In  comparison  with  Egyptian  youth,  young peo- ple in Tunisia have been better integrated into party structures. Nearly all political parties have engaged with the  youth issue, but  this is primarily because Tunisian youth have been adamant in demanding a seat at the  table.  As a result, most parties have some youth representatives on their  central committees or have a youth wing. While this structure tends to function along hierarchical lines, it also offers a polit- ical ladder to climb within the  system. This translates into a political activism among youth that  centres on  preparing for party congresses, developing pol- icy platforms and  messaging, and  campaigning for a greater youth voice internally. It has also meant that youth activists  in Tunisia  are  less disaffected  than their  counterparts in Egypt.
SEIZING INFORM AL P OLITIC AL SPACE
Most youth political activism in Egypt and  Tunisia, and indeed globally, has taken place though informal chan- nels, with much of the  activity occurring in the  civil society arena. Young people have a huge presence in this sphere, ranging from youth movements with tens of thousands of members to individual activists who might be lawyers, labourers, bloggers or graffiti artists.
Most youth-led civil society organizations focus on putting the  citizen at the  centre of the  political pro- cess.  In Egypt,  many groups have worked to raise awareness of political and  socioeconomic rights. In Tunisia, there has been greater emphasis on  play- ing a direct role in establishing monitoring bodies or watchdog groups in an effort to ensure the  account- ability of the  Parliament,  the  constitution-drafting committee and  the  election commission.
Young people in both Egypt and  Tunisia affirm that achieving political and  economic justice is a top  prior- ity. In pursuing this objective, however, they are keen to move away from old models of thinking and governing. In the  early days of the  transition period their  ideas for change bore a laser-like sharpness, in part  because the  youth were able to present a united front.
The transition process itself, though, soon divided youth as it pulled them in different directions. This, coupled  with  a tendency to fight  for  single  issues as opposed to linking  them to a wider political plat- form, has led  many youth to retreat into their  own silos from which they can only fight disjointed cam- paigns. Such a move has risked reinforcing the  old mechanism of functioning, with the  State offering to exchange specific entitlements for broader polit- ical rights--a trade-off sometimes seen to have been made between Governments and  previous genera- tions of activists.
Yet  youth remain different from the  older generation in that  they also have a parallel  narrative that  places strong emphasis  on promoting  the  idea  of equal citizenship. To paraphrase a young Tunisian activ- ist, they believe that  a Pandora's Box of issues has been opened but  that  the  only solution is to over- come the  legacies of the  past. Thus, while polarized, many youth argue that  there is no option but  to work through the  post-transition crisis of governance.
In both Egypt and  Tunisia, youth activism is based on  horizontal organizational structures rather than vertical  hierarchies of leadership.  Nearly  all youth activists  in  both formal  and  informal  politics  face structural and  financial constraints, as well as chal- lenges related to strategy and  long-term planning.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
What are the  implications of this for the  future, and how can stakeholders respond?
Youth-led protests show that  there is a great desire to change the  system. There is a common aspiration for a new political culture, which above all is about accountability. Youth see themselves as a counter- balance  to power and  during the  uprisings  spent much energy on  trying to expand political and  civic space. They have utilized social media and  crowd- sourcing platforms to develop more innovative ways of engaging with challenges, finding solutions and fostering  new citizen-based  structures.  For  many, their  legitimacy is grounded in a politics that  exists beyond the  structures of the  State.
It  is impor tant,  however,  that  civ ic  engagement and  political engagement, as well as the  relation- ship  b et ween c it i zen and   State,  b e  reconc ile d and  better integrated. Many youth recognize that informal political activism cannot be  a substitute for  the  institutionalized  politics  of par ties,  elec- tions and  Governments.
The lessons  learned and  best practices observed through interviews with youth politicians and  activ- ists can inform the  development of effective strate- gies for enhancing youth participation in governance through both formal  and  informal  channels.  The recommendations presented below are intended for stakeholders at the  United Nations agency, national and  local levels.
In the informal or civil society arena
Ensure  that mechanisms  exist  for direct   interaction  between gover nment officials and  young people, as witnessed in Tunisia, where youth groups have played  an  active  role in setting up parliamentary watchdog groups.
Decentralize   power by giving all  youth access to the  political process and  the  opportunity to have their  voices heard. In Tunisia, youth groups have brought Members of Parliament to local con- stituencies  to consult  with  young people on  the issues that  concern them most, including education and  unemployment.
Use   the nor m at ive   f ramework  of the  United  Nations  Secretary-General 's  Five-Year Action Agenda and  the  2011 United Nations General Assembly resolution on  mediation134   to guide pro- gramme development.  Relevant measures might include offering training on conflict mediation and strengthening  avenues for  youth  participation in community  decision-making,  as seen in  Yemen. Encouraging  inclusive  dialogue to resolve  conflict at the  community and  national levels in post-tran- sition countries is key. The process can be  further enhanced through the  creation of mediation mod- ules and  texts that  can be  used by political parties and  for training programmes undertaken by youth- led civil society organizations.
In the formal political arena
Involve  youth  directly  in  the elec- toral  process.  Young people can function as election observers--a strategy implemented by the Carter Center in Egypt and  Tunisia. Youth can also serve as polling station workers and  have seats on national election commissions.
Build  strong  youth  wings  in  politi- cal parties but  also have youth quotas for rep- resentation in central bureaus and  decision-making committees. Young people who have a direct voice in policymaking can call attention to youth  priorities in general policies on education, health, employ- ment and  other areas of special concern.
Introduce  quotas  for  youth  on par- liament ar y list s and in   n at ion al dialogue  processes,  as has been done in Yemen. Quotas and  legal frameworks are important, but  they mean next to nothing if there is no com- mitment to ensure the  meaningful participation of young people in all stages of the  electoral process (before, during and  after  elections) and  in other key political processes.
In both formal and  informal political arenas, young people  are  actively  engaged in  horizontal  experi- ence sharing. This trend should be  supported, with youth encouraged to strengthen communication through peer-to-peer networks across political par- ties and  civil society so that  they can profit from les- sons learned and  best practices.
Youth  political inclusion  is a  key component  of
United  Nations  Secretary-General  Ban  Ki-moon's
Five-Year Action Agenda. As the  international com- munity seeks ways to address the  monumental challenges that  face youth, initiatives based on capacity-building are  important. However, it is the engagement of youth as relevant and  meaning- ful stakeholders that  is essential to building a stable political and  economic future.

INTRODUC TION
It is generally accepted that  youth civic participa- tion and  political engagement are  essential  com- ponents of a healthy,  functioning  society.  Youth engagement  is vital  to political socialization  and participation; young people represent future elec- torates and  publics, and  initial experiences of dem- ocratic  engagement are  likely to  resonate  into adulthood.135   However, it is also crucial in helping to build  human and  social capital, and  at the  most fundamental  level,  it strengthens young people's understanding of their  own roles as citizens and  the attendant rights and  responsibilities.
An alternative  to positive  youth engagement may simply be apathy and disengagement, which remains a significant  problem worldwide.136   However,  dis- affected youth can also choose to engage in what may broadly be  termed  radical or extreme  activity.
This might range from simply espousing intolerant, extreme or  fundamentalist  views to actively  par- ticipating in radical or extreme groups and  causes or engaging in illegal  political activity such as vio- lent  protest and  even terrorism. This is the  poten- tial  negative  side  of youth engagement that,  far from promoting human rights, social mobility, civic responsibility, political socialization and youth devel- opment, actively works against them and is the  focus of this thought piece.
Defining radicalism or extremism can be some- what problematic. Historically, radicalism has often reflected the  predominant political ideologies and social currents of its time, either by resonating with or echoing some aspect of them or by emerging in opposition to the  status quo. Consequently, the  defi- nition of what is radical is largely contingent upon the  milieu from which it emerges. Another consid- eration is that  many movements initially considered radical or extreme gain  acceptance and  legitimacy
 		over time  and  eventually  enter the   mainstream;
examples within the  past century include the  emer- gence of movements advocating  decolonization, civil rights,  women's  liberation and  environmen- tal concerns. It is essential, then, that  extremism or radicalism be considered within its contemporary sociopolitical context, and  that  those exploring this
87
concept remain cognizant of the  historical subjec- tivity that  accompanies the  identification and  label- ling of an individual or group as radical or extreme.
For  the  purposes of this thought piece, it is posited that  radicalism or extremism involves at least one of the  following:
1.    The acceptance or espousal of beliefs, ideas and attitudes  that  clearly  contradict  or  fall outside the  range of acceptable or  mainstream  views within that  particular society; an example would be the  racist and  intolerant attitudes of neo-Nazi groups in contemporary Europe.
2.    T he  employ ment  of  illegitimate methods or strategies to actualize ideas and  beliefs, irrespec- tive  of the  legitimacy and  mainstream accepta- bility of those  ideas.  For  example,  while  most people would  accept that  animals  have rights and   should be  protected f rom unnecessar y harm,  violent attacks on  people and  research facilities that  carry out testing on  animals would be  considered illegal  and  an example of radical or extreme activity.
Radicalism and  extremism operate on  or outside the periphery of mainstream society and  are character- ized by the  espousal of beliefs and  ideas or the  use of methods and  strategies that  are  not considered acceptable within a particular societal context.
ANALYSIS OF
CURRENT TRENDS
Radicalism and  extremism are largely perceived as youth phenomena. Indeed, historically, certain youth demographics have been drawn disproportionately
to these sorts of activities and  movements, and exceptionally large  youth cohorts, or "youth bulges", often make countries more susceptible  to politi- cal violence.137  It is also possible to identify violent groups that  not only  target youth audiences,  but whose very existence centres around a youth iden- tity.  For  example, the  Red  Guards in China  were a violent paramilitary youth  social movement mobi- lized from universities by Chairman Mao during the Cultural  Revolution.  Indeed,  the  very name of the group may sometimes reflect a youth demographic; the  name al-Shabaab in Somalia literally means  "the Youth" in Arabic,138   and  the  name of the  Taliban in Afghanistan  stems from the  Pashto word for  "stu- dents". Most strikingly today, jihadism, in the  guise of al-Qaeda  and  the  Islamic  State of Iraq  and  the Levant, is almost exclusively associated with young men under the  age  of 25139 and  originates in regions experiencing a substantial youth bulge.
While extremism predominantly draws young men to its fold, women are not entirely immune. Indeed, not only have women been drawn to political radi- calism and  extremism throughout history, but  they have also played crucial leadership roles in move- ments associated  with  women's  rights,  universal
suffrage, civil rights, and  animal and  environmental rights.  In  the  1970s,  when extreme left-wing  rad- icalism was prevalent throughout much of Europe, women were sometimes considered far more ide- ologically  extreme than even their  male counter- parts. For  example, West German counterterrorism units were apparently ordered to "shoot the  women first" when encountering the  Baader-Meinhoff Gang owing  to the  supposed danger they posed as the group's most ideologically committed members.140
However, this perception of women as ideologically extreme has been the  exception rather than the  rule. Women involved in radical or extremist groups have generally  been depicted  using  biological,  psycho- logical or sexualized stereotypes linked  to assump- tions about what is "appropriate" female behaviour,141 thereby divesting them of political and  personal agency. Even today, at a time when women are increasingly drawn to radical movements, this char- acterization still appears to hold. For example, young women  who  have attempted  to join the   Islamic State,  in contrast to their  male  counterparts,  have been labelled sensationally by the  media as " jihadi sex brides", with terms such as "vulnerable" and  "sex- ually groomed" used to account for their  actions.
ACCOUNTING FOR THE RISE OF YOUTH R ADIC ALISM AND
CONDITIONS THAT FOSTER YOUTH EX TREMISM
There is no simple  cause-and-effect calculus  that accounts for the  rise of youth extremism; however, it is possible to identify certain critical factors that might make young people more susceptible to radi- cal narratives or provide the  impetus for their  partic- ipation in radical structures and  activities. Three of the  most important factors--identity crises, political disenfranchisement, and  socioeconomic inequality
--are explored below.
Identity crises
The nexus of radicalism,  extremism  and  youth is primarily the   transitional  stage of development into adulthood and  the  presence of unresolved issues  relating to identity  formation.142   Of course, this search for identity and  belonging is an intrinsic part  of adolescence and  early adulthood and  occurs among young people everywhere. However, as the case studies of many radicals will attest, this process appears to take  on  an  urgency and  prominence in these individuals that  belie  its ubiquitous and  often mundane nature. Identity crises inspired by alien- ation, racism, dislocation, globalization, changing value  systems,  anomie and  a host of other issues produce a  heightened  state of v ulnerability and might compel individuals to seek solace in beguil- ing narratives that  offer a safe and  welcoming com- munity of like-minded "outcast" individuals.143  In this respect, the  need to belong and  the  dynamics behind the appeal of such groups as the Islamic State, which offers an identity based on  a global religious
fraternity of believers, or of Neo-Nazi groups, which offer  an identity based on  racial  purity and  cultural solidarity, are not entirely dissimilar to the  appeal of gang culture identities to some young people.
The nexus of youth radicalism  also  stems in  part from the  exposure at  this  formative  stage to new ideas and  theories provided by expanding social net- works and  educational opportunities. The university
Yo Soy 132, and  the  Occupy movement in the  United States are partially founded on the  principle that  young people are unwilling to pay the  price for the  excesses and fiscal irresponsibility of earlier generations.
Political disenfranchisement
Increasing political disenfranchisement and  dis- illusionment  w ith  traditional political processes,
145
is both historically and  pedagogically the  home of
institutions  and   structures
are  also  central  to
radical ideas,  revolutionary  beliefs  and  subversive thoughts,  precisely  because it is often the  setting in  which  students receive  their  first independent exposure to the  political world around them. Many of the  great political movements  first emerged on university  campuses and  were no doubt consid- ered unorthodox or radical at the  time. Intoxicated by new causes that  animate them and  struggles that inspire them, students are inevitably filled with gen- uine--if somewhat na\0xEFve and  unrefined--enthusiasm and  idealism. However, that  is part of growing up, of healthy political socialization and  development; stu- dents experiment not only with sex, drugs and music at university, but  also with ideas.
Add to this  heady mix issues  relating to rebellion against social and  parental mores, crises of authority,
understanding young people's alienation from con-
ventional politics and  mainstream civic and  political engagement. Young people who do not believe that the  issues of concern to them are  being addressed through politics and  public policy146 often take to the streets and  engage in protest and  demonstrations. Where "legitimate"  forms of protest prove unsuc- cessful, individuals may begin to countenance illegit- imate and  violent forms of protest including rioting, public  disorder,  sabotage and   even terrorism.147
Consequently,  a gravitation towards  radicalism  or
extremism might be  interpreted as one of the  ways in which young people seek to air their  frustrations and  grievances and  to attach themselves  to struc- tures that  ostensibly allow them to feel  that  they are being empowered socially and  politically. Radicalism
and intergenerational conflict, and it is easy to under-	 	
stand why radicalism often takes root among youth. In West Germany in the  1970s, young people rebelled against the  State and  society by joining extreme left- wing groups. These young people broke starkly with their  parents by labelling them the  "Auschwitz genera- tion", pointedly accusing them of lacking a moral com- pass and  of being complicit in the  Holocaust.144  Even today, many of the  anti-austerity and inequality move- ments such as Spain's Los Indignados (15-M), Mexico's
or extremism may be particularly appealing to young people at this stage of their  lives, especially if their initial tentative yet idealistic forays into political activism have failed  to produce the  desired results.
Socioeconomic inequality
Socioeconomic  pressures can play  a  key role in influencing a young person's susceptibility to rad- icalism  and  extremism.  High  rates of global  youth unemployment (exceeding 10 per cent over the  past three decades)148  and  other, broader forms of soci- oeconomic inequality have been the  focal point of youth grievances for some time. The anti-austerity and  inequality movements in Europe and  the  United States and  the  violent protests that  have erupted in Cairo, Caracas and  many other parts of the  world are largely predicated upon the  sorts of socioeconomic inequalities that  disproportionately impact young people. Indeed, the  youth bulge within many socie- ties in the  Middle East and North Africa and the  asso- ciated lack of employment and  other opportunities for youth are widely seen as constituting one of the principle precursors of the  risings that  took place in that  region.149
Young people today are facing an  uphill  climb that ha s become dauntingly  steep.  Many  have lim- ited  prospects for  employment, decent shelter and upward social mobility. Poverty, low educational attainment, and  disproportionately high crime rates among youth have become endemic in certain set- tings. Youth experiencing these challenges as well as prejudice and  societal marginalization may find "solutions" to their  predicament in extreme organi- zations and  movements. The two young Frenchmen who carried out the  Charlie Hebdo attacks in Paris in early 2015 hailed from one of the  banlieues situated around the  capital. These largely working-class sub- urbs are often characterized as environments with high rates of unemployment, crime and  drug use, as well as institutional racism and  endemic cycles of poverty and  disenfranchisement. It is in these types of settings that  radical groups might offer an escape from a potentially bleak future or a criminal past.
War and   conf lict  have a  tremendous impact  on negative youth engagement. Young people in con- flict  zones, and  particularly those  in "failing States" (which often result from periods of long, drawn-out conflict), are  likely to gravitate towards  violence or violent actors because, somewhat ironically,  such contexts are seen to offer security and  a chance to meet basic survival needs. Many young people in the Syrian Arab Republic and  Afghanistan, for example, have joined  the  Islamic  State and  Taliban  respec- tively,  not necessarily  because of any ideological commitment or religious appeal, but  simply out of financial necessity and  the  need to survive.
Periods of insecurity or poverty heighten young people's vulnerability, rendering them far more sus- ceptible to coercion and  manipulation by extreme
demagog ues,  gangs and   v iolent criminals.  It  is believed, for example, that  Ajmal Kasab, the  lone surviving terrorist from the  2008 Mumbai attacks in India, may have been coerced to participate after  his impoverished  family  was promised  Rs 150,000  by Lashkar-e-Taiba upon the  successful completion of his operation.150
SOCIAL MEDIA AND YOUTH AUDIENCES
Online platforms, in particular Internet-based social media  and   web 2 .0  platforms,  have collectively become the  principal arena for  youth political and social  engagement over the  past decade. This  is largely a positive development, as these platforms are ostensibly conducive to the  "levelling" of hierar- chies of knowledge and power151  and have reinforced the  democratizing and  egalitarian nature of the  new media environment. However, the  appropriation of these technologies has also contributed significantly to the  rise and increased visibility of youth radicalism and  extremism.
There are a number of reasons that  might account for the  intersection of youth, technology and  radi-
younger generation of political actors, social interac- tion and  other everyday activities take  place largely within this media environment, whether it be social networking, shopping, dating, playing video games, watching movies, reading news, listening to music, or learning. In fact, most activities in the  "real" world now  have virtual counterparts that  may appear to be  more appealing  to a certain  age  cohort (digi- tal natives), so it is not surprising that  their  political activism  or  radical escapism  should  similarly take place within this arena.153
One of the  paradoxes of the  new media  environ- ment is that  while it provides access to staggering amounts of information and  data  and  exposes users to new perspectives and  experiences, it also allows individuals who gravitate towards extremism to find (or consciously place) themselves in highly cloistered, immersive environments that  effectively cocoon audiences from alternate realities and  interpretational frameworks.  These online  environments  can give rise to an  insular virtual community that  venerates the  radical ideology or community at the  expense of all else while stifling almost any form of debate, dis- cussion or dialogue.154  These forums essentially act
calism. Principally, this nexus is a function of young	 	
people being  "digital  natives"  rather than "digital immigrants".152   The former are  defined  as native speakers of the  digital  language of computers, video games and  the  Internet. Conversely, those who were not born into  the  digital  world  but  have at  some point adopted various aspects of the  new technol- ogy are  considered  digital  immigrants.  For  young people today,  there is little  that  is new  about the new media environment; rather, it is the  only media environment with which they are  familiar. For  this
as echo chambers or rhetorical force amplifiers, pre- disposing users to unreserved acceptance of the  rad- ical perspective and  effectively grooming vulnerable young people online for extremism.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Radicalism is not always a bad  thing. It usually indi- cates a political awakening among young people-- the  presence of latent energy and  a desire to change the  world  for  the  better.  One might  contrast the negative youth engagement of radicals (no matter how problematic) with the  widespread political apa- thy among youth in recent years, as evidenced by chronically low voter turnout in virtually all democ- racies. The most important question one might ask is how the  very same energy hijacked by extrem- ists and  radicals might be directed towards positive, healthy outcomes. Achieving such a goal requires that  certain key issues be  addressed, as outlined in the  recommendations below.
Support political empowerment. The best way to address political disillusionment and disenfranchisement  is to restore  political agency to young people. They must be  provided with the means to become agents of positive change within their  own societies. Conventional political literacy and socialization are important, but alternative forms of engagement that  may be more appealing to youth
need to be  supported as well. Young people must genuinely  believe  that  they can become effective agents of change.155 They require access to mech- anisms through which they can air their  grievances against the  political establishment. Further, when young people express dissatisfaction with political elites or the  status quo through protests and  demon- strations, they must be taken seriously, and appropri- ate  action must be  taken to mitigate their  concerns and  address their  grievances. If their  criticisms and frustrations are  ignored, they may seek resolution through more negative modes of political engage- ment. It must be  acknowledged that  in some cases it will not be possible to cognitively change extrem- ist beliefs and  attitudes. However, in these scenarios, it may be possible to disengage young people from violence, to delegitimize violence as a response, and to aim for  political socialization  focused on  more legitimate modes of political engagement.
Create  inclusive  identities.  Every effort must be  made to create progressive and  inclusive forms of citizenship and  belonging, to prevent the marginalization of youth and  other disadvantaged populations, and  to respect diversity. Human rights and  individual freedoms must be  protected.  Steps must be taken to ensure that  avenues for youth civic participation are created so that  young people feel they have something vested in the  State and  society. Grievances and  narratives of victimhood, whether real or perceived, must be addressed so young peo- ple  can see that  their  concerns are taken seriously. Intolerance, sexism,  racism  and  xenophobia  must
 		be  eliminated, and  their  highly corrosive effects on
community cohesion, healthy identity development and  civic responsibility must be acknowledged.
Address socioeconomic inequality. Governments and  other stakeholders must address all forms of socioeconomic inequality. In much of the  developing world, there must be a push for better governance and  transparency and  greater democra- tization. The international community must uphold its responsibility in tackling these issues, particularly in post-conflict settings. In the  developed world, pol- icymakers must address democratic deficits, income disparities and  fiscal irresponsibility and  work to eliminate barriers to upward social mobility.
As has been demonstrated by the  examples offered here, young people can be powerful agents for change.156   In  order to ensure that  their  efforts are directed towards positive change, young people must be provided with the  tools and means to achieve their potential. This must be done not only to diminish the appeal of radicalism and  extremism but  because all individuals deserve to live in free  and  fair societies. It is essential to invest in younger generations, as they represent the  shared future of society.

YOUTH DIGITAL ACTIVISM
Erhardt Graeff
INTRODUC TION
The terms "civic  engagement"  and  "activism"  tra- ditionally evoke images of voting and  volunteering for  campaigns or marching in the  streets, banners hoisted high. While these are  still fixtures of politi- cal participation, a broader set of practices enabled by digital  technologies is being created and  applied by young people. Cathy  J.  Cohen,  Joseph  Kahne and  others call this broader set of practices "partic- ipatory politics", defined as "interactive, peer-based acts through which individuals and  groups seek to exert both voice and  influence on  issues of public concern".157  They emphasize that  "these acts are not guided by deference to elites or formal institutions".
This is part  of a larger  trend of youth avowing low confidence in national decision-making bodies and disaffection  with  elected officials  and  their  ability to address issues.  The biannual  Harvard Institute of Politics poll indicated consistently declining lev- els of trust in government institutions among 18- to
29-year-old Americans between 2010 and  2015.158
According  to a  2013 LSE Enterprise  study,  when European 16- to 26-year olds reflect on voting and institutional  politics,  they find  "the  political \0x2018offer' does not match their  concerns, ideas, and  ideal  of democratic politics".159   At the  same time, there are high levels of youth participation in issue-oriented activism, boycotting and  buycotting, and  protest activities.160  W. Lance Bennett refers to this new gen- eration of young people as "actualizing  citizens", "who favour loosely networked activism to address
issues that  reflect personal values", in contrast with "dutiful  citizens",  who  maintain a more collective and  government-centred set of practices.161  Similarly, Cohen and  Kahne found that  interest-driven partici- pation was a strong predictor of engagement in par- ticipatory politics among American youth.162
If one thing  defines this  era  of youth digital  activ- ism, it is the  ability to make and  widely share media. It is possible  for  "widely  distributed,  loosely  con- nected individuals" to work together to solve a prob- lem  or  create something  new--a  practice  called
95
crowdsourcing or peer production--because the costs of building loose networks of contributors and disseminating information digitally are nearly zero.163
When people make their  own media they can assert power by framing issues in ways that  compel others to change their  minds or to adapt to new realities and perspectives. This form of "media activism" is not a new theory of change in itself; however, its practice is being transformed by the  use of digital  technologies for  coordination and  amplification. Agenda-setting power is shifting to a broader set of political actors with the  necessary tools, savvy and timing.
Mobile computing, in particular, is allowing a new generation  of citizens  to access the  Internet and enjoy lowered  coordination  costs.  In  Canada,  the United  Kingdom  and   the   United  States,  9  in  10
Millennials  have a smartphone and  spend 50-100 per  cent more time on  their  mobile device than on a desktop computer.164  Affordable wireless Internet access and  mobile  phone ownership  around the world constitute the  most potent force for expand- ing the  pool and  potential of young digital  activists.
However, the  young people best poised to transform the  practice of democracy around the  world  are those who not only create media but  also build  the tools and  platforms through which they are  made, shared and  organized. Lilly Irani calls this new move- ment of civic hacking and  cultural remaking "entre- preneurial citizenship".165 This represents a small but powerful cohort that  is taking its  cues for  solving the  world's problems from Silicon Valley, identifying primarily as social entrepreneurs and  designers and secondarily as political or as activists.
These new forms of digital  activism are  not with- out problems and  controversy. Many youth are still excluded from civic and  political participation. That is why it is important to comprehend the  wide range of contemporary tactics, tools, and  trends and  the unique challenges youth digital  activists face in con- nection with current laws, norms, market forces and educational  practices.  The current thought piece outlines these trends and  challenges but  also high- lights relevant opportunities and  offers recommen- dations for supporting youth digital  activism.
TRENDS IN
DIGITAL AC TIVISM
 		Digital activism is a rapidly growing phenomenon on
a path to expand Cohen and  Kahne's already broad definition of participatory politics. The sources and targets of activism, the  tools used, and  the  relevant outcomes vary across countries and  are constantly evolv ing;   at  present,  the   communities  coming together via Facebook, Twitter and  other networks are  incredibly  important.166   Several  of the  genres that  best illustrate the  breadth of youth digital  activ- ism's expansion and  legitimization are  highlighted
below; they include networked social movements, i s s ue- or iente d   ac t iv i s m ,   par t ic ipator y  p olit ic s through participatory culture (such as fan  activism and  political memes), civic hacking, and  hacktivism.
Networked social movements
Social movements are defined in part by their  means of communication,  what brings people  together, and  how it happens; networked social movements are participatory because they rely on  "self-con- figurable," "fluid", and  less hierarchical networks of communication.167   This means more entryways to leadership for youth participants through decentral- ization, and  it also demands adequate skill in the  use of digital  media.
Uprisings in the Middle East and North
Africa on Twitter and Facebook
During the  2010/11 uprisings in the  Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and  replicated in the  organi- zation and  broadcast of later  demonstrations and protests throughout Europe, Latin America and  the United States, the  skilful use of Twitter hashtags and the  leverage of social  networks  such as Facebook helped spread and  legitimize uprisings in several countries in the  MENA region. The movements had their  seeds in  long-standing  networks  of activists working towards regime change and  masses of citi- zens exasperated by high youth unemployment and food shortages across the  region. However, it was the  savvy use of Facebook and  Twitter to develop solidarity among those across the  region and  Arab diasporas,  and  then to influence  the  coverage of Western journalists, that  allowed these movements to gain  serious momentum. Local bloggers and activists worked together to create and  disseminate
carefully crafted messages and  images during each revolution, which were retweeted by Western jour- nalists who could amplify the  message to a global audience. This audience included the  bloggers' and activists' fellow countrymen, who could witness the solidarity with and  legitimization of the  revolutions reflected in the  global response.168
Participating in these uprisings online was as easy as retweeting  new information  shared via  Twitter or changing or modifying a profile image in a way that   displayed  one's  support.  Indiv idually,  these might  appear to be  very personal  and  ineffective forms of participation, but  in aggregate they repre- sent a formidable display of solidarity with the  social movements that  helped  to encourage supportive reporting in the  Western press and  the  material sup- port of foreign benefactors and  Governments.
Issue-oriented activism
Another wave of networked social movements even more strongly connected to youth and  new forms of digital  activism began in 2011 with the  Occupy movement originating in New York City and the 15-M Movement in Spain and continued through 2014 with the  Umbrella Movement (Occupy Central with Love and  Peace) in  Hong Kong Special  Administrative Region. In these cases, youth disaffected by institu- tional politics chose to occupy prominent civic spaces
97
and  use an array of media activism tactics to change their  societies' perspectives on specific issues such as income inequality, austerity policies and  democratic rule. There was little expectation by the  activists that traditional politics could achieve such goals. Rather, the  tactics aimed at changing perceptions and  social norms and  calling for elites to respect youth and  stu- dent voices and  to witness a more democratic and participatory way of running society.
This is part  of a larger  trend of youth participating, sometimes fleetingly, around specific issues that  res- onate with their  personal values. Prominent exam- ples of campaigns that  successfully activated youth along these lines are Invisible Children's KONY 2012 campaign and  the  promotion of the  red  equal sign by the  Human Rights Campaign (HRC). Invisible Children was a single-issue advocacy organiza- tion targeting youth  in high  schools,  colleges  and
churches  on  the  principle that  they had  a moral imperative to raise awareness about warlord Joseph Kony's use of their  fellow youth as soldiers in Eastern and Central Africa.169 In 2012, they launched an ambi- tious campaign called KONY 2012 using a 20-minute documentary about the  warlord, imploring watchers to make Kony the  most (in)famous person of 2012 and calling for action by the United States in pursuing him. Supporters were asked to tweet celebrities en masse with links to the  video; comedienne and  talk show host Ellen DeGeneres received 36,000 tweets asking her  to respond.170  The campaign went viral, prompting reactions from many prominent celebri- ties and  politicians and  attracting 100 million views on  YouTube in six days. The media awareness cam- paign worked so well that  it included a massive crit- ical response targeted at the  organizers of Invisible Children for their  tactics and  portrayal of the  issue, which led to the  organization's demise.
In the  case of the  red equal sign campaign, HRC was organizing around two United States Supreme Court cases relating to marriage equality in March 2012. In addition to traditional coalition and  event organizing, including a video message of support from prominent politician and  presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton, HRC created a pink-on-red version of their equal sign logo intended to be shared by those wish- ing to express their  support of marriage rights for gay and  lesbian couples on  social media. Millions of sup- porters,171 including straight, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth wanting to signify their  solidarity on  an  issue on  which they had  an  overwhelmingly more progressive stance than their  parents' genera- tion,172  changed their  profile image to a version of the red equal sign logo and  drove millions of visits to the HRC website and  social media properties.173
PARTICIPATORY P OLITICS THROUGH PARTICIPATORY CULTURE
Fan activism
Issue-oriented campaigns such as KONY 2012 and the  red  equal  sign  campaign  represent the  main- streaming by networked social movements of a set of culture-creating practices known as "participatory culture". In fact, participatory politics is an extension of the  broader participatory culture, wherein con- sumers are  no longer passive recipients of profes- sionally produced cultural content but  instead are encouraged to create and  share their  own content and  form communities  to do so.174   This  has long been true  in fan communities, which generate their own homages and  original material as part  of their fandom. Fan  activism, which has a history of pres- suring media corporations to be responsive to fans' wants and  values, has now become a potent force for broader political activism in the  form of commu- nities such as the  Harry Potter Alliance.
The Harry Potter Alliance (HPA) was founded in 2005 to organize fans of the  Harry Potter stories to come together and  fight against the  evils of "our world" the same way the  novels' characters did  in theirs. HPA has been extremely successful at drawing parallels
between themes addressed in young adult  fiction and  major issues such as fair labour and  marriage equality  and  using  those  narratives to energize  a network of members to volunteer,  to take  actions such as creating their  own testimonials and  signing pledges, and  to donate money and  books to those in need. The organizing of these  largely online and global actions has been enhanced by the  develop- ment of a network of local  chapters spanning  25 countries; the  individual chapters coordinate their own actions and  enable HPA to have local, national and  global platforms.
Political memes
A mainstay of the  activist repertoire and  participa- tory culture  is humour.  For  digital  activists  rang- ing  from the  Harry Potter Alliance and  the  Human Rights Campaign to the  Occupy movement, political memes are  one of the  core tools. The most popu- lar form is the  easiest to create and  share: the  image macro meme takes an image easily recognizable to the  audience and  overlays a bold white caption on it.  Numerous  websites  host generators that  make it easy for  users to make their  own image  macro memes. Given the  universality of  political humour and  the  simplicity of image macro-based memes, it is not surprising that  this practice has spread to even the  tiny  online  populations  of countries  that  have only recently gained Internet access.175
Prominent examples of political memes enlivening international  political discourse  have been those created to poke fun  at terrorists. Terrorist organiza- tions exemplified by the  Islamic State are adept users of participatory culture for recruitment and  informa- tion warfare, so it is only fitting that  memes are used
99
against them. Several lampooning memes came out of Osama bin  Laden's demise--image macros fea- turing bin Laden's image and  captions such as "Hide and  Seek Champion 2001--2011."176 More recently, in August 2015, "ISIS Karaoke" was launched on  Twitter by a 32-year old who combined lyrics of pop songs with images of militants from Islamic State of Iraq and  the  Levant (ISIS) wielding microphones.177  This has spawned a growing collection of memes con- tributed by others using the  hashtag #isiskaraoke.
Civic hacking
Some youth are  going  beyond  making media  and are making or using data  for civic and  political ends. Others are even building the  next generation of technologies for their  fellow digital  activists to use. The open data  movement represents a community of technologists and  activists who are  pushing for the  release of government data  in countries around the  world in order to support a range of practices. Recently,  they have been arg uing for  the   com- mercial  and  efficiency benefits  of providing  open
government data  to coders. As a result, civic hack- athons are being supported at the  highest levels of government in some countries. The longer history of this movement is one aligned with the  political cause of transparency and  accountability--the argu- ment that  citizens  can better monitor  the  perfor- mance of the  Government and  ensure that  it truly represents citizens' best interests when they are able to access and  analyse its data.
Civic  hackers building  tools  for  making their  own data  or organizing civic and  political communities in new ways have had  high-profile success. Activist- oriented civic hacking projects include the  precursor to Twitter--TXTmob--built by young activist technol- ogists who wanted a distributed SMS-based tool for coordinating protests.178  On the  humanitarian side, tools have been developed to establish or strengthen community response mechanisms. For example, youth in the  Russian Federation used the  Ushahidi crowdmapping platform to create Help Map, which coordinated peer-to-peer mutual aid efforts during the  2010 wildfires in the  Russian Federation.179  Those working with the  Government rather than against it have been supported by organizations  such as Code for  America and  Code for  All.180  A number of Governments have a strong interest in creating opportunities for these talented youth to practise the kind of entrepreneurial citizenship Irani describes.
Hacktivism
O ther   g roups  of  technolo g ic ally  adept  youth , attracted more to anti-government and  anti-corpo- rate politics, express themselves through hacktivism. Unlike civic hacking, which  is largely constructive while also potentially activist, hacktivism represents
a more controversial genre of digital  activism that views the  Internet as a site  for  disruptive  protest. Within the  hacktivist repertoire are projects such as Wikileaks--with clear  political goals similar to those of many open data  activists--leaking sensitive docu- ments and  helping to maintain the  infrastructure for anonymous submissions.
More controversial have been hacktivists--most notably   those  af f iliated   w ith   one  or   more  of Anonymous's many incarnations--who have devel- oped tactics for culture jamming vandalism of online property (replacing web pages with political mani- festos), picket lines and  roadblocks (distributed deni- al-of-service,  or  DDOS,  attacks to take  down web servers),  and  leaking private personal  information in support  of radical transparency (data  exfiltration from private servers).  Most versions of the  offline analogues of these tactics are illegal, even if they are recognized as political acts; computer law is no dif- ferent. The United States and  many other countries treat  such tactics as dangerously criminal and  even terroristic.  Harsh punishments  can be  meted out to participants, who may do little  more than click a button on  a software application that  instructs their computer to send large  amounts of data  to a target web server; some hacktivists have been fined hun- dreds of thousands of dollars and  threatened with long prison sentences to persuade them to accept felony plea deals.
Anonymous affiliates who participated in operations between 2010 and  2011 were arrested in six different countries. Many were identified by their  computers' IP addresses after  participating in DDOS attacks. The string of hacks certainly captivated the  attention of the  media and  terrified companies and  Governments
the  world over. In this case, the  spectacle was success- ful in setting the  media agenda. However, Anonymous struggled to maintain a frame for  its work that  was political rather than criminal.181 In fact, the  tactics used by Anonymous during its most notorious operations were disavowed by early hacktivists such as Oxblood Ruffin, who developed tools for censorship evasion, firewall penetration and  obfuscation.182
This new brand of digital  activism is considered well outside the  mainstream, and  it represents a tiny frac- tion of the  digital  activism universe.183  It is unclear if hacktivist tactics such as DDOS will even stay within the  repertoire of fringe digital  activism.  However, because government-affiliated  hackers use these same tactic s for  c yber war  and   espionage and because new forms of hacktivism can be  expected to emerge, it is important to understand that  certain practitioners view this as their  contribution to partic- ipatory politics.
CHALLENGES AND
OPP ORTUNITIES FOR
DIGITAL AC TIVISM
Hacktivism  is only  the  most extreme of the  many challenges to traditional notions of legitimate polit- ical  participation. Digital activism faces numerous obstacles to its growth and  efficacy. More directly,
101
it can pose risks to participants themselves, either legally in  the  case of the  Anonymous hacktivists, or socially in the  case of women who exercise their political voice in misogynistic parts of the  Internet.
Unclear impact and slacker activism
Digital activism has been referred to as slacktivism or clicktivism, criticised on  several fronts as being lazy, cowardly, ineffective,184   and  perhaps even harmful to the  larger  process of civic renewal.185 Critics con- sider individualized, networked participation a poor substitute for traditional forms of collective activism exemplified  by well-worn  reductionist  versions of
1960s-era campaigns such as the  United States civil rights movement.186  It is fair to assert, as Peter Levine does,  that  digital  activism  may be  able  to achieve scale and  diversity but  not depth or sustainability-- that  online campaigns may all prove evanescent and lack  an  ability to handle  and  overcome  valid  criti- cisms or lack the  infrastructure necessary to invite and  train  youth  from apolitical networks to replace current leaders the  way traditional political organi- zations could.187 The Invisible Children and  the  upris- ings in the  MENA region exemplify these problems with participatory politics.
It cannot yet be  said whether  youth  digital  activ- ism  is a  poor substitute  for  traditional forms  of youth activism, and  it is hard  to evaluate the  direct effects of media activist tactics on  long-term targets such as social norms. It is known that  digital  struc- tures and  tactics used in the  uprisings in the  MENA region, by Invisible Children, and  even by the  Harry Potter Alliance  have had  an  impact  on the  world. Furthermore, with rates of volunteerism and  infor- mal  political participation  remaining  high  among
youth--especially marginalized racial and  ethnic groups in the  United States--scholars such as Ethan Zuckerman see the  potential for a new "ladder of cit- izen participation" leading from lightweight forms of digital  activism such as sharing memes to political participation involving the same level of time and per- sonal commitment as traditional activism.188 Although there are  some concerns  about social  movements founded on participatory politics, successful and  sus- tainable networked social movements may already be emerging as hybrids of new and  traditional youth organizing  around issues  such as undocumented immigrant rights in the  United States.189
Unprotected civil rights and an unfree Internet
Outside  of Wester n  countr ies w ith  strong f ree speech and  assembly protections, the  slacktivist cri- tique of digital  activists as lazy or cowardly does not
hold up. Many countries have long track records of harassing and  imprisoning online activists. In 2015, Reporters Without Borders counted 170 imprisoned "netizens" around the  world.190  Several countries run extremely sophisticated national programmes of Internet filtering and  information control; some have even developed State-run alternative  social  net- works to move domestic Facebook users into a more easily monitored space, and  "patriotic hackers" may be tasked with taking down dissenting websites.191
Digital activists  in  some countries have invented ways to evade censors and  share their  own brand of political memes using clever language and  imagery that stand in for political topics.192 However, pervasive censorship and  surveillance undermine online polit- ical participation by creating a kind  of "disciplinary society",  wherein  users discipline  themselves  and cultivate a kind of political disaffection and  apathy.193
This  is a threat not only  in countries  perceived  as authoritarian. Edward Snowden's leaks have exposed
massive unwarranted surveillance operations by Western Governments, which may have chilling effects on citizens in countries used to the  assurance of being innocent until  proven guilty and  free  to say what they want,  especially  in spaces perceived  as private. Following J\0xFCrgen Habermas's formulation, losing those private spheres deprives individuals of a safe place to develop their  political identities and  can undermine their  ability to participate effectively once they are in their  public spheres.194
These threats to Internet freedom are increasing as the  world  moves further into  the  mobile  comput- ing  era and  are likely to have a negative impact on the  ability of youth  to express  themselves  in con- temporary forums. With an  ever-growing percent- age  of online interaction channelled through apps controlled  by private companies  such as Twitter, Facebook, Google and  Apple, users have less control over their  data  and  expose themselves to more risk as companies share their  data  with  Governments and  other third  parties.  Millions  of users in  devel- oping countries who have received free  access to Facebook on  their  mobile Internet plans do not real- ize they are actually on  the  Internet;195 they are not aware that  their  data  are traveling through the  same Internet cables that  several  Governments  are  sur- veilling, looking explicitly for social media metadata. Moreover, free  access to Facebook is not access  to the  Internet and  its rich  array of information sources and  communication forums.  This  is creating  new digital  divides in the  name of addressing old ones.
Digital divides
For  many youth,  the  biggest  barrier  to joining the world  of digital  activism  is still some  form of the
103
digital  divide or digital  inequality.196  While the  pro- liferation of mobile computing means that  cheaper Internet connections are being offered to more peo- ple worldwide, the  Facebook example suggests that it might not be a full, free  Internet they can afford to access. This means that  people who have the  great- est access and  the  time to develop their  skills and realize their  full potential will pull  away from their fellow citizens in terms of political agency. Moreover, this select  few will be  those civic hackers empow- ered to design and  fully exploit the  next generation of civic and  political technologies.
In studying youth engagement in participatory cul- ture,  Henry Jenkins and  his colleagues identified an insidious "participation gap", finding that  youth with poor access to the  necessary hardware and  software and  to safe,  scaffolded  environments  in  which  to develop skills for creating and  sharing media will fall behind.197  Essentially, such youth do not have equita- ble opportunities to engage in participatory politics and  digital  activism. The gap  is even worse for girls, who on average have significantly less access to edu- cational opportunities than boys do in many coun- tries. There is already a need to develop advanced digital  skills in combination with traditional political knowledge and critical thinking skills if one wishes to participate fully in contemporary politics. Youth who do not have access to their  own computers, smart- phones, or even feature phones will be  less able  to practice the  digital  skills of media making and  online participation necessary  to fully join the  online pub- lics that  are increasingly shaping the  political agen- das around the  world.
Technologies and communities that oppress
Even when youth make it online and  have the  skills necessary to participate, they can still be  marginal- ized by oppressive cultures of misogyny and  racism, as traditional forms of sociopolitical inequality bleed into  online  spaces.  Many of the  most open online spaces for  political discourse--sites such as Twitter and  reddit--also play host to bad  actors who belit- tle and  harass women and  racial  and  ethnic minor- ities for  creating and  sharing political messages of empowerment for their  respective groups.
Harassment in the  digital  age  is insidious because it follows the  victim home and  inherently expands the size and  scope of the  public witnessing the  sham- ing and  intimidation. This may result in the  spread of fear  across whole communities and  desensitization to violent language and  imagery.198  In many coun- tries, Internet-based violence directed at lesbian, gay, bisexual  and  transgender individuals  is a common occurrence, with the oppression sometimes amplified by practices such as videotaping and  uploading epi- sodes of abuse online. In addition, several countries pay for or otherwise promote harmful disinformation
online,  drowning  out anti-government  voices on social media and in comment sections across numer- ous websites, which adds to and  encourages online violence by authorities. This type of systematic ideo- logical oppression is something technology compa- nies should be working to address.
Twitter still struggles to identify nefarious bots on  its platform; these automated software programs pos- ing  as and  posting like real Twitter users have been used by a number of politicians around the  world, sometimes simply to artificially inflate the  popularity of a candidate but  also to silence legitimate politi- cal speech.199  In one instance, during a 2012 national election, all the  political parties were allegedly using Twitter  bots to repeatedly  send out messages to
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Support the growth of a free and open Internet
Millions of youth still need reliable,  open access to the Internet, not just for political purposes but also to meet their  educational and  economic needs. This does not mean providing free  Facebook access. Free and  open access to the  whole Internet also means continuing to combat online censorship and  mass surveillance activities around the  world, as these undermine polit- ical expression. Finally, this also means continuing to support efforts to address oppression online, includ- ing  those undertaken by Women,  Action,  and  the Media (WAM!) to audit Twitter's harassment reporting
201
make their  statements trend on  Twitter; one party even co-opted opposition  hashtags and  activated tens of thousands of bots,  in  effect drowning  out legitimate public speech.200
mechanisms and to recommend changes.
Teach digital and civic skills together
To ensure that   even those youth with  complete access to the  Internet  can  participate fully using contemporary technologies, steps must be taken to provide  sufficient scaffolding  for  young people so that  they are able  to gain  experience and  an under- standing of how these new systems of change and power operate. Youth should be  developing  their digital  media skills (both media production and  pro- gramming)  while  also  being  exposed to political knowledge and  critical and  systems thinking applied to social and  political problems and  changemaking. Educators should find  opportunities for application of these skills in practical changemaking projects at the  local level  that  help youth test their  theories of change, construct new media or technologies with a purpose, and  gain  confidence in their  ability to assume a civic leadership role.
105
It is essential to look to the  future of digital  activism, as the  next set of online platforms and  civic technol- ogies will be  designed  by today's  youth.  Ensuring that  future technologies are inclusive and  represent- ative in terms of who can use them and  how they can be  used requires a  community  of designers characterized by diversity--in terms of race, ethnic- ity, gender, sexuality, language and  socioeconomic status--who can design with that  diversity in mind. Providing access  to digital  tools,  relevant learning opportunities, and  pathways to political participa- tion that  validate youth as effective citizens will be critical to expanding youth political participation.
Fund digital activism impact studies
Research on digital  activism is rapidly expanding, but that  does not mean it is keeping up  with innovation in the  sector. Moreover, most of the  current research efforts are  theoretical  or  descriptive. Case  studies can provide detailed representations of successful digital  actions,  though cases of failure  need to be studied as well. In addition, efforts must be made to understand the  real impact of individual digital  activ- ism tactics such as online petitions, meme sharing, or calling for  celebrity attention on  Twitter. Causal studies are needed to better understand this space and  to inform the  design of future forms of activ- ism and  civic technology. Politically engaged youth can and  should  be  at  the  forefront of performing this research as both practitioners and  scholars. The upcoming generation of researchers deserves fund- ing  to make sense of the  important innovations in digital  activism their  fellow youth are devising.
Take the lead  and take responsibility:
musts for youth and Governments
Youth should  and   undoubtedly  w ill continue  to invent new forms and  uses of media and  technology to express themselves, set agendas, organize politi- cally, and  press for change in the  world. Digital activ- ism represents a space in which youth practitioners are uniquely positioned to serve as civic and  political leaders by repurposing existing platforms for  new civic purposes and  capitalizing on  the  democratic opportunities  available to those  with  the  requisite skills and  technology access. Youth should support their  peers through collaboration,  mentoring  and advocacy to ensure that  more young people  can participate civically and  politically using digital  tools. Importantly, youth who ascend to leadership roles in traditional institutions of corporate or government power should push for reforms that  make those insti- tutions more accessible, transparent and  responsive to current and  future generations of actualizing citizens. Governments may be  able  to address the mistrust and  disengagement characteristically asso- ciated with traditional political processes by engag- ing  more authentically with youth both online and offline. This means not only promoting civic hacking or creating more efficient channels of official com- munication, but  also strengthening protections for freedom of speech, assembly, the  press, and  privacy so that  youth digital  activists do not suffer the  chill- ing effects of government and  corporate censorship and  surveillance and  are  not criminalized or casti- gated for non-violent political activity.

COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT
OVER the past few decades, greater attention has been given to youth engagement at all levels within the development agenda. There has been increased recognition of the value of young people's partici- pation as it pertains to both youth and wider devel- opment, as well as formal acknowledgement of the need to actively address the many challenges facing a growing youth population, including unemploy- ment and underemployment, poverty, inequality, political unrest, and social exclusion.
\0xA9 UNICEF/UN06479/Anmar. A basketball game at Al-Yaqatha High School in Kirkuk's Arafa District.
Involving youth--as collaborators, team members, leaders and  decision makers--in addressing the  day- to-day issues that  affect them offers a broad range of benefits to both young people and  the  community, from greater community connectedness and  social awareness of the  individual  to enhanced participa- tory decision-making and  democratic governance in community institutions (see boxes 4.1 and 4.2 for more detailed benefits). Such involvement also sends youth the message that  their participation has intrinsic value.
Although the  extent of their  participation has varied, young people have always been actively engaged at the  community level  through volunteerism, peace- building efforts and  sporting activities. Young peo- ple  engage for  a number of reasons ranging from self-actualization and  peer recognition to the  desire
to solve problems, make changes or fight injustice through social or  political activism.202   Young peo- ple  are  often more motivated  by the   immediate and  short-term outcomes of engagement, while for adults  community  involvement  tends to be  more focused on the  long-term impact.203
Engagement at the  community level  often provides young people  with  their  first experience  of active participation in a cause or activity, serving as a gate- way to further and  broader engagement throughout life as well as opportunities for  leadership building. Young people are increasingly motivated to engage with issues, causes or movements that  are meaning- ful to them and the communities in which they live.204
Over the  past few decades, young people have been
gradually moving away from engagement in insti- tutionalized structures (such as electoral activities and  political parties) towards greater involvement in cause-oriented political activism. At the  same time,
 		the  rise of social media and advance of new ICTs and
mobile technology has provided young people with greater opportunity to engage within in their  com- munities in new and  innovative ways.
Youth-focused and  youth-led organizations  often provide the  first experience of intentional engage- ment for  young people at  the   community  level. Organizations such as the  Scouts can draw together children and  youth at an  early age,  teaching them
CHAPTER
4
valuable life skills through focused voluntary activ- ity. Integrating intentional learning and  education in youth engagement at the  community level  can con- tribute significantly to youth development. Activities such as volunteering, peacebuilding and  sport not only engage youth in the  activity itself, but  also offer the  possibility for young people to develop special- ized skills and  knowledge in the  areas of leadership, teamwork,  communication,  peer-to-peer mentor- ship, problem solving, decision-making, negotia- tion and  mediation, and  intercultural understanding. Furthermore, evidence suggests that  involving youth at the  community level  in grass-roots causes, groups and  activities increases the  likelihood that  they will engage in political processes.205
In this chapter, the  changing trends and  concepts sur- rounding engagement at the  community level  are explored in the  contexts of volunteerism (Sarah Huxley), peacebuilding (Lakshitha Saji Prelis) and sport for devel-
order to promote the  well-being of a specific group or society as a whole.
The notion of volunteering  can be  quite fluid  and broadly encompasses many forms of civic engage- ment.  For  example,  according  to the  most recent State of the World's Volunteerism Report, the  terms "volunteering" and  "social activism" are not mutually exclusive. "Volunteering and  social action converge and  overlap around creating opportunities for  par- ticipation: social activism starts at exactly the  same premise  as volunteering--people  giving time  who want to make a change in their  community".206
At its most basic, volunteerism often works to fill gaps in service provision for those living  in poverty,207 and while volunteering is often perceived as those "with"
opment (Selina Khoo and Andre Matthias M\0xFCller).	 	
VOLUNTEERISM
The nature and  practice of voluntary  activity  are wide  ranging and  have been subject to change. Volunteering has traditionally been viewed as an altruistic endeavour carried out by an individual for the  purpose of providing charity, support or assis- tance to a  specific  community  and/or  project in
helping those "without", volunteers are  themselves diverse in nature. Indeed, in Africa, "much volunteer- ing is done by the  poor for the  poor".208
In recent decades, the  practice of volunteering and voluntary service has increasingly been viewed as a give-and-get proposition, whereby individuals offer their  time and effort to a cause but  expect, in return, to develop skills and  gain experience. In some cases, vol- untary activity is used as a means of obtaining expe- rience in a specific area  to bolster a young person's curriculum vitae (CV) or resume as he or she searches for employment. Volunteerism is seen to have added value among recent graduates who are potentially facing long periods of unemployment or underem- ployment as a result of the  global economic crisis.
The period of "waithood"--a time of stagnation in the  transition from youth to adulthood--is becom- ing  longer for  many young  people worldw ide. Facing delays in the  progression from school to work, marriage and  family formation, youth often see voluntar y activ ity  a s a  way to f ill the   gap. However, the  potential exists for  young people to become long-ter m volunteers  rather than tran- sitioning  to the  labour  market,  which can have a significant impact  on  youth development.  Added
recognized in many sectors, leading some employ- ers to ignore  the  value  and  benefits of voluntary activity among prospective employees.
T he  upsurge in  "voluntourism"--where  a  person travels  abroad to volunteer  on a community  pro- ject for a specified short-term period--has also had implications for volunteerism and  brings into ques- tion the  sustainability  of such endeavours for  the receiving communities.
With  the  development of relevant ICT  platforms, online voluntary service has become increasingly p opular  among young p eople,  prov iding   them w ith  a means to work w ith  a community  and /or project any where in  the   world  f rom their   ow n home. Young people are  able  to quickly mobilize others via  social media sites and  campaigns; this less formal but  enormously effective form of mass volunteerism  is challenging  historic  notions and definitions of volunteerism.
to  this  is  the  fact  that  the  skills  and  ex perience	 	
gained  throughout voluntary  activity  are  still not
BOX 4.1.
BENEFITS OF YOUTH ENGAGEMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL
--Pat Dolan and Mark Brennan
Young people who are involved in their  communi- ties feel  that  they are valued and  taken seriously by other community  members.a   They often receive recognition for their  contributions and  tend to have relatively high self-esteem.b  Helping others can bring great satisfaction, contribute to happiness, and  make young people feel  part  of something  bigger than themselves.c  Assuming some form of responsibility or leadership can engender feelings of efficacy and being able  to make a difference. Young volunteers often have a sense of contributing to shared norms or values so that  they feel  "at home rather than out of place" in their  communities.d  Flanagan and  Levine point out that  engaging with peers singularly and  in groups helps  young people form social  networks, build  social  capital  and  connect to opportunities.e Young people may enjoy increased independence
and  altruistic capacity, enabling them to shift their focus from their  own problems to the  needs of oth- ers. Youth also benefit from more and  better social support from others, which has a proven connection to better mental health and  well-being.f
YOUTH CIVIC AC TION: BENEFIT S FOR
INDIVIDUAL S
    Enjoyment, fun  and  friendship;
 	Enhanced skills in areas such as group work, research, needs assessment, planning, pro- gramme evaluation, and  media campaign development and  execution;
 	Strengthened capacity to participate effec- tively in the  community and  contribute to its betterment;
    Greater community connectedness;
    Greater social awareness;
    A positive sense of self and  identity;
 	Enhanced social support, resilience and well-being;
 	Opportunities to provide organizational leadership;
    Academic and  career development;
 	Development of personal networks and  social capital.
BOX 4.2.
BENEFITS OF YOUTH ENGAGEMENT FOR THE COMMUNITY
--Pat Dolan and Mark Brennan
Youth civic engagement benefits not only the  indi- viduals involved but  also their  communities and wider society. Supportive groups, organizations and communities can provide opportunities for  young people to connect with others, participate in mean- ingful activities, develop skills, and  feel  safe, secure and  valued. Crucially, by engaging in civic activities, young people can help create the types of communi- ties that  are needed for positive youth development. According to Brennan,a  the  contributions of young people to community development have often been overlooked  or  underestimated,  even though it  is known that  community and  resiliency (the capacity to cope under stress) contribute significantly to the well-being of youth. More simply, strong communi- ties are needed to promote youth resiliency and  vice versa. Communities can benefit from youth partici- pation in the  identification of problems and solutions relevant to young people and  the  community as a whole. Collaborative civic action creates connected- ness between community members and  highlights the  importance  of young people as civic  actors. Research has shown that  youth civic engagement can help young people develop the  capacity to serve in organizations and  eventually transition into com- munity leaders who contribute to the  long-term suc- cess and  sustainability of community development efforts.b  Furthermore, youth civic engagement can enhance the  democratic process by bringing new energy, ideas and  perspectives into the  community.
YOUTH CIVIC AC TION: BENEFIT S FOR
COMMUNITIES
 		The negotiation of joint solutions to social and civic problems and  inequalities;
 	Stronger community networks, identity, attach- ment and  capacity;
 	Better recognition of young people as contrib- utors to the  development of their  communities and  society;
 	Enhanced participatory decision-making and  democratic governance in community institutions;
 	Renewal and  sustainability of community devel- opment efforts through the  injection of new lifeblood.
CHAPTER
4
YOUTH ENG AGEMENT IN
PE ACEBUILDING
With  close to 600 million  young people living  in conflict-affected  or  fragile  contexts,209   youth have a significant  role to play  in  peacebuilding  efforts. Although young people have always been involved in peacebuilding, activities and programmes focused on the  specific role of youth in peacebuilding are rel- atively new.
Just  as youth are  not homogeneous,  the  roles of young people in conflict and  post-conflict settings are  diverse, ranging from activist  to dissident  and from peacemaker to conflict aggravator.210
Much attention is being focused, particularly by the mainstream media, on  the  role of youth--especially young men--in instigating or perpetuating conflict and  violence, either via recruitment as armed soldiers or as instigators of armed conflict themselves. Indeed,
is unfair, as the  majority of young people worldwide espouse the  ideals of peace and  security.
Indeed, large numbers of youth are engaged in com- munity-based activities at the  grass-roots level  and are  most often on  the  front lines of peacebuilding efforts.211  With the  right  opportunities and  targeted activities that  build  on  their  special skills and  capaci- ties, young people can be effective agents of change within the  community.
However, whether or not this happens can depend greatly on  the  approach applied to peacebuilding in its specific context. As Professor Alan Smith, Ulster University,  explains  (Box 4.3.)  young people  can be  viewed as either positive stakeholders who are sought out to be actively involved in the  peacebuild- ing  process or they can be perceived as threats and excluded from the  process altogether.
throughout 2014 and 2015, Western media focused	 	
disproportionately on the numbers of young men and young women joining the  group Islamic State of Iraq and  the  Levant. Far less attention has been directed towards the  role of young people in peacebuilding. The perpetuation  of the  view  of young people  as instigators of violence rather than as peacebuilders
BOX 4.3.
APPROACHES TO PEACEBUILDING AND THE ROLE  OF YOUTH
--Alan Smith
A young person's role in peacebuilding can depend on  the  nature of the  peacebuilding efforts in place. Alan Smith, Professor of Education at Ulster University, notes two broad approaches to peacebuilding.
The first is a neoliberal approach, which focuses on establishing  dialogue between  political  actors and securing a cessation of violence. Youth are often per- ceived mainly as a threat to security, and  their  poten- tial as peacebuilders is neglected. One of the  main criticisms of the  neoliberal approach is that  it tends to focus on  reversion to the  status quo once hostilities have ceased; often, this involves bringing together political actors in a coalition to govern and  revive the economy. This approach is frequently criticized for not addressing systemic issues and  inequalities and for failing to serve the  interests of those who often are the  most marginalized and disadvantaged.
An alternative approach places much more empha- sis on  social justice, building on  Galtung's concepts of "negative peace" (stopping violence) and  "positive peace" (addressing the  fundamental causes of vio- lence). This approach also has strong links to critical theory by feminist thinkers such as Nancy Fraser, in which transformation and  change are key elements and  social justice is achieved through, for example, the  redistribution of social, economic and  political power and  resources and  the  recognition and  rep- resentation of groups and  populations previously marginalized  and  discriminated against,  including youth in many cases.
When involving  youth in  peacebuilding  efforts,  it is important to establish whether specific youth engagement programmes are focused primarily on keeping the  peace or are committed to addressing structural causes of violence, inequalities in society, and  historical grievances between groups in order to bring about real transformative change in society.
CHAPTER
4
In  recognising  the  positive  role that  young peo- ple   play  in  p eacebuilding,  the   United  Nation s Inter-agency Network on  Youth Development con- vened a Working  Group on  Youth  Participation in Peacebuilding21 2 .  The Working  Group developed a  set of "Guiding  P rinciples for  Young People's Participation in  Peacebuilding"213   to offer overar- ching guidance on  meaningful youth engagement and  participation,  especially  in  conflict  or  transi- tion  settings.  The Principles  offer  guidance  to key stakeholders,  including  Governments,  UN entities, donors, national and  international non-governmen- tal organizations and  civil society actors.
In addition, the  Working Group has released a "Practice  Note on  Young People's  Participation in Peacebuilding"214  which aims to inform policymakers and  donors of key strategic and  programming con- siderations for supporting young people's participa- tion to peacebuilding.
YOUTH ENG AGEMENT THROUGH SP ORT
Sport is a popular  pursuit  in  which  young people regularly engage  and  can include myriad types of physical activity contributing to fitness, well-being and  social  engagement.215   Many young people of
all ages participate in sport--ranging from play and
 		recreation to organized competitive and  non-com-
petitive activity--at the  community level. Schools, sporting  clubs  and   recreation centres  provide  a meeting place for youth to engage with each other in a safe environment where they can develop skills such as teamwork and  collaboration.
Sport  is being  increasingly  recognized  as a  tool for education, capacity-building and  community engagement,  and  in  recent decades,  sport-based development initiatives targeting youth have been on  the  rise. The benefits sport provides to individ- uals and  communities are manifold. For the  young person, sport not only offers opportunities for  play and  self-expression; it can also foster physical and
117
4
emotional development and  can constitute an alter- native  to harmful  activities  such as drug use and criminal pursuits. At the  community level, sport can provide a platform for members of the  community to come together, bridging ethnic, racial, religious and  other divides, and  can be a useful component of peacebuilding and  social integration efforts.216
In particular, sport can be used as a tool to engage disad- vantaged youth and  youth at risk, many of whom may otherwise be hard to reach. Youth who are no longer in the  formal education system, young people susceptible and vulnerable to joining gangs, and youth who are iso- lated from other forms of youth engagement can often find a medium for engagement through sports.
There is increasing recognition of the  role that  sport plays in bringing young people together and  in pro- moting  civic  engagement and  youth development. However, in and  of itself, sport is not a panacea for youth development and  social integration. Sport can be an exclusory activity, particularly for young people with disabilities, young migrants, and  young women; ensuring the full and meaningful inclusion of these and other such groups in sport-based activity is necessary for successful sport-for-development programming.
an organization working with vulnerable youth in an after-school programme may include sporting activ- ities to reinforce specific skills and  attributes such as collaboration, teamwork and  negotiation, which has a positive impact on other work being carried out.
Sporting activities and programmes must be strongly
linked to existing initiatives and work within the com-	 	
munity focused on youth development. For example,
RECONCEPTUALIZING YOUTH VOLUNTARISM: WHO DECIDES?
Sarah Huxley
INTRODUC TION
This is a time of great transition. The world is fac- ing many interconnected challenges and  upheavals, including growing inequality, climate change, com- plex  conflicts,  and  increasing  resource scarcity.  At the  same time, there is a world full of young women and  young men who are drivers of social change.217
Youth218 from all backgrounds are passionate about improving their  lives, their  families' lives, their  com- munities and  the  world around them. Volunteerism is at the  heart of how diverse groups of young men and  women  seek social transformation, but  much more needs to be done in terms of conceptualizing what youth volunteerism  could be  from the  per- spective of young people themselves, and  when it becomes disempowering  or  co-opted and  should give  way to other forms of civic engagement.
This  thought piece explores the   historical  roots of youth volunteerism  and  some of the  emerging trends in  the  past three decades before touching
upon the  benefits for  young people and  society as a whole. It then moves to a discussion of alternative perspectives (especially for those living  in poverty) before proposing  five  guiding  principles aimed  at encouraging a deeper level  of analysis that  is cogni- zant of diverse motivations, acknowledges different types of youth volunteerism (activism), and  ensures flexibility within an ever-changing external environ- ment. The piece concludes with a summary of key challenges, opportunities and  recommendations.
NORM ATIVE DEFINITIONS AND HISTORIC AL ROOT S'
N or m a t i v e   ( We s t e r n )   d ef i n i t i on s  o f   y o u t h volunteerism focus on a young individual's offer of free  work on  a project or series of activities for  an organization or institution. Yet  this is by no means the  only definition, and  there are many variants that focus on the  giving of time and  talents for charitable, educational, military or other purposes. At the  core of volunteerism is a moral imperative to engage in
 		worthwhile activities primarily for the  good of oth-
ers--but also for  the  benefit of the  individual con- cerned in terms of their  skills development,  sense of identity and  self-worth, and  socialization within a community.
It  is interesting  to note some of the   differences bet ween youth and   adult /senior  volunteer i sm .
According   to  a  2010  st u dy  publi she d   by  the Corporation for National and  Community Service (CNCS),219  around 59 per cent of 12- to 18-year olds220 in the  United States were engaged in youth volun- teer  work in 2009. Brief 1 in the  CNCS Youth Helping America series indicates that  in 2004, more than 15 million  teenagers participated in formal  volunteer activities, "contributing more than 1.3 billion  hours of service"; the  youth volunteer rate  of 55  per  cent was almost double the  adult rate  of 29 per  cent for that  year.221  The Brief notes that  "teens tend to serve fewer hours and  with less regularity than their  adult counterparts.  The typical youth volunteer contrib- utes 29 hours of service each year, compared to 52 hours for  the  adult volunteer population".222   In the mainstream culture of the  United States, youth vol- unteerism  is a popular  form of civic  engagement. Such activity is more likely to continue into adult- hood if undertaken when young--especially if a par- ent  volunteers as well.
Although the  United Nations Declaration of Universal Human Rights  provides  a relevant  framework for signatories,  the  questions of what makes a good citizen and  how this can be  demonstrated through civic  engagement are  the  focus of heated debate. Therefore, it is crucial to explore the  historical roots of youth volunteerism,  which  is arguably  key to understanding citizenship and  the  package of rights and  responsibilities associated with it.
Volunteering was originally associated with military service in the  seventeenth century, when the  French noun voluntaire first appeared.223   Volunteerism  in a Western context thus has its origins in a cultural psyche based on the  collective defence of one's own country, principles and  values. What is fascinating is
the  inherent tension embedded in what it means to be a volunteer; the  claim is that  this is based on  "free will", but  State/societal pulls can make it something else entirely, and  forced conscription or "volunteer" conscription is at the  epicentre of this tension.224 The fundamental exertion of free  will can be understood from a collective or societal perspective, as well as from an individual's point of view.
In  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries there was a shift from the  military draft  to voluntary civic engagement and community service, which focused on  collective  organizing  to address the  systemic social  injustices  of those times;  examples  include the  anti-slavery and  women's suffrage movements. By the  twentieth century, volunteering was associ- ated with charitable organizations and  large  inter- national aid programmes such as the  Red  Cross and
Girl Guides. Youth volunteering programmes were seeded with  the  emergence of Voluntary  Service Overseas (1958) and  the  Peace Corps (1961) against the  backdrop of independence movements in Africa and  Asia.
YOUTH VOLUNTEERING
IN RECENT DEC ADES AND
THE POLITIC AL ECONOMY
As the  youth unemployment crisis  has intensified over the   past few decades,225   grow ing  numbers of young people from diverse  backgrounds have turned to volunteering  as a means of developing their  skills and  building their  CVs. This trend derives in part  from the  fact  that  many State and  non-gov- ernmental agencies now regard youth volunteering as a prerequisite for paid  employment, especially for entry-level jobs. Similarly, young people often see volunteering not as "lost" time but  as an investment in their  career of choice. In Myanmar, for  example, several volunteer Youth Fellows226  have gone on  to paid  employment in social work or development or are  seeking  to create their  own social  enterprises with a human-rights-based approach.
Although youth volunteerism can be  a springboard for sustained  youth-led civ ic  engagement, 2 27    it requires reconceptualization  in the  present global context. In today's political economy, volunteerism can be  used by States as a mechanism for  obtain- ing  free  labour from citizens; by non-governmental organizations as a means of providing opportunities for the  better off to "help" the  less well off (at its worst a form of neocolonialism);  and  by businesses  and youth development programmes as a way to pro- vide  young people with work experience (a societal
narrative around moulding youth). All of these sce- narios present a dynamic of those with power pro- viding something for those without.
The point  is that,  depending  on  one's  perspective, youth volunteering can be very empowering or very disempowering, and just because there is a narrative of morality and  entitlement does not mean that  it should not be  challenged and  brought into the  twenty-first century. The time should be  taken to answer these questions: Who is volunteering for whom? Why are they volunteering? What does everyone get  out of it (in terms of the  cost/benefit to the  individual and  the social consequences)?
SKIMMING THE SURFACE: WHAT IS THE VALUE OF YOUTH VOLUNTEERISM?
Much has been written by sociologists, international organizations and  government entities on  the  value of youth engagement. Some observations that  have emerged from the  discourse include the  following:
 	Young  Westerners  participating in  volunteer tourism,  or  "voluntourism",  are  often provided
w ith   oppor tunities  for   global  engagement, networking,  career development,  intercultural competence building,  problem solv ing   and psychological support (life  skills).228   One study on international volunteering and  service (IVS) in Australia notes that  "for these projects to avoid public critiques and  negative outcomes, they need to harmonize  personal  and  institutional ex pectations w ith  real  volunteer  capacities. Thus, until IVS programs in the university context distance  themselves  from a development aid discourse,  they  will potentially  fall  under the umbrella of \0x2018neo-colonialism'".229
 	A study carried out by CNCS in 2004 concludes that  volunteering helps young people succeed-- and  benefits society as a whole--in  the  sense that  "youth who volunteer are less likely to engage in risky behaviour, are more likely to feel connected to their  communities, and  tend to do better in school".230  Further exploring the  link to education,  the  study asserts that  "the  success that  teens find  in their  academic life is related to their likelihood of volunteering. [The researchers] found that  the  higher their  grade point average, the  more likely it was that  teens volunteered and volunteered regularly.  However, it is likely that the  relationship of grades to volunteering is also part  of a larger  set of positive expectations and social networks for  this group. Those students with high academic achievement may be  more engaged in other activities, may have more opportunities to be asked to volunteer, and  may feel  more empowered to effect change in their community".231  It is thus implied that  youth who volunteer can achieve more and  contribute effectively to the  labour force in adulthood.
 	Among youth living   in  poverty,  volunteering is often viewed as a way to improve prospects for  securing employment, as it allows them to network and  potentially strengthen their  skills. As noted by one young focus group participant in  a  2006 study on   volunteering  in  Malaw i, "Somebody  ...  [volunteers]  b ecau se he   ha s nothing else to do ... but  once he gets a better job or something permanent, then he will get  out."232
 	Direct political participation may occur in multiple contexts. Young members of parliament--many of whom started their  careers as volunteers--can bring the  concerns  of young constituents  into the  heart of traditional political institutions. Just as important as mainstream political participation are the  informal, grass-roots modes of civic engagement,  which  also  tend to develop  off the  back  of youth volunteering experiences. Volunteerism plays an  important part  in laying the  foundations for lifestyle and  career pathways to sustained civic engagement.
These observations offer insight  into  some of the motivations  and  reasons for  volunteering  among
young women and  men.233  Below is an exploration of alternative perspectives on  youth volunteerism, with attention given to the  importance of reflecting on power dynamics and to the  problematic nature of extended periods of volunteering.
ALTERNATIVES: IS THE LABEL "VOLUNTEER" ACTUALLY
DISEMPOWERING FOR
THOSE LIVING IN POVERT Y?
Youth volunteerism can be a negative, prolonged or forced experience. At the  ActionAid Design-a-Thon workshops held in Uganda and  Bangladesh in the summer of  2015,234   which encouraged the  use of social design to think  through challenges and  solu- tions linked  to youth unemployment, it became apparent that  for some of the  fiercely intelligent but largely unemployed participants, the  prolonged state of  unemployment (despite their  academic creden- tials and  experience) was making them long-term volunteers--in the  sense that  they could often pick
up  small, insecure pieces of work for little or no pay. Young people in  such circumstances  are  stuck  in a period of "waithood".235   The questions arise: For how long can a young person continue to volunteer? When does it become an  act of civic engagement that  no longer benefits the  young men or  women involved?  While  youth volunteerism  can be  com- mended for  finding value  in  an  exchange system that  goes beyond financial gain, it can also become corrupted and  exploitative, especially in a world of increasing inequality.
Within this context of prolonged/forced/unpaid work, the  position  of disadvantaged  groups--including the  disabled, those in poverty, and  young women-- deserves special attention. A number of organiza- tions involved in youth volunteering efforts focus on the  challenges faced by one or more of these groups; ActionAid's Young Urban Women Project, for exam- ple, highlights young women's contributions to fam- ily and  society that  often go unnoticed.236
There is also something of a myth regarding expe- rience and  what youth have to offer. Who decides what experience is within the  framework of an activ- ity or project? If peer-to-peer facilitation is needed,
 		then a young person may well have much more to
offer than an  adult facilitator in terms  of skills and experience--particularly within the  realm of modern technologies and  processes. However, traditional assumptions within an  adult-centred power struc- ture  may mean that  the  resources youth can bring to volunteering are never tapped--which effectively serves to devalue their  role and  contributions.
There has to be  an  element of choice and  free  will at both the  individual and  collective levels. It may be
argued that  much of the  youth volunteering occur- ring  today is prolonged, and  that  the  term itself has become overly  neutral,  reflecting  a soft,  glass-is- half-empty  view  of youth.  Rather than identifying them as young volunteers, it might be better to think and  speak of them as young activists, as the  latter term is empowering237  and  acknowledges a diverse collective of capable changemakers.238
Volunteerism  is not intrinsically  good or  positive just because its traditional premise is "doing good". There needs to be  far more consideration given to the question of who benefits over time. It is no longer acceptable, in an interconnected world focused on genuine development and  respect for human rights, to assert prejudice and  say that  youth volunteerism is inherently good because it keeps otherwise idle young people occupied and  offers them the  chance to obtain experience.240
BOX 4.4.
KEY PRINCIPLES OF YOUTH VOLUNTEERISM
Youth volunteerism can be  hugely beneficial, but  it is often presented in a narrow or biased way.239  It is essential  to consider  the  diverse motivations driving young volunteers, to rec- ognize and  support different types of youth volunteerism (activism), and  to ensure flexibil- ity within an ever-changing external environ- ment. The present thought piece is intended to encourage a deeper level  of analysis based on the  following five principles:
1.    Altruism is not always the  starting point, especially for those living  in poverty; vol- unteerism  may be  driven by the  desire to sur vive   or may be  an  expression  of resilience.
2.    Youth volunteerism  is a fluid  and  shift- ing  series of activities that  can take  place within a variety of formal and  informal spaces for civic engagement.
3.    Young women and young men are co-cre- ators of the  ways they want to engage in acts of social good.
4.   Prolonged experiences and  the  lack of monetary compensation can devalue vol- unteer contributions  and  can ultimately become disempowering.
5.    At its best, youth volunteerism is a collec- tive endeavour that  seeks to address social injustices and  reduce structural inequali-
ties such as patriarchy and  ageism.
125
KE Y CHALLENGES
AND OPP ORTUNITIES
Some of the  main challenges for youth volunteering may be summarized as follows:
 	Youth are in danger of being co-opted. Are young people actually provided with enabling, support- ive and  mutually beneficial environments, or are they doing community work for which the  State should assume responsibility (with support from aid agencies and  civil society)?
 	Institutional forms of youth volunteerism do not always support the  human rights agenda. Built into youth volunteering should be  mechanisms to guarantee freedom of speech and  assembly, as these rights are being increasingly threatened across the  globe.
 	Volunteerism is often prolonged to the  point that it becomes a negative experience in many young people's lives. There should be open discussion about whether opportunities for payment exist, especially given the  lack of employment oppor- tunities for youth (and  the  implications this may have for their  dependents).
The following is a summary of opportunities linked to youth volunteerism:
 	Volunteerism constitutes part  of an  alternative socioeconomic model.  T he  challenge  men- tioned above may also be  interpreted as an opportunity whereby unpaid volunteerism could potentially  be  part  of an  alternative  approach to communit y  development that   by pa sses the  market economy. Anand Aditya expands upon this concept, referring to volunteerism in Nepal as "a theory that  subsumes the  ultimate
fulfilment of the  human individuality in broader social callings and defines it as the  best flowering of the  individuals' innate capacity for self-actual- ization.  [It] is an emerging movement  a shift from  material consumption toward voluntary simplicity,  from technological  growth toward post-materialism, and  from growth fetish toward evolution".241  While much needs to be  qualified in this ideology, it has resonance.
 	Online  volunteer  platforms  and  other relevant ICT applications are expanding rapidly and  pres- ent  unlimited possibilities. ICT resources are dramatically reshaping youth volunteerism in a number of areas, including emergency response. During  the  recent earthquakes in Nepal,  huge numbers of young people contributed time and effort through social media such as Facebook, Google and  Twitter to deliver services242  outside formal  aid  mechanisms.  The impact  of online youth volunteering  has yet to be  fully  under- stood,  in part  because it is growing  so rapidly and  expanding in multiple directions. Crowd- funding, project management and  data  gather- ing sites are all facilitating the  emergence of new forms of volunteerism--most notably the  fusion of traditional and  cyber-volunteering. One com- munity of practice helping to redefine youth vol- unteerism by operating both online and  offline is Edgeryders, which works to invest "time and
effort into solving the  global societal, econom- ic, environmental, security and  energy problems threatening  Europe and   humanity  in  gener- al. [They] care about things like open access to knowledge; openness and  transparency of gov- ernment; food security; smart communities; decentralised economic architecture; free/open source software; and  art".243  For Edgeryders, both the  material and  virtual worlds  are  invaluable spaces that  mutually reinforce one another. This dual  model is likely to inform much of the  youth volunteering activity occurring in the  future.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Youth volunteerism (activism) is evolving as the world changes. Opportunities for digital  engagement are emerging alongside volunteer activities on the ground. However, there are aspects of volunteerism that  effectively hold young people back and  reinforce inequality--particularly among young women.
The present thought piece has sought to explore the power dynamics behind  youth volunteerism  and to encourage those seeking to volunteer and  those who work with young volunteers to consider the  five principles outlined above in future research and  in programme planning, development and  execution. Youth volunteerism  (activism)  needs to be  able  to breathe,  evolve  and  expand; some  risks may have to be taken to find  alternatives to practices that  per- petuate injustice and  inequality--including seeking partnerships in unexpected places.
Agenc ies ,   in st it ut ion s ,   and   other  for m al  plat- forms for  civic engagement are no longer the  only
mechanisms  for  deciding  and  shaping  who youth volunteers (activists) are  and  what they do. In this digital  and  potentially more open age, policymakers and  institutional  decision  makers need to change their  approaches in order to motivate and  meet the needs of young volunteers;  other w ise,  they w ill cease to be  relevant. To what extent are  agencies, organizations, and  government entities enabling diverse  groups of youth to shape the  agendas on what youth volunteering should be?
There has been a dramatic increase  in  the  use of different artistic forms244 to challenge social norms, as evidenced by the  work of Afripedia, political car- toonists, photojournalists and  grass-roots groups such as Activista El Salvador.
Overall,  much more can be  done, especially  with regard to mobilizing adult-led (and  often male-dom- inated) spaces  to support and  advocate for youth agendas. What are young people's plans, and  what kind  of action can be  taken to ensure that  young women play a key role?
Youth volunteerism is a social contract, and  for too long young people have had  little  say in  defining the  terms of engagement.  This  needs to change. Societal norms and  life circumstances influence an individual's ability to exercise free  will and  demon- strate citizenship.  History  has shown that  people who volunteer  in  their  youth can shape not only
127
themselves, their  families and  communities, but  also society as a whole. Nelson Mandela demonstrated this as National Volunteer-in-Chief for the  Defiance Campaign of 1952, tackling apartheid at the  age  of
34. There are thousands of young men and  women in  the  world  at  this  very moment fighting social injustices. They need to be provided with appropri- ate support.

INTRODUC TION
The youth of today constitute the  largest generation the  world has ever seen,245  yet nearly 600 million of these young people live in conflict-affected or fragile States.246  Because they comprise such a large  share of the  population in many troubled countries, youth inevitably play a major role at every stage of con- flicts and  social movements. From the  uprisings in the  Middle East and  North Africa to the  rise of tech- nologically  savvy violent extremist  groups,  young leaders play pivotal roles in the  growing demand for major change. Policymakers and  practitioners can build  on  this momentum by encouraging youth par- ticipation that  is constructive, and  can mobilize the potential of this generation of eager peacebuilders by partnering with them to reduce violence, build resilience, and  contribute to development.
This shift has already begun, catalysing new ways policymakers  and  practitioners  engage and  sup- port young people in conflict and  fragile  contexts. Though the  "victims  and  villains"  paradigm is still prevalent  in  global discourse,  there  is g row ing appreciation  of the  multiple  and  complex  positive roles that  young people do play and  can build  on  in their  societies. This includes their  critical efforts in managing, mitigating and  preventing violent conflict and  building peace.
WHAT IS PE ACEBUILDING? Peacebuilding is a process that  encompasses a wide range of activities  ranging from formal  mediation and  reconciliation efforts to security sector reform and  intergenerational dialogue. It involves many dif- ferent actors including Governments and  civil soci- ety, the  media, artists, athletes and  everyday citizens. Peacebuilding activities can take  place at the  com- munity, regional, national and/or international levels, with all involved working towards a common goal. The Alliance  for  Peacebuilding  notes that  "peace- building ultimately supports human security--where people have freedom from fear, freedom from want, and  freedom from humiliation".247   Peacebuilding is generally  recognized  as a process  that  involves many entities addressing the  root causes of conflict, but  it is important to understand that  young peo- ple  are  affected by different forms of violence that may not relate directly to armed conflict itself. Johan
Galtung  (1969)248  identified three distinct  forms of
129
violence--structural,249 cultural,250 and direct.251 In expanding  peacebuilding  work,  it is important  to understand and  transform these types of violence. An effective conflict transformation model,252   pro- posed here, builds on  this premise towards a prac- tical  application  to programming  in  conflict  and fragile  situations. Essentially, change can be viewed at three levels:
1. Changing  the perception  of  self.
Conflicts inevitably mould the  self-identity of young people. A successful transformation can only take  place when people's identities are consistent with the  desired result. The types of change desired might include a fearful refugee becoming a reintegrated member of society or a perpetrator of violence evolving into a peace- builder and  bridge builder.
2. Changing  the perception  of  "the other".  A characteristic of conflict or violence is that  communication between conflicting par- ties breaks down,  the  parties become isolated, and  their  perceptions of one another diverge. Transformation requires that  all parties work to understand each other and  acknowledge the essential humanity of everyone involved.
3. Changing  the perception  of  the issues.  Conflicts emerge from disagreements over specific issues, and  the  situation often dete- riorates very quickly, with opposing parties focus- ing  more on  blaming  or  accusing  each other than on solving  the  problems at  hand.  One of the  requirements of peacebuilding should there- fore  be  to help parties focus  on  reconciling the issues that  constitute the  source of the  conflict
collegially and  without blame. If steps are taken to increase people's knowledge and  understand- ing  of the  issues,  to articulate  the  many differ- ent  perspectives that  exist and, when necessary, to identify and  explore any "unspoken" issues, it may be possible to better assist people in making decisions in a safe space, based on  their  interests rather than on fear.
YOUNG PEOPLE ' S PARTICIPATION IN PE ACEBUILDING
Young women and  young men play a multitude of roles in pre-conflict, conflict, and  post-conflict set- tings, serving as activists, dissidents and  vigilantes but  also as negotiators, mediators and  peacemak- ers.253   The notion that  youth "are  at  the  frontlines
of peace building" is one that  has been affirmed by many practitioners  and  scholars254  and  by United Nations  Secretary-General  Ban  Ki-moon.255   On 9
December 2015, the  United Nations Security Council un animou sly   adopted  resolut ion   2250,   which encourages increa sed  representation of young women and  young men in preventing and  resolving conflicts and  their  participation in peace processes and  dispute resolution mechanisms.256
A multi-countr y study on   child  and   youth par- ticipation in  peacebuilding--the  first of its  kind, in  Colombia,  Democratic Republic  of the  Congo and  Nepal--was  recently  undertaken by a global steering team comprising Peace Action Training and  Research Institute  of Romania  (PATRIR),  Save the   Children  Nor way  (Redd Bar na),  Search  for Common Ground (SFCG), United Network of Young Peacebuilders  (UNOY  Peacebuilders),  and   World
Vision International, and  was supported by 117 local young evaluators (children and  youth) and  two global evaluators. The study's main findings included the  following:257
 	Young peacebuilders often became more aware and  active citizens for peace.
 	Young peacebuilders increased peaceful cohabi- tation and  reduced discrimination.
    Young peacebuilders reduced violence.
 	Young peacebuilders increased support to vul- nerable groups.
The study also identified 11 factors influencing the impact  of child  and  youth  participation in  peace- building, as follows:258
 	Attitudes, motivation, and  commitment of chil- dren and  youth and  their  organizations;
 		 	Capacity,  knowledge, skills,  and  experience of
children and  youth;
 	Family attitudes and  support;
 	Cultural attitudes, beliefs, and  practices;
 	Key stakeholders' motivation, commitment, and support;
 	Awareness raising, sensitization, and  campaigns among key stakeholders  [including  access to information];
 	Culture, theatre, arts, and  sports as a means of engaging children and  youth;
 	Existence  and  implementation  of government laws, policies, strategies, and  provisions;
131
 	Financial and  material support given to child and youth participation in peacebuilding efforts;
 	Income  generation support for  marginalized groups;
    Conflict, political instability, and  insecurity.
From this and  related studies, a salient finding was that   young people's  participation in  peacebuild- ing  at an early age  had  a lasting, positive impact on their  involvement in school, family life and  the  com- munity,  helping  them develop  as individuals  and become responsible young adults.
Changing Social Norms: New narratives and youth alternative models to violence
Information and  communications media provide youth with powerful platforms for expression, allow- ing  their  message to reach an  extensive audience. These mechanisms  of interaction  provide  young people with outlets to engage with society and  their broader community in productive ways. One related theory of change holds that  at the  community level, the  presence of media programming and  social media will create a peacebuilding constituency that extends beyond the  confines  of a viewer-listener relationship. As the  user base increases, conversa- tion and  dialogue can also grow at the  societal level.
Young people are already using a creative mix of tra- ditional and  emerging communications media for peacebuilding. SFCG has used interactive media and role models to enable youth to learn  how to resolve conflicts non-violently. The Generation Grands Lacs radio  programme, for example, simulcast in Rwanda,
Burundi and  Eastern Democratic Republic  of the Congo, is co-hosted by two young journalists from two different countries on  a rotating basis. Through call-ins and  text  messaging, each radio  show incor- porates live question-and-answer sessions and inter- active discussions that  engage a broader audience.259
In  Democratic Republic  of the  Congo,  SFCG used Participatory Theatre for Conflict Transformation260 to enable local youth communities to observe and acquire conflict-management and  peacebuilding skills.  This  methodology was used to change the way young people dealt  with  conflict  by offering them a venue to test new ways of addressing conflict and  have those efforts immediately validated by their peers and  community members.
Throughout the  Middle East, most notably in Egypt, Tunisia and  Yemen, youth in recent years have learned how to make their  voices heard to influence change and  challenge the  political elite.
Increasingly,  the  peacebuilding  field  is learning to embrace an  integrated, informed model for  policy and  programming  that  engages young people as partners for peace.
EX A MPLES OF
the  National  Youth Policy  and  have felt  a strong
262
PROMISING PR AC TICE
Young  people's  participation  as an essential condition for successful peacebuilding.  The Process Approach Model for Community Peace, Recovery, and  Reconciliation (CPRR)261  is a mechanism for community-based conflict  resolution  and  reconciliation  that   allows for meaningful youth participation and  partnership. Designed for use in divided communities, the  Model encourages all members of a community, including youth, to uncover the  root causes of conflict and  the potential paths forward through dialogue. In Burundi, Kenya, the  Central African Republic, Guinea, South Sudan, Uganda, and  Ethiopia, the  Model recognizes the  role of young people within a community system. Rather than singling out youth as the  only important actors, this practice respects youth as partners to their adult counterparts and encourages everyone to play a role in community conflict resolution.
Young people's ownership, leader- ship and accountability  in  peace- building.  Other mechanisms  that  specifically promote the  participation of young people, includ- ing  youth leadership  models,  have also  y ielded promising results. In Timor-Leste, the  Government supported the  creation of the  National Youth Council and  the  Youth Parliament in order to build  the  capac- ity  of young people to be  civically  engaged.  One important outcome of this positive relationship and engagement was the  creation of a National Youth Policy based on evidence and  input from young per- sons. Since they contributed to its creation, young individuals and  their  associations largely supported
sense of ownership for it.
Similar  pro g rammes  and   p olic ies  desig ned  to enhance the  leadership capacity  of young people have been implemented  in  South Africa,  Tunisia, Lebanon, Nepal and  other areas and  have led to bet- ter relationships between youth and  their  communi- ties and Governments. In Tunisia, for example, where half of the  population is below the  age  of 30, a large number of young women and  young men mobilized to help build  a more democratic and politically inclu- sive system of government. SFCG, an  international conflict transformation and  peacebuilding organiza- tion, launched Empowering Young Change Makers in  Tunisia,  a programme that  worked with  young Tunisians to create Youth Leadership Councils (YLCs) in each of the  24 governorates.263  The youth in these Councils  built  strong networks  and  engaged with their  elected leaders and  peers from diverse politi- cal, geographic, and  socioeconomic backgrounds to address grievances and  differences constructively. In  doing  so,  they facilitated  open communication between youth and  elected  officials,  encouraged cooperative  action on  local  issues,  and  inspired
133
other youth to engage civically  through dialogue, social media, and  community advocacy.
A Mercy  Corps  publication  on  best practices and lessons learned in dealing with youth and  conflict emphasizes the  following:
"Engaging young people in the  project cycle will help nurture and  encourage emerging youth leaders to learn, to lead, and to identify areas that may be  of interest  for  future careers.  Further- more, inclusion of youth in project design and implementation provides youth with the  self-es- teem, connection to peers and  communities and a positive self-identity, all of which reduce vul- nerability to joining violent movements."264
As part  of Mercy Corps' Nepal programme, young people designed community projects (for which they  raised money)  and   subseq uently  built   and helped maintain them. By including young women and  young men in all phases of the  projects, Mercy Corps enabled young people to see themselves as responsible for their  future.265
Invest in intergenerational partner- ships. In young people's communities, many effective programmes have capitalized on  youth involvement  as a means to undermine  the  appeal of armed groups. A number of community-building initiatives employ a two-pronged approach aimed at both increasing "protective factors" against violence and  providing productive outlets for youth to voice grievances.  Policymakers  in  Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK)  and  the  Federally  Administered  Tribal Areas (FATA) in Pakistan have employed  this  strategy by using dialogue and  mediation to reduce incidents
of violence.266 Strengthening community resilience requires the  collaboration of diverse groups across multiple  sectors including  youth,  security  forces, political figures and  religious leaders.
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following  are  recommendations  policymak- ers and  practitioners might consider to strengthen youth participation in peacebuilding:267
 	Prioritize young people's participation and  pro- mote the  reality that  the  majority of young peo- ple worldwide do not participate in violence.
 	Respect the  experiences of all young people and  develop targeted strategies to include youth from different backgrounds.
 	Avoid stereotypical assumptions about gender norms and  focus on  the  roles that  girls,  boys, young men,  young women,  and  young trans- gender individuals can play in peacebuilding.
 	Enable young people's  ownership,  leadership, and  accountability in peacebuilding processes and  projects. (This would include access to pub- lic information)
 	Create  a safe268  environment  for  participation and  be sensitive to inequalities.
 	Involve young people in all phases of program- ming and  policy development.
 	Enhance the  knowledge, skills,  competencies, and  attitudes of youth.
 	Create or expand opportunities for intergeneration- al and  intergroup dialogue so young people may help bridge divides in their  communities.
 	Support policies  that  address the  full needs of young people.
 	Use an interdisciplinary approach when engag- i n g   yo u n g   p e o p le   i n   p e a c eb ui l d i n g.   T h e ground-breaking new  Guiding  Principles  on Young People's  Participation in  Peacebuilding recommend that  policymakers and  practitioners integrate economic, sociocultural, socio-politi- cal, and  human rights approaches in promoting peacebuilding among youth.
 	Identify youth participation as a critical compo- nent in achieving sustainable peace. This includes rejecting the  assumption that  a majority of youth engage in violence and  accepting the  reality that most young people  strive  for  and  are  actively involved in the  pursuit of peace and  stability.
In a recently published comprehensive literature review,269 the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) identifies the  following key gaps and  opportunities
relevant to youth peacebuilding programming:
 	A comprehensive and  nuanced understanding of youth and  their  contribution to peacebuilding needs to be developed.
 	It is important to acknowledge the  diversity of youth experiences rather than simply focusing on youth as victims,  troublemakers or peace- makers in conflict settings.  Young people par- ticipate  in  infor mal  gover nance and   peace structures in a wide range of contexts outside of those affected by armed conflict. More youth-led research and analysis is needed to create a better understanding of such diversity so that  positive youth voices and  identities are given the  atten- tion they deserve.
The multi-country,  multi-agency  evaluation  high- lights the  following recommendations:
 	Children  should be  engaged as peacebuild- ers from a young age  to ensure continuity and strengthen the  impact of their  participation. Children  and  youth should  be  integrated  into informal governance and  peace structures in a wide range of contexts, not only in situations of armed conflict.
 	Child and  youth participation in peacebuilding must be  supported by multiple stakeholders in a multitude of ways in order to strengthen the impact of their  contributions.
135
Policymakers:
 	Policymakers should develop a more compre- hensive understanding of young people's needs and  priorities. This will require further analysis of holistic and  cross-sectoral theories of change.
 	Governments should ensure that  national youth policies are evidence-based, cut across sectors, and  support active participation among youth.
 	Create  platforms  and  mechanisms  to engage young people in decision-making.
Practitioners:
 	Programmes should integrate mechanisms that provide  youth with  the  ability to monitor  and evaluate their  own work to support their  devel- opment and  growth.
 	Practitioners should  explore  the  possibility  of engaging youth-led organizations as advocates of youth inclusion  and  involvement  in  policy decisions.  Providing advocacy  training would offer young people the  opportunity to enhance their  leadership, mediation, negotiation, con- flict-resolution, communication, and  life skills, and  would allow them to contribute to rebuild- ing positive social norms.270
 	Work with youth-led organizations to establish participatory governance, monitoring and  eval- uation processes.
 	In   ad dit ion   to  fac ilitat in g   c ommunic at ion between decision makers and  youth, young people should engage in  dialog ue  w ith  the surrounding  community  as a  means of both
establishing  accountability  and  securing  local and  regional support.
 	Donors must allocate  long-term,  sustainable funding  and   material support to youth-- led organizations and networks, formal and informal youth groups, and  individual youth initiatives.271


YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN SPORT FOR DEVELOPMENT
Selina Khoo and Andre Matthias M\0xFCller
INTRODUC TION
Sport in the  modern sense is a hotly debated con- cept,  as there are  widely  varying opinions  on  the extent to which it is understood to incorporate the many different forms of bodily movement, play, and games existing worldwide. Sport--specifically athlet- ics--was historically a religious activity performed to please the  gods in ancient Greece. Another impor- tant purpose of athletic training was preparation for wars and  violent conflicts. In comparison, modern sport is rather secular in nature and  is performed to accommodate various  (arguably  more peace- ful)  motives  such as promoting  health  or getting together with others. This also means that  it is more inclusive of a wider audience that  can be mobilized for humanitarian purposes. Pierre  de Coubertin was among the  first who had  the  vision of sport being a universal movement of education towards peace, tolerance  and  development  when he  initiated the first modern Olympic Games in Athens in 1896. He likely thought that  it was the  younger generation that  would benefit most from the  lessons sport could teach because competitors  were mostly  younger people who would  eventually  be  responsible  for future development.
One reason sport rose to become one of the  pillars of development efforts (and  especially peacebuild- ing)  relates to its inherently non-violent approach to nationalism, which stands in clear contrast to how
nationalism  was expressed a  few centuries  ago (through warfare and  killing). Sport "conflicts" (com- petitive races, matches or games between nations or clubs) are resolved based on rules that  constrain vio- lence and  encourage respect. Arguably, people who engage in sport learn  those values and  also experi- ence extreme emotions, which are particularly vital for youth. The rise of sport-based development and peacebuilding projects in conflict-affected regions exemplifies  how sport has proven capable of eas- ing  conflicts  that  might  otherwise  have escalated. For example, various programmes in the  Middle East bring Israeli and  Palestinian youth together via sport.
Sport has evolved from its cultic (ancient Greek) and elitist (industrializing British) origins into a secular, highly inclusive force that  can contribute to achiev- ing  the  Millennium Development Goals. The work- ing group initiated by the  United Nations to drive  the agenda on  sport for development and  peace is dedi- cated to seeing those Goals realized.
THE P OTENTIAL OF SP ORT FOR YOUTH DE VELOPMENT
What makes sport so valuable  for  young people? It is generally  acknowledged that  there are  three broad areas in which sport can positively affect youth development. First, sport participation leads to personal (physical, psychological, educational and
social) development that  is important for  realizing youth potential. Hundreds of studies have reported the  impact  of physical  training on  various health parameters that  in  turn affect well-being.  Further, acquiring a physical skill enhances self-confidence and provides mastery opportunities and experiences, which are important precursors to coping with chal- lenging  situations  beyond sport.  T here are  also numerous studies that  have reported on  the  educa- tional benefits of effectively implemented sport pro- grammes. Apart from reduced school dropout rates among youth involved in sport, physical activity has been shown to increase levels of concentration and academic performance. Language learning through team sports exemplifies a direct link between sport and  education. Extending the  sport-learning con- nection even further, Right to Play is collaborating with  Governments  to successfully  combine  sport, education and  peacebuilding activities for youth in low-income countries and  in post-conflict settings such as refugee camps.
Second, sport has the capacity to support youth at risk (including unemployed and  migrant youth) because it is structured around norms, behaviours and  rules that  are also desirable in the  larger community. Participation in sport cultivates a sense of responsibil- ity that  can be applied to other areas of life.
Finally, sport offers young people the  opportunity to acquire social capital through the  development of contacts and  networks.  Strengthening  social  con- nections can help youth achieve a sense of belong- ing, gain  access to resources outside sport, and  in some cases improve employment prospects.
BOX 4.5. YOUNG WOMEN AND SPORT
In spite of the  clear benefits of sport, girls and young women customarily face more barriers to partici- pation than do boys and  young men and  therefore tend to be less involved. Sport has traditionally been perceived as a primarily masculine activity centred around attributes such as strength, power and  vic- tory. In many societies, young girls are raised in a manner that  they do not identify with such attributes and  therefore have lower motivation to participate, have less confidence in their  physical and  sporting capabilities, and  receive less support from others. Hence, especially during adolescence and  in con- servative cultures, the  increased pressure to be fem- inine conflicts with what sport traditionally stands for. Moreover, girls can often feel that  they are judged physically when engaged in sport. The perceptions of others critically observing their  body can embar- rass girls and effectively limit sport participation.
To make sport more appealing to girls and  young women, sport programmes can incorporate activities that  are in line with their preferences and strengths-- cooperation rather than competition, agility rather than strength, positive reinforcement for skill mastery and  effort rather than victory--or build  on  activities that  are not "gendered" (including action sports such as Ultimate Frisbee). With this approach, it is possible to appreciate the  body for what it can do rather than how it is perceived to look. If that  can be achieved and  more girls and  young women are empowered to become involved in sporting activities, they can unlock physical, psychological and social assets that are transferable to other spheres (as shown by study results). Girls in the  Game, based in Chicago, is an example of a programme that  has embraced such a framework and  effectively combines sport, health education and leadership training for girls.
BOX 4.6.
SPORT AND THE ENGAGEMENT OF YOUNG PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
The potential  of sport to foster the  inclusion  and engagement of young persons with  disabilities is immense; though their  involvement in sport is not new,  there is growing  emphasis  on  utilizing  sport geared towards youth with disabilities for  commu- nity development and  integration. Involving young persons with disabilities in sporting activities chal- lenges what communities think  about disability while also challenging the  perceptions those with disabilities may  have  about  themselves.  In  doing so, stigma and  discrimination are reduced, and  the skills, confidence and  potential of youth with disabil- ities are realized.
In addition, sporting activities can provide a meet- ing  ground for young people with and  without dis- abilities to come together in a positive environment, learn  from each other, and  help eradicate precon- ceived notions of disability by focusing attention on the  varying abilities of all youth.
However,  for such efforts to be  successful,  sport- ing  activ ities must  be  inclusive  and   adapted to
accommo date  the   var y ing   need s of all  youth involved. If not, sport neglects its potential to provide a forum for  inclusion  and  integration  and  instead remains an activity that  excludes young people with disabilities.
Few realize that  there are more than 17 international competitions  for  persons with  disabilities,  includ- ing  three world-level  competitions  targeting ath- letes with disabilities--the Deaflympics (for  athletes with hearing impairment), the  Paralympics (for  ath- letes with other forms of disability such as physical disability and  visual impairment), and  the  Special Olympics (for athletes with intellectual disabilities).
What makes sport such a powerful tool for engaging youth? For one thing, sport typically brings a sense of joy and  adventure not found in other daily activities. It offers youth the  excitement  they crave in a safe environment. For  the  most part, sport is a voluntary activity in which youth are intrinsically motivated to join. Sport is full of challenges that  have to be  tack- led  with  acquired  skills and  through coordinated
interaction with others (including teammates, com- petitors and  coaching staff). This combination is optimal for engagement and  positive development.
Sport is valuable for all youth but  is particularly ben- eficial for  young people who are marginalized. For example, participation in sport can facilitate the  inte- gration of migrant  youth into  their  host societies.
Sport is always linked to the values, norms and culture of the  society in which it is played. Young migrants generally  have problems  finding their  way in their new environment, and  participation in sport provides them with the  opportunity to assimilate. Furthermore, when "different"  people work together in  a team, obeying the  same rules to achieve a common goal, a sense of camaraderie emerges similar to that  found in traditional communities where mutual support was necessary for survival. Recent research from Norway confirms that  team sports such as basketball and  soc- cer offer opportunities for migrant youth to develop a sense of belonging, whereas individual or expressive activities such as aerobics are more ego-centred and therefore less effective in promoting integration.
SPORT NOT FOR SP ORT ' S SAKE
It is worth pointing out that sport in itself is not enough to effect broader development, except at the  individ- ual level. This is because participation in an inherently competitive activity has limited potential to engage youth. As it is commonly assumed by Governments and  non-governmental organizations that  sport is, in itself, a solution for many youth-related problems, little  thought  is given to how the  potential of sport might be interpreted and  utilized more meaningfully. Research from around the  globe has emphasized that  sport must be  regarded as a "hook" for engag- ing  young people. The idea  is to use sport to attract youth and to then add other activities beyond sport to bring about individual and  community development and  induce social change. For example, organizations can offer activities  in neighbourhoods  with  disad- vantaged youth, providing them with access to sport that  they would  not normally  have (such as street
leagues). Through cooperation with specific organi- zations, activity modules relating to education, health, peacebuilding or other areas of interest can be added. Collaboration with non-sport-related organizations is essential  because such organizations  have the resources and  expertise to implement comprehen- sive programmes with sport as a necessary building block. The focus is hence not on sport for pure sport- ing success, but  on  sport as a means to reach out to youth and engage them beyond sport.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations below are intended to guide policy and  programme planning focused on  sport for youth development.
Recommendations for youth
Contribute  Knowledge.  Provide "insider" knowledge to inform  the  content and  delivery  of sport for youth development programmes.
Contribute to Programme Develop- ment. Contribute actively to the creation and adap- tation of sport for youth development initiatives and to relevant outreach (via social networks, for example).
Recommendations for
Governments/policymakers
Design  and Adapt  Policies.  Design and adapt policies and  educational curricula to ensure that  the  potential of sport can be actualized to bene- fit youth on various levels.
Provide Funding and Infrastructure. Provide funding and  a safe and  easily accessible sport infrastructure to engage as many youth as possible.
Engage Stakeholders. Cooperate with a wide range of stakeholders from various fields and sectors (including sport and  academia), utilizing existing  expertise  in the  development  of sport for youth development.
Recommendations for all stakeholders
Engage youth. Actively involve youth as both leaders and  informants  in  the  design  of sport for youth development  programmes to learn  what is wanted and  needed from young people themselves.
Target marginalized youth. Implement prog rammes for  marg inalized  youth,  including migrant youth and youth with disabilities, in the areas where they feel  safest and  most at home (including neighbourhoods and  common meeting places).

CHAPTER
YOUTH P OLIC YM AKING : LESSONS FROM THE
DEM AND SIDE
Throughout the  present Report, experts provide clear recommendations for both young people and policy- makers on  how to enhance youth-led civic engage- ment in economic, political and  community life.
While  young people  need to play  a central  role  in addressing issues that  affect them, they cannot tackle the  multitude of challenges alone. It is only through active  partnership,  inclusive  policies  and decision making processes, and  meaningful involve- ment that  solutions  to some of the  key problems experienced by young people can be  developed. In promoting youth engagement, support to young people  must be  provided  and  the  respective  roles of young people, policymakers, and  the  institutions through which they work, clearly defined.
Chapter one of the  Report provided a broad over- view on  the  issue of youth civic engagement. The following recommendations should be considered in the  development, design, and  follow-up of all youth engagement related initiatives and  programmes.
Be  explicit  regarding  the degree  of youth par ticipation.  It is important  that civic  engagement  initiatives explicitly  define  the degree of youth ownership and  the  decision-making
authority  young people have with  regard to pro- gramme activities. Successful civic engagement programmes include youth involvement in design planning, development, execution, and  in moni- toring and  evaluation. This should be  included as a norm in all youth engagement efforts.
Be  relevant  to  young people's  own interests and lived experience.  Young people are more likely to be engaged by and  passion- ate about issues that  are relevant to their  own culture and  lived  experience. The knowledge youth possess must be valued, and  young people need an enabling environment that  allows them to develop a certain level of expertise on the issues that influence their lives.
Be   action-or iented.   Organizations  and agencies working with youth on  civic engagement initiatives should clearly specify the  civic goals they wish to achieve and  provide real  opportunities for young people to engage in action directed towards meeting  those objectives.  They must also  ensure that  youth engagement is real, substantial, and significant.
Value and foster analysis and reflec- tion.  While action is essential in developing civic skills and   experience, there is great importance in  reflecting  on  civic  activity.  For  example, young people  may be  trained and  engaged in designing,
CHAPTER
5
implementing and  evaluating research, conducting surveys and  interviews of their  peers, and  presenting findings and  solutions in public forums.
P rov ide oppor tunities   for youth- adult partnership. Youth leadership emerges out of a complex set of skills, behaviours, actions and attitudes that  are  best developed through appren- ticeships and  other experiential processes requiring close partnerships between youth and  adults. Adults often play a key role as mentors and  motivators in youth leadership programmes.
Young people may be  central  figures in  develop- ment, but  responsibility for  finding solutions to the problems  of unemploy ment and   underemploy- ment,  for  ensuring  youth representation  in  politi- cal processes, and  for facilitating social inclusion at the  community level  lies largely with Governments, which must create enabling environments, policies and  spaces for youth engagement.
The remainder of this Chapter sets out the  key con- clusions and  recommendations arising throughout the  Report as they pertain to the  economic, political and  community engagement of youth.


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ECONOMIC ENGAGEMENT
For  many young people today, economic engagement has become more challenging owing to the dearth of decent employment opportunities, inadequacies in skills and  education, the  lack of support for entrepreneurship, and  diminishing labour rights.
However, young people have shown themselves to be  powerful agents in the  creation of jobs and opportunities to enhance their  engagement. Through internships, entrepreneurship and  involvement in trade unions, young people are demonstrating their  resourcefulness in overcoming the  challenges and  barriers to economic engagement.
The recommendations below focus on steps that  can be taken to strengthen these efforts.\0x0D
INTERNSHIP S\0x0D
REVIEW INTERNSHIP OFFERS BY USING THE MAIN BENCHM ARKS FOR QUALIT Y INTERNSHIPS\0x0D
Young people considering or undertaking an internship should review the relevant terms and conditions in order to ascertain whether quality benchmarks are met in the internship offer. Examples of quality benchmarks can be found on page 39 of this Report.\0x0D
COLLECT INFORMATION ON THE REGUL ATORY AND MONITORING FRAMEWORKS GOVERNING INTERNSHIPS
IN A PARTICUL AR COUNTRY, SECTOR OR OCCUPATION\0x0D
Information should be  collected on the minimal regulations and codes of conduct in place to protect trainees and interns to ensure that internships are  in line with existing regulations.\0x0D
CONTACT ORGANIZATIONS REPRESENTING THE INTERESTS OF YOUTH FOR ADVICE ON CONDITIONS GOVERNING INTERNSHIPS\0x0D
Youth organizations, employers' organizations and trade unions
can sometimes offer help in determining whether the basic condi- tions of internships are  met and rights and entitlements are  pro- vided. They can also advise on the process to be  followed in cases where such conditions, rights and entitlements are  not respected.\0x0D
ENTREPRENEURSHIP\0x0D
INCREASE AND IMPROVE ENTREPRENEURSHIP
EDUCATION\0x0D
Governments, educators and civil society should work together to improve and expand the delivery of entrepreneurship skills edu- cation and programmes. Although formal education is the most convenient way to provide entrepreneurship training, outside programmes should also be  developed in order to reach out-of- school and at-risk youth.\0x0D


ENTREPRENEURSHIP\0x0D
DESIGN SUPPORT SYSTEMS WITH TARGET POPUL ATIONS IN MIND\0x0D
In designing relevant support systems, policymakers and prac- titioners should take into account the dynamism of youth as well as the local context in order to best serve the needs of young entrepreneurs, in particular young women. Programmes supporting young entrepreneurs should be  flexible enough to accommodate young people's differences and avoid a one-size- fits-all approach.\0x0D
INVOLVE THE PRIVATE
SECTOR AND EXISTING
ENTREPRENEURS THROUGH MENTORSHIP PROGRAMMES\0x0D
Young entrepreneurs should be  provided with "soft" (non-finan- cial) support, including mentoring. Mentors play a crucial role
in facilitating networking and connections and serve as positive role models. Young entrepreneurs who are  mentored appropri- ately are  far more likely to succeed in their endeavours.\0x0D
INCREASE ACCESS TO CAPITAL\0x0D
Increased access to financial resources and services is needed to facilitate successful youth entrepreneurship worldwide. The public and financial sectors should work together to develop better funding policies and mechanisms specifically targeting young entrepreneurs.\0x0D
CREATE AND SUSTAIN AN ENABLING YOUTH
ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM\0x0D
Governments, academic institutions, the private sector and others should work together to develop an enabling environ- ment for youth entrepreneurship. For example, policymakers can establish legal and financial frameworks to encourage entre-
preneurship, the education system can provide an  appropriate learning environment and relevant practical training such as facilitating technology exchange and innovation, including ICT training, and support of youth participation in research and
entrepreneurship centres. Private sector entities can provide knowledge, expertise, social capital and financial support.\0x0D
TR ADE UNIONS\0x0D
ENHANCE EDUCATION ON L ABOUR RIGHTS\0x0D
Adequately educating young people about their labour rights is essential for  their full economic  participation. Educational institutions (from primary to post-secondary levels) should form partnerships with trade unions and Governments to ensure that young people are  made aware of their rights in the workplace-- long before they start their first job.\0x0D


CHALLENGE POLITICAL APATHY AND EMPOWER YOUNG WORKERS TO GUIDE LEGISL ATIVE CHANGE\0x0D
Governments should actively involve young workers and union- ized youth in the development and improvement of labour legis- lation and should promote their participation and representation in government structures and processes.\0x0D
CREATE DECENT JOBS FOR YOUTH\0x0D
Youth employment policies must recognize the labour rights of youth and support the role of trade unions in protecting young workers. These policies should facilitate the creation of decent work opportunities, moving away from the view of youth as a source of low-wage labour. Governments must consider the potential of youth in the development of national education and employment policies, working to ensure that the two are  mutu- ally supportive through the creation of internships, apprentice- ships and vocational training.\0x0D
ENSURE EQUALIT Y THROUGH COLLECTIVE BARGAINING\0x0D
Unions should use collective bargaining to reduce gender and age inequalities in the workplace. Unions tend to be  large and powerful enough to bargain effectively for fair  treatment of their members, addressing problems of  discrimination based on gen- der,  age  or experience and working to reduce wage and entitle- ment differentials.\0x0D
INCREASE RESEARCH AND DIALOGUE\0x0D
Global stakeholders such as the United Nations and the Interna- tional Labour Organization must continue to provide support for research and discussion on young people's rights in the work- place, creating a space for a broader dialogue about strength- ening the collective capacity and power of youth to assert their labour rights.\0x0D
INCREASE UNIONIZATION\0x0D
Unions should connect with young employees to organize in new workplaces and sectors and should stand ready to defend and actively work to expand legislated labour rights. Govern- ments should adopt legislation to facilitate the organizing of workers by workplace or sector to ensure that as many workers as possible are  covered by collective agreements. Private sector employers should collaborate with workers and unions in the creation of fair  and safe workplaces.\0x0D


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR POLITICAL ENGAGEMENT
Young people participate in political life for a multitude of reasons and  in a wide variety of ways. Low electoral participation and declining levels of engagement in party politics point to young people's dis- illusionment with the  Government and  formal political processes. At the  same time, institutional and legal  barriers to young people's participation, such as age  restrictions in running for political office, have excluded many youth from institutional political processes. This exclusion undermines the  rep- resentativeness and  legitimacy of political systems and  structures--and in many cases leads young people to seek alternative methods of political engagement. Through protests, demonstrations and digital  activism, young people are expressing their  opinions and  demanding a greater say in political processes and  outcomes. At the  same time, the  violent or extremist activity of some young people is indicative of the  failure  to adequately involve youth and  meet youth development challenges.
Ensuring young people's meaningful involvement in institutionalized political processes is essential. Efforts to enhance such participation should be coupled with efforts to engage with youth using new ICT, social media and other forums and platforms through which young people connect and communicate.
The recommendations below focus on ways to further enhance young people's political engagement.\0x0D
ELEC TOR AL PARTICIPATION\0x0D
PRIORITIZE YOUTH ISSUES AND INCLUDE YOUTH IN
ADDRESSING CHALLENGES\0x0D
Governments should assign priority to the concerns of youth and maintain an open dialogue with them. Young people--including activists--should be  actively encouraged to participate in efforts to articulate and achieve political goals.\0x0D
EMPOWER YOUNG PEOPLE THROUGH SOCIAL NETWORKS\0x0D
Peer-to-peer mechanisms can be  used to foster youth engage- ment. "Champion schemes" have proved effective as a recruiting tool, with youth urging or inspiring "people like them" to become more engaged.\0x0D
IMPROVE YOUTH
REPRESENTATION AND THE POLITICS OF PRESENCE\0x0D
Measures such as the introduction of quotas or the creation of all-female candidate shortlists should be  adopted to improve the representation of young people (especially female youth) in
national parliaments and other decision-making bodies. Similar steps should be  taken to ensure a more balanced representation of young women and youth from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds in the youth wings of political parties and youth rep- resentative bodies (such as youth parliaments and councils).\0x0D
STRENGTHEN
CITIZENSHIP EDUCATION\0x0D
Citizenship education should be  introduced/improved and stan- dardized in schools and in institutions of higher learning.\0x0D


TR ANSITIONS IN P OWER\0x0D
OPEN CHANNELS FOR INTERACTION\0x0D
Institutional channels should be  provided for direct interaction between government officials and youth to facilitate communi- cation and joint action in policy development.\0x0D
DECENTRALIZE POWER\0x0D
Some decentralization is needed to facilitate youth access to
the political process at the community level. For example, youth groups might bring members of parliament to gatherings of young constituents for  consultations on education, unemploy- ment, and other areas of special concern.\0x0D
PROMOTE MEDIATION
AND PARTICIPATION IN RESOLVING CONFLICT\0x0D
Mechanisms should be  created to promote inclusive institu- tionalized dialogue and participation in mediation and deci- sion-making, in order to facilitate conflict resolution at the community  and national levels in post-transition countries. Modules and texts on mediation should be  developed for use in training by youth-led civil society organizations and political
parties.\0x0D
ENCOURAGE YOUTH TO SERVE AS ELECTION OBSERVERS\0x0D
Youth should act as election observers, sit on national election commissions, and serve as polling station workers.\0x0D
STRENGTHEN YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN
POLITICAL PARTIES\0x0D
When political parties have strong youth wings and when youth quotas are  introduced for  central bureaus and decision-making committees, young people are  better positioned to have a direct voice in policymaking.\0x0D
ESTABLISH QUOTAS FOR YOUTH REPRESENTATION AND ENSURE MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION\0x0D
Quotas need to be  introduced for youth on parliamentary lists and for youth participation in national dialogue processes.
Steps should be  taken to ensure that there is a commitment to meaningful participation, wherein youth are  included not to fill quotas but to participate in actual decision-making throughout the electoral cycle (before, during and after elections).\0x0D
ENCOURAGE YOUTH TO
SHARE THEIR EXPERIENCES\0x0D
Young people should be  encouraged and provided space to share their experiences--through youth networks, across party lines, and within civil society--so that they can benefit from les- sons learned and best practices.\0x0D


NEG ATIVE ENG AGEMENT\0x0D
FACILITATE POLITICAL EMPOWERMENT\0x0D
Governments  and policymakers can address political disillusionment and disenfranchisement by restoring political agency to young people, by providing them the means to become agents of positive change within their ow n societies, by teaching conventional political literacy and socialization, and by exploring and endorsing alternative forms of engagement that may be  more appealing to a younger cohort.
Avenues for young people to legitimately express discontent with and grievances against the political establishment need to be  created--and their concerns must be  taken seriously.\0x0D
CREATE INCLUSIVE IDENTITIES\0x0D
More progressive and inclusive forms of citizenship should be  promot- ed.  Youth (and minority populations in particular) must be  made to
feel  as if they belong and are  not being marginalized; diversity, human rights and individual freedoms must be  respected and supported.
Steps should also be  taken to eliminate intolerance, sexism, racism and xenophobia, and their highly corrosive effects on community cohe- sion, healthy identity development and civic responsibility need to be highlighted.\0x0D
ADDRESS GRIEVANCES AND NARRATIVES
OF VICTIMHOOD\0x0D
Grievances and narratives of victimhood, whether real  or perceived, should be  addressed so young people know that their concerns are taken seriously.\0x0D
ADDRESS SOCIOECONOMIC INEQUALITIES\0x0D
The international community should address all forms of socioeco- nomic inequality by pushing for better governance, increased trans- parency, and greater democratization. This is particularly important in post-conflict States.\0x0D
DIGITAL AC TIVISM\0x0D
SUPPORT THE GROWTH AND ACCESS OF A
RELIABLE , FREE AND OPEN INTERNET\0x0D
Efforts must be  stepped up to ensure that youth have reliable, open access to the Internet for social, political, economic and education- al purposes. Action is needed to increase the availability of reliable broadband Internet access to youth, particularly those living in least developed countries.
Efforts are  needed to combat the suppression and mass surveillance of online activity, as both inhibit political expression, and to address oppression and harassment online.\0x0D


TEACH DIGITAL AND CIVIC SKILLS TOGETHER\0x0D
Youth should be  developing digital media production and program- ming skills while also being exposed to political knowledge and critical and systems thinking applied to social and political problems and changemaking.
Educators should provide young people with opportunities to apply these skills in practical projects focused on changemaking at the local level. Such projects allow youth to test their mental models
of theories of change, construct new media or technologies with a purpose, and gain confidence in their ability to assume a civic lead- ership role.\0x0D
ENSURE DIVERSIT Y IN DESIGN\0x0D
Ensuring that future technologies are  inclusive and representative in terms of who can use them and how they can be  used requires a community of designers characterized by diversity--in terms of race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, language and socioeconomic status-- who can design with that diversity in mind.
Access must be  provided to digital tools, relevant learning opportu- nities, and pathways to political participation that validate youth as effective citizens.\0x0D
FUND DIGITAL ACTIVISM IMPACT STUDIES\0x0D
Funding should be  provided to support research on the evolving technology and impact of digital activism. Politically engaged youth can and should be  at the forefront of this research as both practi- tioners and scholars.\0x0D
DEFINE THE ROLE OF YOUNG PEOPLE: TAKE THE LEAD
AND TAKE RESPONSIBILIT Y\0x0D
Youth should support their peers through collaboration, mentoring and advocacy to ensure that more young people can participate civically and politically using digital tools.   Youth who ascend to
leadership roles in traditional institutions of  corporate or  govern- ment power should push for reforms that make those institutions more accessible, transparent and responsive to current and future generations of  actualizing citizens.\0x0D
DEFINE THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS:
ADDRESS MISTRUST BY ENGAGING WITH YOUTH\0x0D
Governments may be  able  to address the mistrust and disengage- ment characteristically associated with traditional political pro- cesses by engaging more authentically with youth both online and offline. This means not only promoting civic hacking or  creating more efficient channels of official communication and partnership, but also strengthening protections for freedom of speech, assem- bly, the press, and privacy.
In abidance with the rule of law and respect for human rights,
governments should engage further through the provision of pub- lic services; access to public information and open government; accountability; and inclusive decision-making and responsiveness.\0x0D


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR COMMUN ITY ENGAGEMENT
Growing recognition of the  value youth engagement adds to the  development process has led to a shift in how young people participate at the  community level. Stakeholders, including youth them- selves, have become progressively more aware of the  personal and  community benefits of youth engagement, and  young people today are  becoming more and  more involved as collaborators, team members, leaders and  decision makers within their  communities. Such engagement often sets a young person on  a lifetime course of broader engagement in political and  economic life. Through their  participation in voluntary activity, peacebuilding and  sport for development, young people have been key stakeholders in shaping and  contributing to community development. At the same time, the  development and  use of social media platforms and  new ICTs has allowed young people to engage in new and  innovative ways at the  community level, further changing the  land- scape and  allowing young people greater opportunities for engagement.
The benefits of such engagement and  approaches to better supporting community participation among youth are outlined in the  recommendations below.\0x0D
VOLUNTARY AC TIVIT Y\0x0D
ENABLE YOUTH TO SHAPE VOLUNTEERING\0x0D
Policymakers and programme coordinators need to adapt approach- es to fit the needs and motivations of young volunteers. Agencies, organizations and Governments should create an environment that enables diverse groups of youth to shape the respective agendas on what youth volunteering should be. In particular, efforts to ensure
the meaningful engagement of young women should be  undertaken at all levels.\0x0D
ENSURE THAT YOUNG
PEOPLE HAVE  A SAY IN THEIR VOLUNTARY ENGAGEMENT\0x0D
Young people should have a greater say in defining the terms of their voluntary engagement. There should be  open discussion about the length and conditions of the volunteer activity, includ- ing whether or not any stipends for living expenses or compensa- tion are  offered.\0x0D


PE ACEBUILDING\0x0D
DEEPEN
UNDERSTANDING AND IDENTIF Y YOUTH NEEDS AND PRIORITIES\0x0D
A comprehensive and nuanced understanding of youth and their contri-
butions to peacebuilding should be  developed, including on the needs and priorities of youth. In particular the specific needs and situation of young women should be  given attention. This will require further analysis of holis- tic and cross-sectoral theories of change.\0x0D
ACKNOWLEDGE THE DIVERSIT Y OF YOUTH\0x0DIt is important to acknowledge the diversity of youth experiences rather than simply focusing on youth as victims, troublemakers or peacemakers in conflict settings. Young people participate in informal governance and peace structures in a wide range of contexts outside of those affected by armed conflict. More youth-led research and analysis is needed to create a better understanding of such diversity so that positive youth voices and identities
are  given the attention they deserve.\0x0D
ENSURE THE INCLUSION OF ALL YOUTH
\0x0DRespect the experiences of all young people and develop targeted strategies to include youth from different backgrounds. Avoid stereotypical assump- tions about gender norms and focus on the roles that girls, boys, young men, young women, and young transgender individuals can play in peacebuilding.\0x0D
PRIORITISE YOUNG PEOPLE'S PARTICIPATION\0x0DEnable young people's ow nership, leadership, and accountability in peace- building processes and projects by involving young people in all phases of programming and policy development. Platforms and mechanisms for youth engagement in decision-making should be  created.\0x0DENSURE THAT
EVIDENCE-BASED YOUTH POLICIES
ARE ADOPTED\0x0D
Governments should ensure that national youth policies are  evidence-based, cross-sectoral, and are  designed with the active participation of youth.\0x0D
SUPPORT YOUTH MONITORING AND EVALUATION\0x0D
Practitioners should develop programmes that provide youth with the ability to monitor and evaluate their own work to support their development and growth.\0x0D
INVOLVE YOUTH-LED ORGANIZATIONS
AS ADVOCATES\0x0D
Practitioners should explore the possibility of  engaging youth-led organiza- tions as advocates of youth inclusion and involvement in policy decisions. Providing advocacy training would offer members of these organizations the opportunity to enhance their peacebuilding and mediation skills.\0x0D
STRENGTHEN YOUTH
-LED DIALOGUE IN THE COMMUNIT Y\0x0D
In addition to facilitating communication between decision makers and youth, young people should engage in dialogue with the surrounding community as a means of establishing accountability and securing local and regional support.\0x0D
ENGAGE CHILDREN AS PEACEBUILDERS\0x0D
In order to promote continuity and strengthen the impact of their participation, children should be  engaged as peacebuilders from a young age.  Child and youth participation in peacebuilding must be  supported by multiple stakeholders in a multitude of ways in order to strengthen the impact of their contributions.\0x0D


SP ORT FOR DE VELOPMENT\0x0D
FACILITATE YOUTH INVOLVEMENT
IN PROGRAMME DEVELOPMENT\0x0D
Young people should be  actively involved as both leaders and informants
in the design of sport for youth development programmes so that it may be determined from youth themselves what is wanted and needed. Young peo- ple  should be  involved in the inception, adaptation and outreach of sport for youth development initiatives.\0x0D
DESIGN POLICIES AND PROVIDE
FUNDING FOR SPORT INFRASTRUCTURE\0x0D
Government policies and educational curricula should be  designed or adapt- ed  to ensure that the potential of sport can be  actualized to benefit youth on multiple levels. Funding support and a safe and accessible sport infrastruc- ture should also be  provided to engage as many youth as possible.\0x0D
PROMOTE MULTI- STAKEHOLDER COOPERATION\0x0D
Governments should cooperate with a wide range of stakeholders from various fields and sectors (including sport and academia), utilizing existing expertise in the development of sport for youth development programmes.\0x0D
IMPLEMENT PROGRAMMES FOR M ARGINALIZED YOUTH\0x0D
Programmes should be  implemented for marginalized youth, including migrant youth and youth with disabilities, in the areas where they feel  safest and most at home.\0x0D
\0x0D


