
INTRODUCTION
IN September 2015 the United Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, an ambitious plan of action aimed at
ending all forms of poverty, fighting inequality, and tackling climate change--while ensuring that no one is left behind. The 2030 Agenda includes a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals with 169 targets, to be achieved by the year 2030. A list of 232 indicators, developed in 2017 and refined annually, constitutes a mechanism for monitoring and assessing progress towards the Goals and related targets.
The 2030 Agenda provides a comprehensive systems map for Governments, the private sector and communities--a global plan of action through which the inherent interconnections between people, planet and prosperity are fully optimized to inform strategies and actions for a common future of universal peace and freedom.
T he Wo r l d Yo ut h R e p o r t : Yo ut h a n d t h e 2 030 Ag e n d a fo r Sustainable D evelopment examines the mutually supportive roles of the new Agenda and youth development efforts. The Repor t is intended to offer Member States and other stakeholders information and analysis that can help them gauge the progress made in address- ing youth issues, assess policy gaps, and develop policy responses.
The Report also provides insight into the role of young people in sustainable development in the context of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda and related frameworks, in particular the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the third International Conference on Financing
5
for Developmentand the World Programme of Action for Youth.
T he Re p or t considers the role the 2030 Agenda can play in enhancing youth development efforts, while examining how evidence-based youth policies can help accelerate youth-related objectives. In doing so, the Report explores the critical roles and responsibilities young peo- ple have in the implementation of sustainable social, eco- nomic and environmental development efforts at all levels.
YOUTH AND THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
The innovative 2030 Agenda is intended to bolster devel- opment efforts and policies by providing a comprehensive and well-articulated set of goals and targets for the crea- tion and implementation of policies and actions to reduce poverty, achieve peace, and promote equality, leaving no one behind. It emphasizes the importance of integration and synergy across policies, frameworks and actions, and in doing so emphasizes the vital role all stakeholders play in its implementation.
The Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible, global in nature and universally applicable, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting national policies and priorities. Targets are defined as aspirational and global, with each
Government setting its own national targets guided by the global level of ambition but taking into account national circumstances. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 55)
The Sustainable Development Goals are integrated, indivisible and universal, but their long-term success is largely contingent upon how well youth development efforts are integrated into the policies, plans and actions adopted to bring about their realization. W hile all the Su stainable Development Goals are cr itical to youth development, this Repor t focuses primarily on the two interrelated areas of education and employment; both feature largely in the Agenda, underlining the realization of targets under these Goals as fundamental to overall youth development. Other Goals that address priority areas for youth--including gender equality, good health, reducing inequality, combating poverty and hunger, and action on environmental issues and climate change--are also addressed briefly within the scope of the Report.
THE ROLE OF YOUTH POLICIES IN
THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Youth are being referred to as the "torchbearers" of the
2030 Agenda and have a pivotal role to play both a s beneficiaries of actions and policies under the Agenda and as partners and participants in its implementation. Indeed, both ex plicitly and implicitly, the 2030 Agenda c all s for the d evelop m ent an d ac t ivat ion o f sou n d , evidence-based youth policies and actions to ensure its full realization.
With the adoption of the World Programme of Action for Youth in 1995, Member States and young people were provided with a policy framework and practical guidelines for national action and international support to improve
the situation of youth around the world. Under its aus- pices, many Member States have increased efforts to develop and implement robust youth policies and policies affecting youth across the 15 priority areasaddressed in the World Programme of Action.
T he s e ef for t s h ave b e en c omplemente d by a number of targeted youth development strategies and frameworks adopted at the international level, including the Global Initiative on Decent Jobs for Youth; the Global Strategy for Women's, Children's and Adolescents' Health (2016-2030); and the Education 2030 Framework for Action. A significant number of national and regional frameworks have been developed to bolster these efforts.
With a broad array of frameworks, strategies and guidance available, fresh impetus and innovative thinking are needed to determine how existing and newly launched tools for youth development can drive youth policies that advance the 2030 Agenda. Strategic planning and coor- dination can help ensure better alignment of efforts and resources and increase the likelihood of success.
THE ROLE OF YOUTH IN
ADAPTING THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT TO NATIONAL AND LOCAL CONTEXTS
Institutional and structural synergies and integration at the local and national levels are essential for meeting the objectives embodied in the 2030 Agenda. Achievement of the Su stain able D evelopment G oal s w ill req uire working not only horizontally across policy sectors and
f ramework s, but ver tically among community, local, national, regional and global authorities, together with civil society stakeholders, including youth.
Critical to the success of the 2030 Agenda are the role of young people in engaging with local and national government in delivering on policies and programmes on the ground; the role of public-private partnerships in driving the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including financing and harnessing technology for data collection and utilization; and the role of youth participation in informing equitable and diverse policy design, imple- mentation, monitoring and evaluation.
STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
The Report comprises six substantive chapters.
Chapter I prov ides an over v iew of global youth population trends and their implications, the role of youth in relation to the 2030 Agenda, and how youth are refer- enced in the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Chapter II explores the area of youth education, o utli ni n g o p p o r t u nit i e s a n d c h all e n g e s fo r yo u n g people and policymakers. The chapter details aspects of the Sustainable Development Goals that pertain to education--with particular emphasis on Goal 4 (quality education)--and examines related targets. This chapter also explores the multidimensional issues surrounding education and how they impact youth, with special atten- tion given to disparities in education; the rights-based approach to education; education challenges for young women, youth with disabilities, migrant youth and youth affected by conf lict; entrepreneurship education; and financing education.
Chapter III explores the area of youth employment, highlighting development challenges and opportunities
for young people and policymakers. The chapter focuses on aspects of the Sustainable Development Goals pertain- ing to employment, looking specifically at Goal 8 (decent work and economic growth), and examines the relevant targets. This chapter also explores global and regional trends and priorities such as underemployment, formal versus informal work, entrepreneurship, and disguised employment; it further considers employment challenges specific to youth living in poverty, youth with disabilities, young women, youth in conflict and post-conflict set- tings, and young migrants.
Chapter IV explores the nexus between the youth education and employment issues addressed in chapters II and III. It specifically examines those areas in the context of the transition from school to work, providing a set of case studies on skills development targeting marginalized and vulnerable youth. It also explores the human devel- opment approach to youth education and employment.
Chapter V examines the key elements of youth policies and their role in advancing youth development objectives in the context of the 2030 Agenda. Special emphasis is given to the importance of accurate, timely and high-quality age-disaggregated data for the develop- ment of evidence-based youth policymaking. The chapter considers how enhanced efforts to ensure the collection
of such data, including data on marginalized and vulnera- ble youth, can be undertaken through statistical and data system capacity-building, public-private partnerships, and support for youth-led data collection and use. It also addresses issues related to defining and interpreting indicators, and provides an in-depth analysis of indicators associated with both the Sustainable Development Goals and the World Programme of Action for Youth.
Chapter VI moves to the conc rete a sp ec t s of implementing the 2030 Agenda, analysing the role young people have and can play at the local and national lev- els. It sets out a series of principles to help guide such engagement, while highlighting, including through case studies, the many ways young people are contributing to the implementation and monitoring of the 2030 Agenda through engagement in awareness-raising, policymaking and data collection, as well as through participation in national and international review processes.
A concluding chapter summarizes and synthesizes the key messages put forward in the Report.
A statistical annex presents the most recent data available on the 90 youth-related indicators for the Sustainable Development Goals and the 34 core indica- tors for the World Programme of Action for Youth.

CHAPTER I
YOUTH AND THE
2030 AGENDA
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
The future of humanity and of our planet lies in our hands. It lies also in the hands of today's younger generation who will pass the torch to future generations. We have mapped the road to sustainable development; it will be for all of us to ensure that
the journey is successful and its gains irreversible. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 53)
THE 2030 AGENDA
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: LEAVING NO YOUTH BEHIND
In September 2015, Member States of the United Nations adopted the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,setting out a global vision and plan for ending poverty and hunger, realizing human rights, and strengthening world peace by 2030. At the heart of the Agenda is a set of universal objectives embodied in 17 Sustainable Development
Goalsand 169 targets that are integrated and indivisi- ble and that aim to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure equality and prosperity by balancing and coordi- nating the social, economic and environmental dimen- sions of sustainable development.
While considerable progress has been made over the past two decades in reducing poverty, alleviating hunger, reducing inequality and improving outcomes for many of the world's poorest and most vulnerable, such progress has been uneven (United Nations, 2017c). Inequality has not only persisted, but in many instances widened, with substantial numbers of people, including youth, excluded from full participation in economic, political and social life. The situation of young people from groups considered vulnerable or marginalized--including indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, migrants and refugees, people liv- ing in poverty, and girls and young women--underlines the fact that the 2030 Agenda will not be a success unless it is based on the ideals of inclusiveness and shared prosperity.
BOX 1.1.
DIVERSITY OF YOUTH
While geography and gender characterize part of the diversity of youth, diversity also reflects the var- ied experiences and life situations of young people. Youth with disabilities; indigenous youth; lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth; migrant, displaced and refugee youth; youth in conflict and post-con- flict situations; and rural youth, among others, often face challenges and barriers to participation specific to their situation. As many young people identify with more than one group, the challenges they encounter are often multiplied. The dearth of information and data on marginalized and vulnerable youth makes identifying and addressing their distinctive challenges particularly difficult (see chapter V).
A central principle of the 2030 Agenda is the assur- ance that "no one will be left behind".The Sustainable Development Goals and targets are meant for all nations, all peoples of all ages, and all societies. The universal nature of the 2030 Agenda supposes that youth, defined by the United Nations as persons aged 15 to 24 years,should be considered across all Goals and targets, a point emphasized in the 2017 report of the Secretary-General on youth development links to sustainable development:
The pledges made in the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and to reach the furthest behind first, as well as its affirmation to be people-centred, ensure that youth are included in all aspects of the Agenda. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2017e, para. 6)
YOUTH DEMOGRAPHICS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
T he 2030 Agenda clearly applies to all of the world 's
1.2 billion young people, who currently make up 16 per cent of the global population--and to the 1.3 billion young people who will call the world home by 2030, the target date for attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations, 2017c).
The size of the youth population matters greatly in the context of sustainable development. The age structure of a population and the relative size of the youth cohort are important because they serve as determining factors in the growth of the labour force and pressures on the
economy in terms of job creation. Indeed, Governments and policymakers often view young people not as an asset but as a source of labour market pressures that are difficult to address, and large numbers of unemployed youth are viewed as potential causes of political instability and civil unrest (United Nations, 2016a). As a case in point, the unrest that erupted across the Arab world in 2011 finds its roots in the economic dislocation of the region's large youth population and its expectations for improved economic outcomes. W hile the political unrest associated w ith large, restive youth populations across the Arab world has found resolution in many States, it is important to highlight the escalation of violence and civil strife that continue to undermine the welfare of young people and their families in countries such as Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. T he continued grow th of the youth popula- tion in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, coupled with rising
unemployment and continued political instability, suggest similar emerging concerns for many States in that region.
While the population of young people is growing overall, the age structure of the population and the rela- tive size of the youth population vary widely. In developed countries, where fertility rates have declined for decades, youth make up a relatively small share of the total pop- ulation, while the share of persons over age 60 is on the rise. In contrast, youth in sub-Saharan Africa comprise nearly 20 per cent of the total population, and this share is expected to remain stable over the next 20 years. In other developing regions, the proportion of youth in the total population is declining, though it remains sizeable in Latin America and the Caribbean (17 per cent), Western Asia (17 per cent), and Southern Asia (19 per cent).
BOX 1.2. WHAT IS A YOUTH BULGE?
As countries develop economically, shifting towards more industrialization, urbanization, and skills- dependent economic production, they experience a demog raphic tran sition wherein fer tility and the share of the population made up of child-age dependents decline. As the relative number of chil- dren decreases, populations experience a growth in youth as a share of the total population, resulting in what is known as a youth bulge. This demographic bulge then passes through the body of the total population as a cohort in successive bulges until-- as seen now in developed economies--the highest shares of the total population are made up of older workers and those of retirement age.
W hile most developing nations, in particular the emerg ing economies, have seen their youth bulges peakand now have a bulge in their older working-age populations, other regions, such as sub-Saharan Africa, are only just beginning to experience a rise in their youth populations.
While a youth bulge is often seen in terms of the challenges it poses, the growth of a country's youth pop- ulation as a share of the total population also presents opportunities. As the youth population increases, it ushers in a period during which a country's working-age popu- lation makes up a growing share of the overall population while dependent children make up a declining share. This creates an opportunity for a demographic dividend, wherein the relative abundance of working-age people can
lead to increased savings, higher productivity and more rapid economic growth. However, the ability of countries to harness the demographic dividend depends critically on their investments in human capital, particularly among young people poised to enter the labour force, whose pro- ductivity, entrepreneurship and innovation will drive future economic growth. If human capital investment falls short or if the labour market is unable to absorb new workers, the opportunity deriving from this demographic dividend may be squandered (Williamson, 2013).
A demographic dividend can have a positive impact on economic growth, political stability, and social and sus- tainable development. However, despite their significant present and future numbers, young people are often faced with age-related challenges and barriers to participation in economic, political and social life, greatly hindering their own development and, by extension, sustainable develop- ment. Harnessing the potential of youth is dependent on protecting young people's health and well-being, guaran- teeing a quality education and the freedom to participate, providing decent work opportunities, and addressing the myriad other challenges young people face.
YOUTH AS ARCHITECTS OF THE 2030 AGENDA
Far from being mere mentions in and beneficiaries of the
2030 Agenda, young people were active contributors to its development and continue to be engaged in the frameworks and processes that support its implementa- tion, follow-up and review (see chapter IV).
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda represented the culmination of an extensive three-year process involving Member States and civil society, including youth organi- zations, working together to develop a comprehensive set of Sustainable Development Goals and targets to be met within a 15-year period. This journey began in Rio de Janeiro, at the 2012 United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20),where Member States and civil society stakeholders came together to launch a process to develop a global agenda and a new set of sustainable development goals that would be "limited in number, aspirational and easy to communicate" (United Nations, n.d.(b), para. 3). The new goals would succeed the Millennium Development Goals, which had been adopted in 2000 and targeted for achievement by 2015.
Building on the success--and importantly, learning from the shor tfalls--of the Millennium Development Goals, the 2012 Rio+20 Conference, in which a consid- erable number of young people participated, resulted in an outcome document entitled "The future we want", committing to the establishment of an " inclusive and transparent intergovernmental process on sustainable development goals  open to all stakeholders, with a view to developing global sustainable development goals to be agreed by the General Assembly" (United Nations, General Assembly, 2012, para. 248). This was a marked improve- ment over the process of establishing the Millennium Development Goals, which had been criticized for its lack of civil society participation and transparency.
To ensure greater transparency and participation, Governments invited representatives from civil society organizations to become part of the 30-member Open Working Group of the General Assemblyto drive the development of the 2030 Agenda and to deliberate and negotiate its 17 Goals. In particular, they stressed the
valuable role of "Major Groups and other stakeholders".--a mechanism developed within the framework of the first United Nations Conference on Env ironment and Development (the Earth Summit) in 1992 and formalized in Agenda 21-- in safeguarding and fostering sustainable societies for future generations, which formed a core ele- ment of the negotiations.
Following the 2012 Conference, the Major Group for Children and Youth was a key stakeholder in the Open Working Group negotiations, drawing on the expertise and input of young people and youth entities from all over the world to ensure that the rights, priorities and needs of young people were integrated and considered across the
2030 Agenda and its 17 Goals and 169 targets.
Reflecting the commitment to achieve broad global participation and transparency, the Open Working Group deliberations were informed by the outcomes of "global conversation s" conducted by the United Nation s--a set of 11 thematic global and reg ional consultations,
83 national con sultation s, and door-to-door sur veys on development pr ior ities. T he United Nation s al so launched the MY World sur vey, an online and of f line platform for people to contribute their thoughts on the global priorities they would like to see in the Goals. The survey reflected overwhelming participation from young people, with the majority of respondents under the age
of 30, and gender balance in responses. Interestingly, the majority of votes were received via offline consultations, highlighting the necessity of efforts to ensure that no one is left behind as technology advances.
T he 2030 Agenda calls upon Major Groups and other stakeholders "to report on their contribution to the implementation of the Agenda" (United Nations, General A ssembly, 2015b, para . 89). T hrough coordination by the Major Group for Children and Youth, young people and youth entities continue to engage in follow-up and rev iew of the 2030 Agenda by cont r ibut ing to
deliberations on the formal areas of work of the High- level Political For um on Su stainable Development,including voluntary national reviews (VNRs),and fol- low-up mechanisms for linked processes, including the ECOSOC Forum on Financing for Development follow-up (to review outcomes of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda), the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, and the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction.Report 
BOX 1.3.
YOUTH IN ACTION: YOUTH NEGOTIATING THE
2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
United Nations Major Group for Children and Youth
The United Nations Major Group for Children and Youth, mandated by the General Assembly, is the "official, formal and self-organized space for children and youth to contribute to and engage in certain intergovernmental and allied policy processes at the United Nations".* It acts as a bridge between young people and the United Nations system, ensuring their right to meaningful participation by, inter alia, conducting and facilitating online and offline activities associated with policy and advocacy, capacity-building, youth action, and knowledge generation.
With the implementation of the 2030 Agenda under way, the Major Group for Children and Youth and other young stakeholders continue to be actively engaged. The High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development--where Member States work on identifying emerging issues and creating cohesion across the three dimensions of sustainable development, engage in thematic reviews, work towards enhancing the science-policy interface and evidence-based decision-making, and monitor and review progress made towards implementation of the 2030 Agenda and achieve- ment of the Sustainable Development Goals--provides an important space for young people to engage either via the VNRs of their countries or through shadow reporting and awareness-raising (see chapter V).
The Major Group for Children and Youth is involved in numerous other processes at the United Nations level to advance sustainable development, including those pertaining to disaster risk reduction, financing for development, humanitar- ian affairs, and youth development.
MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION: BRINGING THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS TO LIFE
The means of implementation targets under
Goal 17 and under each Sustainable Development
Goal are key to realizing our Agenda and are of equal importance with the other Goals and targets. The Agenda, including the Sustainable Development Goals, can be met within the framework of a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, supported by the concrete policies and actions as outlined in the outcome document of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 40)
Provisions addressing the means of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals can be found throughout the 2030 Agenda but feature most prominently in Goal 17, which focuses on revitalizing the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development and provides the foundation for achieving all the Goals. Goal 17 incorporates targets speci- fying how the international community should finance and operationalize the Goals, including reaffirming the com- mitment of developed countries to earmark 0.7 per cent of their gross national income (GNI) for official development assistance (ODA) to developing countries, and to consider allocating at least 0.2 per cent of their GNI for ODA to least developed countries. Goal 17 also includes a number of tar- gets relating to technology transfer, investment and trade aimed at encouraging greater investment in developing countries in ways that facilitate economic development and support strengthening economic welfare therein.
Central to the 2030 Agenda is the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda,adopted by Member States in July 2015
to provide a global framework for financing sustainable development and for ensuring the efficacy of the joint commitments made under the Sustainable Development Goals. Organized around seven action areas,17 the Addis Ababa Action Agenda incorporates more than 100 meas- ures on global financing and investment practices aimed at boosting collaboration between Governments, civil society, the private sector, and other stakeholders in the areas of science and technology, infrastructure devel- opment and investment, and pover ty eradication so as to transform the global economy and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda aligns financial flows and policies with economic, social and environmen- tal priorities (United Nations, 2015a). It essentially provides a financing framework for Governments, international organizations, the business sector, civil society, and phi- lanthropists implementing the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, with a focus on fostering partnerships and actions aimed at promoting prosperity and preserving the planet.
Importantly, in its opening paragraphs, the Action Agenda acknowledges the necessity of investing in youth for the realization of sustainable development:
We recognize that investing in children and youth is critical to achieving inclusive, equitable and sustainable development for present and future generations, and we recognize the need to support countries that face particular challenges to make the requisite investments in this area. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015a, para. 7)
W hile the Addi s Ababa Ac t ion Agend a m ake s explicit reference to the situation of young people only seven times (see box 1.4), it is similar to the 2030 Agenda in that support of youth is one of its cross-cutting themes, helping to harness synergies and policy action across its seven areas, and should be considered in all actions to achieve sustainable development.
YOUNG PEOPLE WORKING WITHIN NEW AND EXISTING FRAMEWORKS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN SUPPORT OF THE 2030 AGENDA
While the adoption of the 2030 Agenda offers the oppor- tunity to break new ground, its success is ultimately tied to the integration and advancement of existing development efforts and processes. Some of the key frameworks that can support its implementation include the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020, the Small Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway, the New Urban Agenda, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
In addition, numerous youth- and adolescent-spe- cific international instruments and frameworks exist that can support youth objectives within the 2030 Agenda. In many cases they offer more robust analysis and options for addressing global youth challenges. Instruments that can serve as important resources for Member States and youth organizations as they develop thematic policies and prog rammes per taining to youth in the contex t of national development strategies include, inter alia,
the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted in
1995 to guide the development of youth policies; the Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents (A A-HA!) f ramework , l aunche d in 2017 to advanc e adolescent health by 2030 (WHO, n.d.); the Global ini- tiative on Decent Jobs for Youth, aimed at enhancing youth employ ment prosp ects by 2020 (ILO, 2015b); and United Nations Security Council resolution 2250 of
2015,which calls for increased youth representation
at all levels of decision-making in peacebuilding and dispute resolution.
As noted in chapter VI of the present Report, young people are becoming increasingly active par tners in su stainable development ef for ts. Recog nized a s the torchbearers of the 2030 Agenda, youth are at the heart of sustainable development. Their active engagement is key to achieving sustainable, inclusive and stable societies and to averting the most serious future challenges to sus- tainable development, including the impacts of climate change, conf lict, gender inequality, forced migration, poverty and unemployment.
BOX 1.4. REFERENCES TO YOUTH IN THE ADDIS ABABA ACTION AGENDA
In the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, youth are mentioned seven times in four paragraphs.
Paragraph 7 emphasizes "that investing in children and youth is critical to achieving inclusive, equitable and sustain- able development for present and future generations" and acknowledges "the need to support countries that face particular challenges to make the requisite investments in this area".
Paragraph 16, which focuses on generating full and productive employment and decent work for all and promoting micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, addresses the issue head-on by committing to the promotion of "ade- quate skills development training for all, particularly for youth and entrepreneurs'' and "to developing and operation- alizing, by 2020, a global strategy for youth employment and implementing the International Labour Organization (ILO) Global Jobs Pact", reflecting target 8.b of the Sustainable Development Goals. Importantly for youth employ- ment, the Action Agenda specifically commits countries to promoting stable and affordable access to finance in sup- port of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, which are essential for promoting job creation.
Paragraph 12 expressly mentions youth in the context of delivering social protection and essential public services, reflecting the commitment to "provide fiscally sustainable and nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, with a focus on those furthest below the poverty line and the vulnerable, persons with disabilities, indigenous persons, children, youth and older persons".
Paragraph 114 focuses on the importance of ensuring access to science and technology for development efforts and includes a specific commitment to promoting "access to technology and science for women, youth and children".
CHAPTER II
YOUTH EDUCATION
We commit to providing inclusive and equitable
quality education at all levels--early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary, technical and vocational training.
All people, irrespective of sex, age, race or ethnicity, and persons with disabilities, migrants, indigenous peoples, children and youth, especially those in vulnerable situations, should have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities and to participate fully in society. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 25)
ALL youth have a right to education. While education must not be reduced to considerations of youth livelihoods and transitions to
the world of work, it is widely accepted that this is a major aspect of youth education. Globally, efforts towards universal education in recent decades saw the years of primary school enrolment increase and lead to the demand for secondary schooling. However, second- ary and tertiary enrolment remains low in many developing coun- tries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia. Inadequate infrastructure, lack of opportunities, and affordability and accessibility concerns characterize many educational systems in those regions. Elsewhere, many education and training systems are not adequately preparing students to meet the demands of a globalized world. Insufficient and/or poor-quality education, training and employment exacerbate the social and economic vulnerability of youth.
\0xA9 Yasutomo Komori,
2016 UNIC Tokyo "My View on 	21
SDGs" student photo contest
Formal education and training systems often do not reach marginalized youth or cater to young women, rural or indigenous youth, or youth with physical, sensory, or cognitive disabilities, leaving them without the skills needed to realize their potential or aspirations. This calls attention to the importance of leaving no youth behind and of finding new and innovative ways to provide all youth with the hard and soft skills and training necessary for today's labour market. The provision for quality education includes a comprehensive pedagogical curriculum, com- plemented by vocational, formal, informal, and non-formal education opportunities and skills development. As an essential element in the eradication of poverty and hunger, quality education should embrace the diversity of youth livelihoods and in so doing address gender inequalities and the needs of marginalized and vulnerable youth.
In the Millennium Development Goals era pr ior to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, the assumption that education wa s predominantly a human capital investment in preparing youth for the labour market was w idely held. W hile this argument remains inf luential, the Sustainable Development Goals identify additional instrumental roles for education in supporting the wider sustainable development agenda.
The Millennium Development Goals committed the world to universal primary education by 2015--some- thing that should have been achieved by 1970 according to prev iou s commitments. Sig nif icant prog ress wa s made between 2000 and 2015, but the goal was still not attained. Moreover, the goal for universal primary educa- tion failed to address a major youth-related aspiration of achieving universal secondary education.
Globally, of the 263 million children and youth under the age of 19 who were out of school in 2014, 142 million were of upper secondary age (UNESCO, 2016a, pp. xviii, 178,
182). Estimates published by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) indicate that
in low-income countries, nearly 30 per cent of the poorest children aged 12-14 years never attended school at all (ibid., p. 181). The proportion of youth completing upper second- ary education between 2008 and 2014 also varied widely on the basis of national income; 84 per cent of youth in high-income countries completed upper secondary edu- cation, but the corresponding figure was only 43 per cent for middle-income countries and a meagre 14 per cent for low-income countries. Disparities within countries are also stark; in low-income countries only 7 young people living in poverty complete upper secondary education for every
100 rich youth who do so. Only 23 per cent of countries have gender parity in upper secondary education (ibid., pp. xviii, 185).
One widespread criticism of Millennium Develop- ment Goal 2 was that it focused on measuring enrolment rather than learning (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 176). Between
2000 and 2015 the number of out-of-school children and youth declined, but the quality of education declined as well on an unprecedented scale (UNESCO, 2013a, p. 2). In
2012, UNESCO stated that the growth in primary enrol- ment was leading to a "crisis in learning", as inadequately educated and trained teachers were not equipped to impart foundational literacy and numeracy skills (UNESCO,
2012, p. 130). Estimates for the period 2005-2014 suggest a youth literacy rate of 91 per cent, meaning that roughly
114 million young people aged 15-24 years were unable to read or to write even a simple sentence. Unsurprisingly, g iven other educational statistics, gender ineq uality has also persisted. Globally, there were 96 literate young women for every 100 literate young men aged 15-24 years, but in low-income countries the female-to-male literacy ratio for this age group was only 0.85. (UNESCO, 2016a, p. xviii, 278, 280, table 15.1).
Without rapid acceleration in the rate of education expansion, Sustainable Development Goal target 4.1 on universal secondary education is not likely to be achieved by 2030 (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 151). It is projected that in 2030,
only 69 per cent of 15-19 year olds will complete their upper secondary studies. Even high-income countries are not expected to achieve universal upper secondary education until 2048. This is projected to occur after 2080 in most regions. If present trends continue, millions of youth will not be able to access or complete the education promised to them in the 2030 Agenda (ibid., pp. 152-153, table 7.2).
The global gross enrolment ratio for upper secondary education now stands at close to 75 per cent (ILO, 2016, p. viii), and tertiary-level enrolment more than doubled between 2000 and 2014 (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 229, table 12.3). However, challenges relating to educational access, content and quality persist. The education system should impart academic knowledge, career and life skills, social norms, values and accepted behaviours to successive generations; all too often, however, this ideal is not met. Disparities in educational access and quality are pronounced both globally and within individual countries. Many young people--including those with disabilities, youth from ethnic and linguistic minorities, indigenous youth, young refu- gees, and young women--face unique barriers to accessing opportunities through the education system.
Regional differences in tertiary education participa- tion remain sizeable. In Europe and Northern America the tertiary gross enrolment ratio is 75 per cent, compared with
23 per cent in Southern Asia and 8 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 228, 229, table 12.3). There are also marked gender disparities and striking wealth inequal- ities in tertiary education. Data indicate that the enrolment gap between men and women widens by the time they complete their post-secondary education. In many Arab and Caribbean countries, more than twice as many young women as young men graduate from tertiary institutions; while not as pronounced, this gender dynamic is present in other countries and regions as well. In Costa Rica, for example, the tertiary entry ratio of men to women was 0.80 in 2011, but by graduation the ratio had dropped to 0.53 (ibid., p. 228-230). There are also significant income-based
disparities among students aged 25-29 years in terms of completing a minimum of four years of tertiary education. Recent statistics indicate that in the Philippines, for instance, of the 21 per cent of students in that age bracket who fin- ished at least four years of tertiary studies, just 1 per cent were from the poorest income group, while 52 per cent were from the wealthiest (ibid., p. 230). In an increasingly polarized labour market, such disparities can have huge implications for young people seeking to secure their first decent job or build a sustainable livelihood.
RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH TO EDUCATION
T he rights-based approach to education establishes fundamental principles and benchmarks, making it clear that education issues are not just about access or even about quality as measured by standard considerations of examination or testing outcomes. The first United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education, Ms. Katarina Toma\0x0161evski, developed a comprehensive framework on the right to education, which was subsequently adopted by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in its General Comment 13 on the right to education.
The framework suggests that education needs to exhibit the following interrelated features if it is to meet rights obligations:
 Availability. Education is free, and there are ade- quate resources, infrastructure and trained teach- ers able to support the delivery of education for all.
 Accessibility. The education system is non- discriminatory and physically and economically accessible to all, and positive steps are taken to include the most marginalized.
 Acceptability. The form and content of educa- tion is relevant, non-discriminatory and culturally appropriate, and of good quality; schools are safe and teachers are professional.
 Adaptability. Education evolves with the chang- ing needs of society and challenges inequalities such as gender discrimination, and it adapts to specific local needs and contexts.
Table 2.1 elucidates these concepts.


TABLE 2.1.
TOMA\0x0160EVSKI'S CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR A RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH TO EDUCATION\0x0D
RIG HT TO
E DUC ATI ON \0x0DAVAIL ABILIT Y\0x0D	Fiscal allocations matching human rights obligations
	Schools matching school-aged children (number, diversity)
	Teachers (education and training, recruitment, labour rights, trade union freedoms)\0x0D\0x0DACCESSIBILIT Y\0x0D	Elimination of legal and administrative barriers
	Elimination of financial obstacles
	Identification and elimination of discriminatory denials of access
	Elimination of obstacles to compulsory schooling (fees, distance, schedule)\0x0D
RIG HT S IN
E DUC ATI ON \0x0DACCEP TABILIT Y\0x0D	Parental choice of education for their children (with human rights correctives)
	Enforcement of minimal standards (quality, safety, environmental health)
	Language of instruction
	Freedom from censorship
	Recognition of children as subjects of rights\0x0D\0x0DADAP TABILIT Y\0x0D	Minority children
	Indigenous children
	Working children
	Children with disabilities
	Child migrants, travelers\0x0D
RIG HT S THRO U G H
E DUC ATI ON \0x0DADAP TABILIT Y\0x0D	Concordance of age-determined rights
	Elimination of child marriage
	Elimination of child labour
	Prevention of child soldiering\0x0D
\0x0D
YOUTH AT RISK
Young women
Although figures for gender parity at the upper second- ary education level indicate that progress is being made in many regions and in upper-middle- and high-income countries, young women continue to face a particularly challenging set of educational bar riers. For instance, patriarchal values often lead to the exclusion of many young women from education owing to issues such as poverty and the perceived opportunity costs of educat- ing girls, as well as more practical issues such as a lack of access to toilets, in particular after first menstruation.
BOX 2.1.
THE IMPACT OF PREGNANCY ON YOUNG WOMEN'S EDUCATION
Toma\0x0161evski presents this issue powerfully through the case of Tatu Shabani, a single young woman sentenced in 2003 to six months in prison for not attending school . A pr imar y school student in Tanzania, Shabani was expelled from school for becoming pregnant, this being a disciplinary offence in the Tanzania school system. However, this meant that she was in breach of the law regarding compul- sory school attendance and was then prosecuted on that basis (Toma\0x0161evski, 2005). Provisions for expel- ling pregnant students have been removed in some countries after rights campaigns. Toma\0x0161evski notes a case in Colombia in which the Supreme Court ruled that "the conversion of pregnancy--through school regulations--into a ground for punishment violates fundamental rights to equality, privacy, free development of personality, and to education" (Supreme Court of Colombia, 1998). The Committee on the Rights of the Child has issued a similar ruling.
Early mar r iage and preg nancy contr ibute to f ur ther excluding young women from schooling due to health issues, stigma, social roles and expectations for young women, and punitive regulations governing pregnancy and school attendance (see box 2.1). While ILO data show a significant decline in global maternity rates among young women between the ages of 15 and 19 since 1990, the rates remain especially high in countries in the Middle East and Northern Africa (38 per cent)and in sub-Saha- ran Africa (16 per cent) (Elder and Kring, 2016).
A problem in many systems and in particular locales is the low number of female teachers. In such contexts, the range of positive role models girls have is limited, which is likely to weaken their "capacity to aspire". This is particularly the case in upper secondary education and in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) subjects. There is also evidence of widespread gender bias among teachers, both male and female. Frequently, boys receive more praise, are given the opportunity to answer questions more often, and are perceived as being naturally more intelligent.
Gender-based violence
Gender-based violence is a significant impediment to the education of girls and young women, as it affects educa- tion attendance and attainment and undermines overall health and well-being at all levels of development. The United Nations (2015f) estimates that one third of women worldwide have experienced physical and/or sexual vio- lence from an intimate partner, or sexual violence from a non-partner, at some point in their lives. Much gen- der-based violence occurs in the home and forms the backdrop to women's educational decisions and experi- ences. However, the journey to school and back can also be fraught with danger.
It is impor tant to remember that gender-ba sed v iolence takes many for m s and is largely embedded in b ehav ioural stereot y p es con st r uc ted at b oth the societal and individual levels. It may be manifested in men's abuse of women or women's abuse of men, or reflected in the complexities surrounding situations in which masculinities are being aggressively policed in certain settings, with boys being bullied for real or per- ceived infractions of dominant masculine attitudes and behaviours. There is growing awareness of the extent to which certain groups may be especially vulnerable. In the United States of America, for example, 85 per cent of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender students surveyed reported experiencing gender-based violence (UNESCO,
2016b, p. 52). School-related v iolence and threats are commonplace and comprise psychological, physical and sexual forms of aggression.
A systematic review of international surveys of vio- lence against children found that approximately 1 billion children between the ages of 2 and 17, or more than half of the world's population in that age group, had experi- enced some form of violence (Hillis and others, 2016, p.
1).Perhaps not surprisingly, girls and young women
were found to be disproportionately affected.
A UNESCO/United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) survey of school curricula in 10 countries in Eastern and Southern Africa found that in many cases gender-based violence was not addressed. W hile the sur vey results indicated that there was some coverage of human rights issues, the tendency was to keep well away from issues of sexual rights or child marriage, even though the latter remains prevalent in some of the countries of the region. Sexual diversity was also largely ignored (UNESCO and UNFPA, 2012).
As part of the background work for the first Global Education Monitor ing Repor t, UNESCO reviewed more than 110 national curriculum framework documents for
primary and secondary education in 78 countries for the period 2005-2015. The review essentially provided a base- line for Sustainable Development Goal target 4.7, which relates to the acquisition of knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development through education for human rights; gender equality; peace, nonviolence and human security; sustainable development; and global citizenship/interconnectedness. The analysis found that less than 15 per cent of the countries integrated key terms such as gender empowerment, gender parity or gender sensitivity in their curriculum content, textbooks and other learning materials, and only about half mentioned gender equality. (UNESCO, 2016b, p. 53)
Youth with disabilities
Children with disabilities have a lower probability of enter- ing and staying in education than do those without disa- bilities. Among youth living with disabilities, dropout and illiteracy rates are disproportionately high, and relatively few progress to upper secondary and tertiary education.Children and youth with mental and intellectual impair-
ments are especially disadvantaged. In many countries, instead of attending school, children and youth with mental and intellectual disabilities are institutionalized in facilities that do not offer education.Those who do attend school are often not provided with quality education owing to a lack of training and awareness among teachers around pro- visions for inclusive and accessible education for children and youth with disabilities.Much of Toma\0x0161evski's 4-A schematic analysis is particularly pertinent here.
Youth affected by migration, displacement and conflict
Educational experiences are profoundly affected by migra- tion (whether planned or forced) and by conflict and emer- gency situations. Programme for International Student Assessment data show that first-generation migrants in high-income countries scored an average of 50 points lower in reading and mathematics than did those from "native" populations, and second-generation immigrant learners scored 20 points lower (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 271).
Conflict undermines education in a number of ways. Only 79 per cent of young people are literate in conflict- affected poor countries, compared with 93 per cent in other poor countries (UNESCO, 2011, p. 2). The Boko Haram insur- gency in Nigeria has pushed more than a million learners to flee their homes and places of education (UNESCO, 2016a, p.
272). Globally, 75 per cent of refugees of secondary educa- tion age are not in school; in Bangladesh, Kenya and Pakistan the proportion is closer to 95 per cent (ibid., pp. xviii, 272). Not only are children and youth treated as legitimate targets in armed conflicts, in clear violation of international human rights law, but they are often forced to become combatants. The EFA Global Monitoring Report 2011 found evidence of
the use of child soldiers in 24 countries (UNESCO, 2011, p.
15), and even many developed countries allow military ser- vice to begin at the age of 16 or 17.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATION
The first decade of the 2000s saw a growing programmatic focus on entrepreneurship education (McGrath and others,
1995). Helping aspiring young entrepreneurs acquire edu- cation can equip them with the acumen needed to navi- gate the world of business creation and development. In this regard, it is important to differentiate between neces- sity entrepreneurship and opportunity entrepreneurship. Necessity or subsistence entrepreneurs are those who are self-employed because they cannot secure work elsewhere
and are forced into self-employment by economic neces- sity. They make up a large share of the informal economy but lack the capacity to become true engines of growth. Opportunity entrepreneurs are those positioned to take advantage of economic opportunities and push forward frontiers in more dynamic business development.
Ent repreneurship educ ation and t raining pro- grammes generally teach technical and business skills, as well as non-cognitive skills that are more conventionally understood as attitudes (including risk-taking and resil- ience). Whereas early entrepreneurship education focused on potential opportunity entrepreneurs with high levels of existing cognitive skills in developed countries, the con- tinued challenge of youth unemployment in developing countries has led to the growth of programmes targeting those who are likely to be entrepreneurs by necessity and who often have lower levels of formal schooling. Such programmes are potentially attractive to funders and Governments owing to their low cost and their focus on individuals rather than systems and structure (DeJaeghere,
2017). However, a World Bank data review indicates that there is far more evidence of success from programmes aimed at opportunity entrepreneurs (Valerio, Parton and Robb, 2014). Programmes focused on necessity entrepre- neurs have been shown to have an uneven, and largely short-term, positive impact on reducing abject poverty but constitute a poor tool for promoting growth, innovation and job creation as reflected in the Schumpeterian vision of economic development.
DeJaeghere (2017) argues that a broader approach to entrepreneurship education is needed that pays atten- tion both to strengthening the social connections within which youth are embedded and to addressing the ine- qualities that limit their life prospects. This requires that entrepreneurship education be evaluated for its impact on the well-being of youth and not just for its effective- ness in placing them in some form of work, no matter how precarious.
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL 4: ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE QUALITY EDUCATION AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
Ensuring access to quality education is central to the achievement of many of the Sustainable Development Goals and constitutes a core foundation on which suc- cessf ul transitions to the workforce and decent work depend . Streng thening this foundation req uires f ur- ther effort to ensure that young men and women have access to free, equitable and quality primary and second- ary education. In a global environment in which a pre- mium is placed on technical and adaptive skills, countries must also continue to invest in prov iding youth w ith equal access to affordable technical, vocational and ter- tiary education that supplies them with skills relevant to employment and entrepreneurship.
The Sustainable Development Goal targets relat- ing to youth education (including the nexus with youth employment) are enumerated in table 2.2.
The targets listed in table 2.2 can be divided into the following three groups:
 Education targets that address matters of educational access and quality. These include all the education targets in the table, with the exception of 4.7 and 16.2 insofar as they cover
the right to education in terms of specific content or as a measurement of violence against children.
 An additional group of content-oriented targets that include an education component. These include 4.7 as well as targets that specifically address environmental issues (12.8 and 13.3) and health education issues (3.7).
 Youth employment targets under Sustainable Development Goal 8. Target 8.6 has an explicit education and training dimension, but this is implicit in the other Goal 8 targets included in the table 2.2.
Youth-related targets of Sustainable Development Goal 4: extending the focus of education
Sustainable Development Goal 4 marks an important shift from previous international goals on education, in par- ticular Millennium Development Goal 2. With its provision for lifelong education, Sustainable Development Goal 4 incorporates targets that extend the age coverage of the Goal at both ends. This extension beyond basic education is highly significant for youth.
Millennium Development Goal 2 ref lected a nar- rowing of the education agenda to the primary school
\0xA9 Partha Banik, 2017 UNIC Tokyo "Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Student Photo Contest"
level, though Goal 3 included a measure of secondary and tertiary education enrolments among girls and young women within the framework of achieving gender equal- ity and empowerment. As table 2.2 shows, Sustainable Development Goal 4 includes a focus on completing secondary education and on access to vocational and tertiary education. Though not listed under the education goal, the part of target 16.2 that relates to violence against children also reflects a rights-based approach to educa- tion and therefore exemplifies the broader approach to education overall.
Target 4.1 integrates four key concepts in its explicit focus on ensuring that all school-age children and youth "complete free, equitable and quality primary and sec- ondary education". It emphasizes that education must be completed, addressing dropout issues but also advocat- ing complete schooling and not just primary education. The mention of free is highly significant in the light of the active encouragement of private education by a number of national Governments and international development organizations in recent years. Equitability has sometimes been seen as irrelevant if universal coverage is to be reached; however, the use of the word here points to the development of a clear framework by the right-to-education community regarding equity and inclusion. Quality is also important. While the 1990 World Declaration on Education for All included specific directives relating to learning outcomes, these were neglected under the Millennium Development Goals, with well-documented and serious consequences for educational achievement, as noted above.
Although target 4.1 holds much promise, there are a number of concerns about this target and the accompany- ing indicator from a youth-rights perspective. As noted in table 2.2, target 4.1 addresses the completion of secondary education; however, there is no proposed indicator for upper secondary education. This means there is a strong likelihood that upper secondary education will not be pri- oritized under the Sustainable Development Goals. This has serious implications for youth development and livelihoods.
Target 4.1 explicitly calls for free education, but in the years since agreement was reached on this target, it is evident that some signatory Governments have not implemented measures to provide free education to all, whether domestically or in their ODA activities. None of the most recently published indicators addresses this key element of the right to education.
Quality education in indicator 4.1.1 is reduced to meeting minimum prof iciency levels in reading and mathematics. This goes against the accepted understand- ing of education as defined in international human rights law, which holds that education in all its forms and at all levels should be characterized by availability, accessibility, acceptability and adaptability. Understanding of the terms "inclusive", "equitable" and "quality" as they relate to edu- cation (and the indicators for monitoring their application) needs to be underpinned by these concepts.
Moreover, the indicator that has been adopted to measure progress in achieving target 4.1 is considered by many to be reductive, implying that the concept of a minimum proficiency threshold will be defined subse- quently by experts rather than internationally established, giving rise to concerns about the risk that low measure- ment thresholds will be set which in turn will impact the achievement of quality education.
CONCLUSIONS
As articulated by successive international frameworks, education is a fundamental right for all youth through- out the world. The 2030 Agenda holistically addresses key priorities for the education of youth within a broader s u s t a i n a b l e d e v el o p m e n t f ra m e w o r k . Su s t a i n a b l e Development Goal 4 calls for inclusive and eq uitable quality education and the promotion of lifelong learning opportunities for all. To achieve this, there is a need for concerted efforts to ensure that young women and men have access to free, equitable and quality education as
well as targeted training opportunities. The most recent statistics suggest that there are profound global dis- parities in education, leaving universal secondary edu- cation an improbable aspiration for many, especially in poorer nations. Importantly, those education systems that exhibit a high degree of availability, accessibility, acceptability and adaptability are better positioned to create and sustain a rights-based foundation that goes beyond abstract considerations of examination or test-
ing outcomes.
Addressing educational bar r iers stemming f rom str uctural, institutional and cultural nor ms, including gender-based v iolence and early marriage and child- b ear ing, i s a c r ucial step toward s the reali z ation of higher school attendance and completion for young women. Equally important is the promotion of gender equality in education curricula, coupled with efforts to address evolving issues of sexual identity and diversity. T his goes hand in hand w ith ensuring that countries
adopt a human-rights-based approach to gender and
BOX 2.2.
FINANCING FOR EDUCATION
Global Partnership for Education
The Global Partnership for Education (GPE), established in 2002 to mobilize support for education in developing countries, is a multi-stakeholder partnership of developing country Governments, donor nations, international and multilateral development organizations, civil society, teacher organizations, philanthropic foundations, and the pri- vate sector (Global Partnership for Education, 2017). GPE has disbursed $4.6 billion to the education sector, focusing mainly on poor and conflict-affected countries (ibid.). Against the decline in ODA to education, GPE disbursements have increased by 14 per cent since 2010. In 2015, GPE disbursements made up 12 per cent of basic and secondary education ODA among its partner countries, compared with 6 per cent in 2010 (UNESCO, 2017, p. 5). GPE is currently seeking to replenish its funding, with a goal of reaching $2 billion per annum by 2020 and $4 billion by 2030. This initi- ative is not primarily youth-focused, as priority has historically been given to primary and lower secondary education.
Education Commission
The International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, commonly known as the Education Commission, was established after the Sustainable Development Goals launch with principal funding from Norway. The Commission's members "are current and former heads of State and Government, government ministers, five Nobel laureates, and leaders in the fields of education, business, economics, development, health, and security" (International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, 2016, p. 6). The Commission advocates for an increase in both domestic and external funding for education. It envisages the latter rising from $16 billion to
$89 billion per year and believes that $20 billion of the annual total could come from philanthropy, while multilat- eral development banks would increase their education spending sixfold, potentially leveraging up to an additional
$20 billion annually.
The Education Commission acknowledges that even this increased funding might not be enough to fully deliver on
Sustainable Development Goal 4. Its projections suggest that while universal primary education can be achieved by
2030 in the narrow sense of enrolments, about one third of primary graduates will not meet minimum learning targets
(ibid., p. 40).
sexuality. Young persons with disabilities, migrant youth, and youth affected by conflict are also an intrinsic part of any comprehensive education model. Research shows that educational experiences are significantly affected by migration, income level, emergencies, refugee status and conflict. Another factor to consider in the context of youth livelihood s and tran sition s to the world of work is entrepreneurship education, w ith precedence given to programmes focusing on the development of
opportunity entrepreneurs, who promote more stable
growth, innovation and job creation than do necessity entrepreneurs.
Ensuring access to inclusive and equitable quality education is essential for successful transitions to the labour force and decent work and is key to the achieve- ment of many Sustainable Development Goals. Quality primary and secondary education should be comple- mented by affordable technical, vocational and tertiary education that prov ides youth w ith relevant skills for
employment and entrepreneurship.
The Commission anticipates that universal secondary education will not be achieved by 2030, forecasting a comple- tion rate of only 62 per cent for low-income countries.
Education Cannot Wait
A third major international funding initiative for education has emerged quite recently. Launched at the World
Humanitarian Summit in 2016, the Education Cannot Wait fund focuses explicitly on children and youth aged
3-18 years living in crisis-affected countries. It has a target population of 75 million children and youth in 35 countries and proposes to raise $11.7 billion per annum.
Resource optimization in financing for education
Donors will need to work in a coordinated manner to ensure that these three initiatives complement each other, avoid duplication, operate within the wider context of financing for development, and remain aligned with the broader sus- tainable development agenda. The International Education Funders Group has emerged to address this need, acting as a coordinating structure for large numbers of givers. The Group describes its mandate as follows:
Much of our work contributes to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 4, and we aim for foundations' grant-making, convening, and collaborating activities to have a marked positive impact on global basic education.  We are diverse--with over 100 member organizations from wide geographic, thematic and political angles. As such, we do not do advocacy, nor pitch or fund projects, but rather focus on ensuring our members keep up with developments and best practices in the field, better identifying our role in catalysing change in the short- and long-term, and in creating opportunities for members to network and learn from each other. (International Education Funders Group, www.iefg.org)
No official figures are available from this rather private group, but it appears that there is a small youth dimension to its work, including some technical and vocational education and training (TVET) support.
Initiatives such as these can constitute an important source of education funding and coordination, but it is also essential that every country honour its ODA/GNI commitments to education as specified in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Efforts should be made to ensure that education allocations go to the countries where they are most needed.
CHAPTER III
YOUTH EMPLOYMENT
We will seek to build strong economic foundations for all our countries. Sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth is essential for prosperity. This
will only be possible if wealth is shared and income inequality is addressed. We will work to build dynamic, sustainable, innovative and people centred economies, promoting youth employment and women's economic empowerment, in particular, and decent work for all. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 27)
YOUTH employment and economic empowerment are essential components of a strong foundation in any society. Having
decent work is crucial for young people and their future, but it also has a domino effect on local communities, countries and the world as a whole. The present challenge lies in simultaneously creating jobs for the bulging youth population and addressing related con- cerns such as the skills mismatch, working poverty, and the subopti- mal school-to-work transition situation, especially in the developing world. Disadvantaged youth often benefit most from the creation of new opportunities, skills training, microcredit provision, support for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and investments in edu- cation, all of which contribute to providing the knowledge and tools needed to be competitive in the international labour market.
35
A s new entrants to the labour force, youth are particularly vulnerable as workers. Provisions for decent work in the 2030 Agenda imply that all workers, including young first-time entrants, should have access to produc- tive employment that offers mobility, equality and dignity in the workplace, as well as fair wages and job security. For a growing number of young people, however, the situation is much different.
The world economy is presently characterized by rapid globalization, advancements in technology, and industrial development. There have been some significant changes in the nature of work and the relationship between employers and employees. New opportunities have opened up for young people as employees and entrepreneurs, but the guarantee of lifelong employment with a company is no longer a reality. This offers youth more flexibility in exploring a wide range of career possibilities but increases the need for continuous skills investment and strategic planning to ensure economic security in retirement.
Globalization, technological advancements and the development of key industries have created new job opportunities for young people, especially in developed countries. However, the nature of work is rapidly chang- ing, and evolving labour market realities compel youth to continually invest in skills development. While economic growth is important in terms of facilitating youth employ- ment, creating demand for new workers, and motivating companies to expand their workforces, growth alone is not sufficient. This is evident, for example, in a long-term review of labour markets and the business cycle in the Arab States and Northern Africa, where a strong period of economic growth in the mid-2000s did little to effect changes in key indicators associated with youth unemployment, under- employment, and inactivity, particularly among women (World Bank, 2004; Dhillon and others, 2009).
Decent work, employ ment creation, social pro- tection, rights at work and social dialogue represent
integral elements of Sustainable Development Goal 8, which acknowledges the inherent connection between decent labour market conditions and dignified livelihoods. Numerous international frameworks and initiatives, nota- bly the Global Initiative on Decent Jobs for Youth and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, call for the strengthening of youth employment prospects and the creation of decent jobs for young men and women by 2030. Holistic employ- ment interventions must promote job growth and skills development, encourage voluntary self-employment, and ensure decent working conditions, social protection, and respect for human rights at work. Such measures will help to ensure that youth with disabilities, indigenous youth, young women, and youth living in conflict and post-conflict situations are engaged and benefit from sustainable and inclusive economic growth.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SECTOR?
While the youth employment situation differs from region to region, there are common factors that affect the behav- iour of both employers and prospective employees, includ- ing institutional forces driven by regulatory and cultural norms. Along with education, public sector employment is an important determinant of labour market outcomes. Although the public sector typically offers workers lower wages than they might find in the private sector, it often provides higher non-wage benefits, including attractive social security plans and, importantly, more job security (ILO, 2018a, p. 9). These advantages might be enticing to youth as they transition from school to work. This is espe- cially true for educated youth seeking out opportunities in less formalized developing economies, where wage premi- ums between the private sector and the public sector are reduced based on the needs of the public sector.
The lure of the public sector has two institutional implication s. First, the possibility of secur ing public sector work may incentivize youth who can afford it to
delay labour market entry as they wait for public sector opportunities, which has a direct impact on unemploy- ment rates. Second, it "plays a role in signalling the skills in which youth should invest: where the attraction is too strong, youth may make educational investments that aim to secure public sector jobs rather than acquiring the skills sought by private employers" (ibid., p. 10). This reinforces skills gaps between what graduates bring to the marketplace and what is needed in the private sector.
Another aspect of the dichotomy between the pub- lic and private sectors is SMEs, which are an economy's core engine of job creation. While large companies (and in some cases the public sector) may be the dominant employers in a country, most new jobs will come from SME s . O rgani z ation for Economic Coop eration and
Development (OECD) data indicate that in developed countries, SMEs generate 60 to 70 per cent of new jobs (OECD, 2000). According to the World Bank, formal SMEs account for up to 60 per cent of total employment and up to 40 per cent of national income (GDP) in emerging economies. Importantly, 80 per cent of new jobs in the formal sector come from SMEs (World Bank, 2015b).
Clearly, ef for ts to stimulate youth employ ment should focus on bolstering the SME sector and facilitat- ing growth. This would require addressing the specific needs of SMEs, including issues relating to regulation and access to credit and financing. Particular attention should be given to promoting SMEs that provide policymakers with the most effective and efficient means of stimulating job-intensive economic growth.
\0xA9 Luis Gustavo Cavalheiro Silva,
2017 UNIC Tokyo "Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Student Photo Contest"
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT: GLOBAL AND REGIONAL TRENDS
Unemployment status is only one marker of the diffi- cult transition to work faced by young people around the world, but it is the most commonly cited and per- haps the most telling of the indicators used in analyses of labour market outcomes. The global rate of youth unem- ployment was estimated at 13 per cent in 2017 and was expected to remain steady during 2018 (ILO, 2018b). In real terms, this means that nearly 67 million young peo- ple between the ages of 15 and 24 report that they are actively searching for work but are unable to find a job.
T he youth unemploy ment rate stood at 11.5 per cent in 2007--a low point for the decade--just before the global financial crisis the following year; between
2008 and 2010, the rate rose from 12.2 to 13 per cent. A deep concern is that world unemployment rates did not decline after the global downturn; as economies began to recover, the rate of unemployment among young people remained at or near 13 per cent (see figure 3.1). This has been driven in part by the failure of economies around the world to return to high rates of economic growth and by the failure of Governments to establish coordinated policy efforts and active labour market programmes designed to help ease the transition to work both for those youth whose transitions were delayed by the economic down- turn and for more recent graduates.
W hile the global youth unemploy ment rate has remained relatively steady over the past decade, there have been significant regional variations in both preva- lence and trends. The sharpest increase has occurred in Latin America and the Caribbean, where the aggregate rate of youth unemploy ment rose from 13.6 per cent in 2014 to 14.8 per cent in 2015 and was projected to reach 18.9 per cent in 2017. This has largely been driven by outcomes for young people in Argentina and Brazil,
where youth unemployment rates for 2017 stood at 24.7 and 30.5 per cent respectively. The impact of high youth unemployment in Argentina and Brazil has been offset in the regional aggregate by increasingly positive outcomes in Mexico, where youth unemployment declined from 10 per cent in 2009 to 6.9 per cent in 2017.
In the Russian Federation economic grow th has been volatile over the past decade. The growth rate fell from 4.3 per cent in 2011 to -0.2 per cent in 2016, and youth unemployment declined from 18.7 per cent in 2009 to 14.1 per cent in 2014 but rose to 16.3 per cent in 2017. Youth unemployment trends in the Russian Federation have generally been aligned with those in nearby regions; in Central Asia, youth unemployment stood at 14.8 per cent in 2012 and was expected to increase to 16.5 per cent in 2017, while Eastern Europe projected a slight decline (from 17.6 per cent in 2015 to 16.1 per cent in 2017). Data indicate that Ukraine has the highest youth unemploy- ment rate in Eastern Europe (23.3 per cent), while Georgia has the highest rate in Central Asia (29.3 per cent).
At an aggregate level, Eastern Asia, South-Eastern Asia and Southern Asia are among the regions with the lowest rates of youth unemployment, estimated at 10.5,
11.1 and 10.8 per cent respectively for 2017. The low rates for Eastern Asia and Southern Asia are driven by unem- ployment estimates for their largest economies, China and India. In China, where youth unemployment was estimated at a low 8.4 per cent in 2009, the proportion of young jobseekers without work is expected to rise grad- ually as competition for higher-skilled jobs among youth increases. Youth unemploy ment in China is currently estimated at 10.8 per cent. In India, the unemployment rate for youth remains at about 10 per cent, but there are concerns that this will increase if India's high economic growth rate of 7 per cent per year fails to boost employ- ment at the rates needed to generate sufficient work for the country's growing youth population.
In 2017 th e rate o f youth u n emp loy m e nt w a s highest in Northern Africa (29.5 per cent) and the Arab State s (24 .9 p e r c e nt). W hile hi gh in c om p ar i s on w ith other reg ions, the youth unemploy ment rate for the Middle Ea st a s a whole ha s not changed sig nif i- cantly over the pa st couple of decades; for much of the 2000s it stayed above 25 per cent, even dur ing a high growth period in the mid-2000s. Even in the Arab Gulf States, which depend heav ily on foreign workers, unemploy ment rates among local youth remain rela- tively high. Across Northern Africa and the Arab States, such outcomes are driven in part by the grow th of the
youth population but also by structural barriers to the economic inclusion of young people (World Economic Forum, 2014; Dhillon, Dyer and Yousef, 2009).
Youth unemployment in sub-Saharan Africa remains fairly low at 11.7 per cent. However, this positive outcome (explored below in greater detail) masks other concerning labour market trends linked to informal sector employ- ment and working poverty. It should be noted that some countries in sub-Saharan Africa are experiencing extraor- dinarily high rates of youth unemploy ment. In South Africa, for example, nearly 57.4 per cent of economically active youth are unemployed. Youth unemployment rates for Lesotho, Mozambique and Namibia are estimated at
38.5, 42.7 and 45.5 per cent respectively.
The rate of youth unemployment in more developed economies is estimated at 12.6 per cent, having declined from 17.2 per cent in 2013. In Western Europe there are notable variations in youth employment outcomes. While unemployment rates among young people are as low as 6.4 per cent in Germany and 6.2 per cent in Iceland, they are as high as 39.4 per cent in Spain, 36.9 per cent in Italy, and 42.8 per cent in Greece. In the less developed Balkan States, youth unemployment rates are as high as
55.4 per cent in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 46.9 per cent in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and 32.8 per cent in Serbia. In both country groupings, poor labour market outcomes for youth are related more to weak growth and structural problems with the labour market than to demographics.
The global ratio of youth unemployment to adult unemploy ment is 2 .09. W hile striking, this difference makes sense when one considers that young people are generally new entrants to the labour market with little or no job experience and are competing for entry-level posi- tions. They are also exploring and experimenting with dif- ferent types of work and are thus more prone to leave jobs that do not meet their goals and expectations or to move frequently to secure better positions. Moreover, for those able to depend on their families for housing and living costs, remaining unemployed may be a viable option as it gives them the freedom to pursue better opportunities.
While short bouts of frictional unemployment may be expected for young new entrants, it is the duration of unemployment that is of greatest concern. Young people who spend many months or even years searching for work but are unable to secure employment often find themselves at a distinct disadvantage in the labour market. Not only are they failing to procure a job that puts them on the pathway to decent work and career development, but they are experiencing an erosion of the skills they developed in school. Long periods of unemployment may also be seen in a negative light by prospective employers,
many of whom base their appraisal of applicants on education, observable traits and work history. Moreover, studies have shown that youth with long periods of initial unemployment continue to experience "wage scarring" throughout their careers, as they are never able to catch up to their peers in terms of expected salaries for their skills and experience (Nelson and Reiso, 2011; Gregg and Tominey, 2004).
Young people in developing economies face an employment situation that is very different from that of youth in developed economies. In most developing econo- mies opportunities for youth are concentrated in the infor- mal sector, where poor job security, low wages, and limited chances for on-the-job learning restrict the ability of young people to leverage such jobs to secure better, more formal work. Those youth most affected by poverty and margin- alization face challenges relating to the cost of education and the possibility of having to leave school to help cover their families' rising cost of living; these factors effectively prevent many youth from completing secondary educa- tion or in some cases even primary education. For young people who lack a strong educational foundation, initial experiences in the labour market can reinforce the cycle of poverty and undermine the intergenerational promise of improving economic outcomes. For a large number of youth, working poverty continues to weaken their ability to prepare themselves for better employment and to escape chronic financial hardship and its attendant challenges.
Around the world, young women and youth from other socially marginalized groups continue to suffer from disproportionately challenging outcomes in the labour market. Young women still face social exclusion in the economic sphere and discrimination in the workplace and when looking for work. Similar barriers exist for youth from ethnic and religious minorities, persons with disa- bilities, youth from indigenous backgrounds, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth. Migrant youth are v ulnerable to job insecurity, poor working conditions
and exploitation. Conflict and warfare situations create unique employment challenges for young victims and combatants alike that can continue long after the conflict is resolved. Addressing the specific barriers for each of these groups is essential not only from a human rights perspective, but for ensuring that these vulnerable youth are f ully able to develop themselves and direct their capacities towards productive economic gain.
YOUTH UNDEREMPLOYMENT Underemployment is a broad classification covering a range of labour-related incongruities. Among the under- employed are those who are earning below-market wages for their skill set, those who are highly skilled but working in low-skill jobs, and part-time workers who would pre- fer full-time work but are unable to find it. As with unem- ployment, any assessment of underemployment tries to
capture those who are economically excluded from the
work opportunities for which they trained and prepared themselves during their schooling.
As new entrants to the labour force, young people are more susceptible to underemployment than are their more established adult counterparts. However, youth need to recognize that part-time work in their field or entry-level jobs for which they may feel overqualified can be important steps on the pathway towards long-term career development and, as such, can arguably be con- sidered decent work. Internships and apprenticeships, in particular, may only offer low-wage or part-time employ- ment but can provide youth with valuable job experience as new entrants, as well as on-the-job training and skills development that will serve them well as they build their skill sets and careers.
In low-growth environments where labour demand does not keep up with the supply of young labour, youth may only be able to find part-time and low-wage work
that often falls into the category of involuntary informal employment and does little to make use of their acquired skills or to meet their income needs. Young people who are not financially secure are pushed into temporary, sea- sonal and part-time work to meet their basic needs (ILO,
2016). Such youth are more at risk, as they are unable to secure enough work and income to climb out of poverty. Even in the developed world, young people seeking initial employment are increasingly at risk in terms of under- employment, as employers respond to weak demand or avoid the costs of formal employment (including health- care and social security mandates) by providing part-time work to new entrants. Moreover, quality part-time work-- including internships that provide no monetary compen- sation but offer job-relevant skills development--often excludes the poorest youth, who cannot afford to work for little or no pay. In the long term, this can reinforce increasing income inequalities among youth.
Because it is conceptually broad, underemploy- ment is difficult to quantify in comparable terms across countries, and there is no single indicator that captures its qualitative nature. However, estimates of part-time work serve as a proxy for underemployment when they include those who are available for additional hours and would be willing to work full-time, as under such circumstances workers are considered involuntarily underemployed. Data on time-related underemployment suggest that, on average, employed youth are 1.5 times more likely than employed adults to work part-time involuntarily (see fig- ure 3.2). While it can be difficult to compile meaningful regional aggregates given the limited availability of rele- vant data, a comparison between low-income, emerging and high-income economies is also telling. According to available country data, underemployment may affect as many as 30 per cent of employed youth in low-income countries; in contrast, data from emerging economies and high-income economies suggest underemployment rates of 7.7 and 8.9 per cent respectively.
FORMAL VERSUS INFORMAL EMPLOYMENT
Decent work "involves opportunities for work that are pro- ductive and deliver a fair income, security in the workplace and social protection for families, better prospects for per- sonal development and social integration, freedom for peo- ple to express their concerns, organize and participate in the decisions that affect their lives, and equality of opportunity and treatment for all women and men" (ILO, n.d.). As a key component of Sustainable Development Goal 8, decent work is identified as a fundamental right. However, many working youth around the world--particularly in emerging and less developed economies--may not have the chance to secure decent work because they have few employment opportunities outside the informal sector. Comprising the black market, semi-legal grey economies, and a large num- ber of unlicensed micro and small businesses, the informal sector is the part of an economy that remains outside the regulatory oversight of Governments. It includes the large numbers of youth who work for themselves (own-account workers) or as unpaid workers (usually for family businesses).
Informal enterprises are often not registered as offi- cial businesses and are able to evade taxation. Importantly, in the context of work, they are also able to sidestep legal mandates in terms of formal work arrangements, bene- fits, and contributions to social protection programmes including unemployment insurance schemes and pen- sions. Ungoverned by existing labour market regulations, the relationships between informal employers and their employees leave the latter v ulnerable to job loss and downswings in the economic cycle.
As is the case with underemployment, youth are more likely than older, more established workers to be found in the informal sector. As new entrants to the labour market, young people often rely on the informal economy as an important source of work and income. This is particularly true for the most marginalized, who
depend on any work they can find to feed themselves and support their families. However, those who secure work in the informal sector, whether as employees, to support a family business, or as independent own-account workers, are doing so without formal contracts and work arrange- ments. They have no access to mandated benefits, social protection schemes or unemployment insurance, which makes them economically v ulnerable. Importantly for youth, informal jobs rarely provide workers with on-the- job training and skills development that would benefit them in a transition to formal work. Initial experience in the informal economy can effectively serve as a kind of trap, relegating youth to a lifetime of informal work.
While there are no internationally comparable figures for informal labour market participation among youth, available data on informal work as a whole show how sizeable the informal market can be. In those (mainly devel- oping) countries for which relevant data are available, the informal economy provides some 69 per cent of employ- ment (ILO, 2017), accounting for nearly 88 per cent of the agricultural economy and 56 per cent of the non-agricul- tural economy. Given the limited availability of data on the informal economy, these figures are not fully reflective of the state of informal work in all developing countries, but they provide useful insight into the scale of informal work in the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors. It should be noted that the informal employment rate is slightly higher for men (71 per cent) than for women (65 per cent), though the rate of informal employment in agriculture is higher for women (90 per cent) than for men (86 per cent).
YOUTH AMONG THE WORKING POOR Employment constitutes the primary means of address- ing hou sehold p over t y; however, large numb er s of youth, par ticularly in the developing world, are f ind- ing themselves among the working poor, able to find employment but living on incomes that are below the
poverty line. Although the share of working youth living in poverty has declined over recent decades, the rate of decline has been slower than that recorded for the adult working population.
According to ILO, the share of employed youth liv- ing in extreme or moderate poverty is estimated to have decreased by almost 49 per cent since the early 1990s, falling from 73.9 per cent in 1991 to 37.7 per cent in 2016. Although such statistics are encouraging, this still trans- lates into more than 70 million young workers living in poverty, and the number rises to 156 million if the thresh- old is raised to include the moderately poor (ILO, 2016).
Data for 2016 indicate that the share of the work- ing poor among economically active youth was highest in sub-Saharan Af r ic a , where nearly 70 p er cent of employed youth were living in poverty. The next highest rate was found in Southern Asia, where the correspond- ing share was closer to 50 per cent. In Northern Africa the rate was fairly high at nearly 25 per cent, similar to the rate for South-Eastern Asia. In the Arab States, nearly
39 per cent of working youth were poor in 2016, living below the moderate poverty line of $3.10 per day. Shares of working youth liv ing in pover ty were sig nif icantly lower in Central and Western Asia (8.9 per cent), in Latin America and the Caribbean (less than 10 per cent), and in Eastern Asia, where the working poverty rate for youth declined from 33 per cent in 2007 to 13.8 per cent in
2016. In high-income countries as well, youth are more likely than adults to experience relative poverty (defined by ILO as living on less than 60 per cent of the median income) despite having a job. Data for 2014 indicate that in the European Union, 12.9 per cent of youth fell into this category, in comparison with 9.6 per cent of adults (ILO,
2016, p. vii).
T he persistent challenge of overcoming poverty through work is ref lective of the trade-of fs between decent work , unemploy ment, and low-income work
among poor youth. Those most in need cannot afford the lu x ur y of prolonged searches for decent work . Instead, they are often pushed into low-quality work and informal positions that provide no legal protections or job security. They are the most vulnerable to involun- tary part-time employment and seasonal employment as they endeavour to meet their immediate needs and those of their families.
SPOTLIGHT ON MARGINALIZED AND VULNERABLE YOUTH
Youth unemploy ment rates are of ten highest among wealthier or middle-income youth, whose families can afford to support them while they take time to look for good jobs and decent work. For similar reasons, rates of youth unemploy ment tend to be relatively high in h i gh-i n c om e c o u nt r ie s a n d e m e rg i n g e c on om ie s . Conversely, poor, marg inalized and v ulnerable youth often cannot afford the lu x ur y of unemploy ment and are pushed into the labour market by necessity, espe- cially in low-income countries. This is reflected in lower rates of unemployment but is also linked to higher rates of informal employment, underemployment and work- ing poverty. In the context of global efforts to address poverty through decent work, these issues are of greater concer n than the more of ten repor ted and analysed issues around unemployment.
Young women and employment
Globally, young women are more likely than young men to be unemployed, though rate differentials should be read with consideration of higher rates of labour market inactivity among women and potential discouragement reflected therein (see figure 3.3). Nearly 13.8 per cent of the world 's young women are unemployed, compared with 12.4 per cent of young men. Although it is rare, the differential is flipped in some regions. In Eastern Asia, for
example, unemployment is higher among young men than among young women, but this is driven largely by China's inclusion of young women in its ex pand- ing manufactur ing sector. In contrast, the respective unemploy ment rates for young women in the Arab States and Northern Africa are exceedingly high on their own (40 and 38.7 per cent) and are significantly higher than the corresponding rates for young men (21.4 and
26 per cent).
In analysing differences in unemployment rates for young women and men, it is important to bear in mind that they sometimes seek employment in different areas of economic activity and that the labour market deci- sions made by women in this regard are often shaped by social norms and restrictions. In some Arab States, where unemploy ment among young women is highest and where the differential between young women and men is most striking, opportunities deemed appropriate for women may be informed by conservative social norms. In countries where this is the case, young women often seek out opportunities in the public sector and avoid jobs in industries dominated by men. It often happens that young women are in intensive competition among themselves for work opportunities in a limited number of sectors.
Also ref lected in the unemploy ment dif ferential between young women and men is the fact that the bur- den of household and unpaid care work falls dispropor- tionately on women. Early parenthood typically leads to divergent gendered outcomes, pushing young men into the labour force and young women out; ILO data from
25 countries show a mean labour market participation gap of 38 percentage points between young fathers and young mothers (Elder and Kring, 2016, p. 4).
Policy makers need to address these global and reg ional trend s--including the patter n s of exclu sion and limiting of oppor tunities for young women--by implementing and enforcing gender-relevant labour
FIGURE 3.3. YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT RATES
BY SEX, 2018


*Arab States correspond to the countries of Western Asia with the exception of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Israel, Turkey
regulations that promote the inclusion of young women across industries and sectors.
Youth with disabilities and employment
Unemployment among persons with disabilities exceeds
80 per cent in some countries (Burton Blatt Institute and Secretariat for the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2014, p. 1). The educational disadvantage experienced by young people with disabilities inevitably has a negative impact on their employment prospects. Those who are able to secure employment tend to work in low-paying or informal jobs. Globally, there are strong links between disability, poverty and the lack of access to decent work (ILO, 2015a). Unemployment rates are high among
young people with disabilities, in part because they are less able to secure access to quality education that meets their specific accessibility needs. Even for those with disabilities who are economically active, finding quality employment that matches their skill level is a constant struggle--one with its roots in persistent social biases and negative per- ceptions regarding the capacity of persons with disabilities to perform in a competitive workplace. Young people with disabilities entering or in the workforce are doubly disad- vantaged, as they are up against negative perceptions and stereotypes of both youth and persons with disabilities.
Addressing discr imination against persons w ith disabilities and securing commitments from employers to engage youth with disabilities in decent work will be
a long-term struggle. These young people can be sup- ported by government efforts to facilitate access to ser- vices in schools and by investments in infrastructure and transport that enable access to education and work. Past deficits in educational provision have meant that youth with disabilities are not adequately prepared for the work- force, and there is continued resistance among employ- ers, in particular those in smaller businesses and the informal sector, to hire youth with disabilities. Therefore, efforts to facilitate inclusion through more strategic meas- ures built around training and employment are essential. Public-private partnerships between government entities, non-gover nmental organization s (NGOs) suppor ting youth with disabilities, and large enterprises--through which youth with disabilities are provided job-skills train- ing and employment opportunities--have proven effective both in improving immediate employment prospects and in altering popular perceptions about the role of persons with disabilities in the workforce.
The provision of economic opportunities for youth w ith disabilities is often approached from a human rights perspective, typically within the framework of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Most of the world's Governments have ratified the Convention, but not all are fully committed to its implementation. Developing nations facing severe resource constraints and enterprises struggling to ensure profits for shareholders often see full engagement of those with disabilities in the labour force as infeasible. It is important to underline that this is a short-sighted perspective that does not take into account the wider social costs of economic exclusion. A growing body of evidence from local case studies shows that efforts to more deeply engage youth with disabilities in economic life is beneficial, both on a macroeconomic scale and at the enterprise level (Banks and Polack, 2014; ILO, 2014).
From a policy perspective, the costs of dedicated pro- grammes for youth with disabilities are offset by increases in work productivity among more educated members of
this demographic, increases in income among working youth with disabilities and family caregivers, and decreased dep endence on social sec ur it y sy stem s . Moreover, evidence from developed countries shows that young employees with disabilities stay in their jobs longer, have higher attendance, and have better safety records than do non-disabled youth, which translates into increased enter- prise productivity and returns on investment (ILO, 2014).
Employment among youth in conflict and post-conflict situations
While the devastation of war affects entire populations, those who bear the heaviest burden are arguably a coun- try's youth. Young people are often involved in conflicts both as victims and as perpetrators of violence (United Nations, 2016a). Whether or not they are involved in the actual fighting, young people carry the emotional and psychological scars of war throughout their lives. Conflict situations undercut the efforts of young people to move forward with their economic lives, whether they stay in their countries or seek escape as refugees. For many, this means deferring or giving up on personal investment in education. Additionally, while wartime economies may provide job opportunities for some, for most the uncer- tainty of wartime violence undermines any efforts to secure work or to start building a career.
For some youth, armed conflicts represent a source of employment. Wartime economies provide young people with work as soldiers and spies, as guards and carriers of ammunition, and as cleaners and cooks in military camps. Young people are often forcibly recruited into armed groups. In some cases, however, disaffected youth are lured into joining by the promise of money and the sense of empowerment that comes with possessing a gun. In the aftermath of war, former youth combatants feel dispos- sessed, as they no longer have weapons and cannot find decent employment and sustainable livelihoods. Therefore,
processes of demobilization and socioeconomic rein- tegration need to be carefully designed to prevent the recruitment of former youth combatants into gangs and other violent groups and to facilitate their engagement in productive socioeconomic activities.
Youth migration and employment
ILO estimates for 2013 indicate that some 27 million youth left their own countries to seek better economic opportuni- ties, accounting for about 12 per cent of all migrants (United Nations, 2016b). In developed countries about 10 per cent of all migrants were youth, and the corresponding figures for developing and least developed countries were about
15 and 21 per cent respectively. These figures point to the economic pull of migration, especially for youth from least developed economies, and the willingness of such youth to assume the burdens and risks associated with leaving their homes and social networks to seek work in other countries so that they can provide for themselves and their families.
For young people, migration offers the hope of decent work and a secure livelihood. Creating avenues for safe and successful migration both within a country and beyond its borders constitutes an important means of improving economic outcomes for youth facing widespread unem- ployment and poor job quality. Likewise, for developed economies experiencing a decline in the share of the work- ing-age population, immigration provides an important means of sustaining employment-driven growth and sup- porting existing social safety nets. For large migrant-send- ing countries, workers' remittances from abroad provide an important source of household income and government revenue. Naturally, however, this comes with frictions and risks on both sides. In spite of the economic need for immi- gration among developed nations, native workers and the unemployed push back against migration, seeing migrants as contributing to low wages and labour competition. For sending countries, emigration may reduce labour market
pressures as a whole, but it often comes at the cost of "brain drain"--the loss of skilled workers and educated young populations who could otherwise play an important role in bolstering the economy and its development.
As explored in the World Youth Report 2013: Youth and Migration (United Nations, 2013), young migrants are particularly vulnerable to the worst risks associated with migration. In leaving their homes and social networks, they set out to secure work that is not always available or of the quality they had envisioned. Migrant youth, in particu- lar those immigrating without the proper documentation, are often forced into the informal economy, where they are vulnerable to exploitation by unscrupulous employers. They frequently work without a contract and may receive irregular payment or no payment at all for their labour. Young migrants, especially young women, also face the continued risk of human trafficking and slavery. These concerns underline how important it is for migrants to adhere to laws and regulations around employment. The stark differences between the quality and availability of work in developed and developing countries mean that young people from developing and least developed coun- tries will continue to seek economic opportunities abroad, regardless of the legalities. Coordinated efforts are needed both to ensure that migration policies and practices pro- tect even undocumented workers from risk and to create gainful employment for youth at home.
INACTIVITY: PURPOSEFUL OR DISGUISED UNEMPLOYMENT?
Although youth between the ages of 15 and 24 account for nearly 22 per cent of the adult population, they make up less than 16 per cent of the labour force (ILO, 2017). Globally, less than 42 per cent of young people are actively engaged in the labour market, in comparison with nearly
63 per cent of the total adult population (which includes those of retirement age). This means that more than half
of the world's young people are not engaged in work or actively searching for work.
Low rates of labour force participation among youth are natural, given that many young people are engaged in full-time studies or in training in preparation for future work. Inactivity is not in and of itself a reflection of poor labour market outcomes. Youth may be economically inactive by choice, spending their time on personal development or carrying out the responsibilities asso- ciated with marriage, household work, raising children, or prov iding care to older relatives. W hile there are concerns that young women, who still bear the primary responsibility for taking care of children and the home in most countries, are being excluded from economic
opportunities outside the home, this remains an impor- tant personal choice. However, inactivity may also reflect aspects of economic exclusion among youth; for exam- ple, there are young people who have exited the labour market out of frustration, those who have never actively sought work because they believe that decent jobs are not available, and youth who have been denied work because of discrimination.
Here, a comparison of economic inactiv ity rates among youth in different regions and by sex is inform- ative. In sub-Saharan Af r ica, labour market inactiv ity among youth is estimated at nearly 49 per cent, w ith rates among young women and young men nearly equal at 47 and 50 per cent respectively. In large part,
this relatively low level of inactivity among youth reflects poverty trends in many of the region's countries and the income pressures that compel young people to enter the labour market. In contrast, youth labour market inactivity is quite high in the Arab States (77 per cent), Northern Africa (75 per cent) and Southern Asia (71 per cent). The high rates of inactivity in these regions are not driven by the rates for young men, which are equal to or slightly higher than those for young men in other regions, but rather by the strikingly high rates of inactivity among young women. In the Arab States, nearly 91 per cent of young women remain outside of the economy, and in Northern Africa and Southern Asia the corresponding figures are 83 and 86 per cent respectively.
While not being actively engaged in the labour force can be a choice, young people and women often remain out of the workforce because of perceptions that no jobs are available to them or because they are discouraged in their efforts to secure work. Differentiating disguised unemployment from voluntary inactivity can be difficult, but inactivity among young women that is the result of having given up the search for employment rather than having made a voluntary decision not to work should be considered disguised unemployment.
A narrower analysis of inactivity and its negative implications derives from assessment of those youth who are not in employment, education or training (NEET). This indicator represents an effort to clarify economic exclu- sion among youth by focusing specifically on a state of inactivity in which potential workers are experiencing a degradation and loss of the skills they have developed. Although it should be acknowledged that this indicator still includes those youth inactive by choice, it helps iden- tify those most at risk of not making a successful transi- tion to work because they are not actively engaged in or preparing for employment.
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL 8: PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL
The Sustainable Development Goal targets relevant to youth employment and decent work are found primarily under Goal 8 but may be identified in other sections of the 2030 Agenda as well (see table 3.1).
The targets listed below can be broadly categorized under the following four thematic schemes:
 Fostering economic growth and broad market development. Target 8.1 focuses on sustainable per capita growth, with a specific goal of at least
7 per cent GDP growth in the least developed countries, while target 8.2 relates to fostering increased productivity through economic diver- sification, technology development and innova- tion. Targets 8.3 and 8.10 highlight the need to promote entrepreneurship and the improvement and formalization of SMEs and to bolster access to finance for this core engine of job creation. Other targets address the unique role that sustaina-
ble trade (8.a) and tourism (8.9) play in fostering job-oriented growth in developing countries. These are echoed in calls for greater industriali- zation (target 9.2) and the promotion of SMEs in industry to support job creation.
 Addressing human capital and access to employ- ment opportunities for youth. Sustainable Development Goal 8 seeks rapid increases in the
share of youth either employed or in education or training (target 8.6). This is supported by Sustainable Development Goal 4, which includes targets aimed at ensuring that all youth have equal access to
affordable technical, vocational and tertiary educa- tion (4.3) and possess job-relevant skills (4.4).
 Labour regulation and social protections. Sustainable Development Goal 8 supports decent work for all without discrimination, and Goals 1 and 10 respec- tively focus on eliminating poverty and reducing
inequality. Target 8.5 calls for full and productive employment and wage equality. Various targets emphasize the need for renewed efforts to protect the rights of workers, including migrants (8.8); the economic security of young migrants is indirectly addressed in targets 10.7 (planned and well-man- aged migration policies) and 10.c (migrant remit- tance costs). Target 8.7 draws international attention
to the continued need to fight the worst forms of exploitation affecting youth, including slavery, traf- ficking, and the use of child labour and child soldiers. Equality in access to economic resources is high- lighted in targets 1.4, 5.4, 5.5, 5.a, 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4.
 International coordination on delivering sustainable outcomes for youth. Target 8.b seeks to ensure the
development of a global strategy for youth employ- ment, while target 8.4 underlines the global impor- tance of ensuring that efforts focusing on economic development and job creation for youth move forward in an environmentally sustainable manner.
Sustainable Development
Goal 8 targets relevant to youth
Sustainable Development Goal 8 contextualizes the call for decent work across 12 specific targets (see the sta- tistical annex to the present Repor t). These targets are intended to guide policy efforts and programmatic inter- ventions that will help Governments and the interna- tional community meet this Goal. Importantly, the Goal
8 targets overlap with targets for other Goals in the 2030
Agenda, most notably those relating to poverty (Goal 1); education (Goal 4); gender equality (Goal 5); infrastruc- ture, industrialization and innovation (Goal 9); and reduc- ing inequality (Goal 10). Progress towards these Goals is mutually reinforcing, providing opportunities to foster improved employment outcomes for youth while con- tributing to the achievement of other Goals.
T he targets of Sustainable Development Goal 8 highlight key issues on which progress is required to move countries, in particular least developed countries, forward with respect to decent employment for present and future generations of young workers. The targets emphasize the importance of a solid macroeconomic foundation for economic g row th, driven by strategic investments in job-intensive and productive economic activities. In keeping with the integrated nature of the global economy, the targets focus on promoting trade and strengthening the ability of less developed econo- mies to tap into the economic power of the developed world (through financial aid, tourism and foreign direct investment) in terms of job creation. On a similar note, the targets reflect the importance of domestic investment
and efforts to facilitate access to finance in generating job-oriented growth. In this regard, the targets justifiably emphasize the need to focus on SME-led job creation.
At the same time, the Goal 8 targets focus on policy and the key role Governments play in building a strong foundat ion for decent work and redressing m arket failures. The targets highlight the continued exclusion of marginalized g roups and women and the need to combat the most egregious forms of forced labour. They also integrate efforts to level the playing field for workers across the board, protecting labour rights and promot- ing safe working environments. Formulating effective regulations aimed at ensuring decent work for all while providing incentives for private sector firms to invest in job creation can be a delicate balance, but this is essential to facilitating productive pathways to work for all youth seeking employment.
Finally, the Goal 8 targets underline the importance of continued investment in education and training for young people. As highlighted in the preceding chapter, access to quality education is essential if youth are to acquire the skills and knowledge they need to achieve their work-related goals and to be competitive in the global labour market. At the same time, educational sys- tems do not provide young people with all the skills they will need to be successful in the labour market; the nature of the modern economy requires all workers--even new entrants--to engage in lifelong learning and continued skills development. This underlines the importance of ongoing efforts to provide youth with opportunities for training and skills enhancement.
T he comprehensive focus of the Goal 8 targets belies the complexity of resolving the challenges facing youth around the world as they transition from school to work. For young people, the issues of unemployment, underemployment and poor job quality have proven to be persistent and daunting. Solutions require a careful
balance between efforts to stimulate economic growth and ensuring the careful alignment of often conflicting goals in terms of private sector development, labour mar- ket regulation, and investments in active labour market programmes. This requires not only close cooperation at the local level among ministries and agencies with different portfolios, but increased coordination between Governments and stakeholders in the economy, including the private sector, NGOs and youth themselves. On an international level, it requires support for deeper analysis, aid and investment, coupled with closer coordination among donors and multinational enterprises.
CONCLUSIONS
Sustainable Development Goal 8 contextualizes the call for decent work across 12 specific targets and provides a road map for Governments and the international com- munity to meet the Goal. Within this framework, priority areas relevant to young people include underemploy- ment, disguised unemployment, informal employment, and NEET.
While economic growth is an essential foundation for youth employment, job prospects for young people can be affected by other factors with a direct bearing on the behaviour of employers and employees, including institutional, societal and cultural norms. This is particu- larly evident for youth living in poverty and those most v ulnerable or marginalized, including young women, youth with disabilities, migrants, and those living in envi- ronments characterized by conflict.
O ther fac tors af fec ting youth employ ment are linked to globalization. Advancements in technology and industrial development have created new opportunities for young people as employees and entrepreneurs and have changed the nature of work, especially in devel- oped economies. These advancements have also meant that ongoing skills development has become especially critical in terms of labour market competitiveness. The skills gap has a significant impact on youth employment, so maintaining a dynamic relationship between educa- tion and employment has never been more important. This connection will be explored in depth in the follow- ing chapter.
CHAPTER IV
YOUTH EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT: EXPLORING THE NEXUS
All countries stand to benefit from having a healthy and well- educated workforce with the knowledge and skills needed for productive and fulfilling work and full participation in society. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 27)
YOUNG people face numerous challenges affecting their development and well-being. Among the greatest of these challenges
are unemployment and the lack of decent work for youth, which many countries have struggled unsuccessfully to address. Similarly, despite the progress made in raising basic literacy rates, many countries have been unable to provide their youth populations with quality educa- tion and the skills they need for the world of work. As the global youth population continues to increase, greater investment is needed to enhance young people's education and employment opportunities in order to leverage their human capital. Without such investment, quality education (Goal 4) and decent work (Goal 8) will remain out of reach for youth in many countries.
T he two prev iou s chapters ex plored key issues facing young people in the realms of education and employment within the wider context of achieving sus- tainable development; the present chapter examines the critical nexus between the two areas. During the form- ative period between childhood and adulthood, young people begin to define their aspirations, pursue economic independence and establish their place in society. For many, this period includes the transition to the world of work. The reality is that for a substantial number of youth, the transition from school to work is not easy or smooth but instead represents a period marked by instability and frustration. For these young people, participation in the labour market is characterized not by decent work but by income insecurity and poor job quality. For those able to find a job, informal sector work and underemploy-
ment are common, while many others face prolonged
periods of unemployment at the start of their transition to the workforce. During these extended periods without decent work, the skills young people acquired as students are eroding and declining in economic value.
Many youth in developing economies can only find work in the informal sector, and with poor job security, low wages and limited oppor tunities for on-the-job learning, such youth often find themselves among the working poor. Education past primary school is often out of the reach of young people living in poverty and those who are otherwise vulnerable or marginalized, as they are expected to help cover their family's more immediate needs, and this early exit from education further limits their f uture employ ment options. T he impor tance of education in expanding job opportunities in the school- to -work t ran sit ion p er io d i s par t ic ularly ev ident in these circumstances.
BOX 4.1.
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR LOW-INCOME YOUTH
REACH
Viet Nam has one of the world's fastest growing economies, and significant skills mismatches are emerging as the country's education and training system struggles to keep up with growing and changing labour market demands. Increasing numbers of jobs are calling for higher skill levels, intensifying the already serious challenges faced by dis- advantaged youth with limited educational attainment.
REACH is an NGO that provides vocational training and employment assistance to disadvantaged youth in Viet Nam. Since 2008, REACH has run a number of short (3- to 5-month) hospitality and information and communications tech- nology (ICT) courses for young people from low-income families. Technical skills development is complemented by non-cognitive (soft) skills and sector-specific English language training. Students learn from tutors as well as industry guest lecturers and through an online platform.
While strong industry links in a booming economy are crucial, REACH also has a clear focus on identifying and meet- ing the needs of disadvantaged youth. Prior to the start of a course, each trainee is visited at home. This serves the dual purpose of building a relationship with the family and developing a better understanding of the individual context of the learner. Because some learner backgrounds may include trafficking or sexual violence, counselling is offered to students both within the programme and, where necessary, by external specialists.
While youth in developing economies face unique and difficult challenges in this transition, youth in devel- oped economies also often find the transition to work increasingly marked by f r ustration w ith poor labour market outcomes, unemployment, underemployment and prolonged per iod s of waiting for oppor tunities aligned with their expectations and educational invest- ments. Although such frustration is temporary for most, prolonged unemployment and delays in securing a first job can impact career trajectories and economic, psy- chological and emotional well-being. There is evidence that delays in transitioning from school to work can have a negative long-term impact on career development and even salaries (Nelson and Reiso, 2011; Gregg and Tominey,
2004). Although the share of youth in the total population and the labour force has declined in developed econo- mies, their ability to successfully enter the labour market and begin their careers has been limited and remains under threat.
INVESTING IN SKILLS DEVELOPMENT TO FACILITATE THE TRANSITION FROM SCHOOL TO WORK
A growing body of evidence-based research indicates that education and training, when supported at the macro level, are important means of enhancing youth employ- ability. Young people need relevant skills, knowledge, competencies and aptitudes to help them obtain jobs and establish career paths. As the demand for skilled labour rises owing to globalization, technological advancements and the changing organization of work, quality educa- tion and appropriate training will be key to addressing employ ment challenges. T he education-employ ment nexus is pivotal to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda.
Ensuring that present and f uture generations of youth have the tools they need to successfully navigate the school-to-work transition and secure decent work is
essential for the well-being of both young people and the economy as a whole. Work is the foundation on which economic stability and prosperity are built. Putting the skills and talents of young people to productive use con- tributes to economic prosperity for entire populations and helps to reduce economic inequality and eliminate poverty. Support for education, training and employment lies at the foundation of international efforts to improve economic outcomes and to strengthen prosperity and security among the nations of the global community. The alignment of education and skills with the needs of the labour market enhances opportunities for decent work . T his dy namic relation ship between education and employment constitutes a key component of the
2030 Agenda.
THE SKILLS MISMATCH
Traditional education systems and training programmes have done little to resolve the of ten sig nif icant mis- match between the skills new entrants possess and those required by employers in today's rapidly evolving global economy. Skills training programmes provided by gov- ernmental, non-governmental and international organ- izations can be an important means of bridging skills gaps and providing youth with opportunities to acquire job-relevant knowledge. These include targeted voca- tional training programmes and, increasingly, training programmes aimed at prov iding youth w ith life skills centred around effective communication and negotia- tion, decision-making and problem solving, leadership, personal finance management, and critical thinking. The effectiveness of such programmes depends largely on the quality and duration of the training and the programme's ability to target specific market demands. In this regard, the best programmes are developed in coordination with private sector employers, as this approach ensures align- ment with market needs and makes employers aware of the training. Programmes that couple training with
BOX 4.2.
THE IMPACT OF HUMANITARIAN SITUATIONS ON THE TRANSITION FROM SCHOOL TO WORK
The transition of youth from school to work can be disrupted by conflicts, natural disasters, or other humanitarian crises. During and after periods of disruption, training programmes and employment initiatives are essential to helping youth strengthen their economic prospects and rebuild their lives. In such scenarios, there are unique dimensions of the challenge of youth employment to consider. In situations of war or armed conflict, for example, employment opportunities are reduced, options for sustainable livelihoods become scarce, and services and social mobility are severely disrupted. Young people have greater difficulty travelling outside of their villages or communities to look for work. Internal displacement also alters local dynamics, as populations have to adapt to and survive in new and more precarious socioeconomic environments.
The displacement that often occurs in the types of extreme situations described above can have a devastating impact on youth who are ready to enter the labour market. Most young refugees find them- selves residing in crowded camps, without access to formal schooling, training opportunities or for- mal employment. While humanitarian agencies and aid groups are often able, in time, to provide such services to youth, there is one important and enduring barrier to employment among young ref- ugees: in many host countries, refugee status pre- cludes work in the formal economy. This effectively restricts refugees to working in the camps or in the informal sector elsewhere, where they are vulnera- ble to exploitation.
work experience (including short-term internships) can facilitate job placement for youth at the conclusion of the programme.
All youth can potentially benefit from the training programme enhancements described above. However, for vulnerable and marginalized youth and young people living in poverty, specific challenges and extenuating circumstances may also need to be taken into account in training programme design and delivery. During periods of upheaval or conflict, it is especially important to realis- tically assess the restrictions and limitations characteriz- ing the labour market and job prospects for young people (see box 4.2).
ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY AND AUTOMATION: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Technological innovation and automation are rapidly changing the nature and context of work for the young p eople of the world . Advances in IC T have g reatly increased the productivity of workers and enabled the creation of new jobs and industries. Youth are particu- larly well-positioned to benefit from these developments, given their early familiarity w ith digital technologies and their openness to exploring their application in an ever-widening range of new and existing contexts.
Technological innovation is responsible for creating new employment opportunities, but it also represents a threat to more traditional forms and sources of work. While youth are better positioned than older, more estab- lished workers to navigate the challenges of skills devel- opment and retraining that may be required to secure a role in the new economy, many youth remain excluded f rom such opportunities. T he digital div ide between developed and developing economies is closing as more young people in the developing world gain access to
digital technology and as technological advancements offer an opportunity for enterprises in the developing world to compete on a more level playing field with those based in the developed world. However, a large gap in technology access remains and is reinforcing the eco- nomic exclusion faced by youth living in extreme poverty in the developing world.
For young workers around the world, advancements in automation and, increasingly, in artificial intelligence (AI) are putting unprecedented pressure on job availabil- ity. Concerns about automation and its impact on jobs are nothing new. In the early days of the industrial revolution in England, the introduction of machinery into manu- facturing led to large-scale revolts among workers led by Ned Ludd out of concern that automation would put
them out of work. While job losses ensued, increased pro- ductivity led to more job creation overall, and today the term "Luddites" is largely used to describe those irration- ally resistant to technology. Today's challenges related to automation will also undoubtedly cause economic dislo- cation, but this should be offset, as it was in the past, by massive increases in productivity and the creation of new opportunities as yet unforeseen.
P resently, the main concer n is that automation and the increa sed capacity of AI to more ef f iciently handle repetitive tasks--not just in manufacturing but in a wide range of services--may be moving too quickly to allow society to keep up and adjust. For today's youth, expanded automation impacts not only those on the pro- duction line in factories, but also farm workers, restaurant
\0xA9 UNMIL Photo/Staton Winter
staff, journalists, and even highly skilled professionals such as scientists and lawyers. For most, advancements in the foreseeable future will enable greater productivity. However, there is a growing and very real possibility that technological advancements will begin to have signifi- cant wide-scale displacement effects on the current and next generation of youth as they prepare for the transition from school to work.
Importantly, technological advancements in the s o - c all e d g i g e c o n o my--in w hi c h we b -b a s e d s e r- v ice f ir m s such as Uber link indiv idual workers w ith
customers--are already redefining traditional relation- ships between employers and employees. Such enter- prises offer income-earning opportunities to a broad range of potential workers as independent contractors, but they are shifting the burden of taxation and regulation to the self-employed and undermining the potential of organized labour to ensure that worker protections are in place.
Given the speed of technological advancements, it is essential that policymakers and society as a whole begin focusing on how institutions can adjust to ensure that
BOX 4.3.
CASE STUDY:
FOSTERING YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN RURAL COLOMBIA
Programa J\0xF3venes Rurales Emprendedores
The Programa J\0xF3venes Rurales Emprendedores (Young Rural Entrepreneurs Programme), developed by the Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje (National Training Service) in Colombia, represents a well-recognized example of efforts to promote youth entrepreneurship. For about a decade, the programme helped young people establish innovative, productive and sustainable businesses in rural areas. It supported locally viable enterprise options including agricul- tural, agribusiness, service and manufacturing activities. Employing a targeted skills development approach, the pro- gramme provided vocational training to unemployed youth in high-demand sectors, and additional modules supplied these youth with entrepreneurship and business management training. While the programme was open to all youth, it particularly targeted vulnerable groups, including displaced persons and indigenous groups. Importantly, training was supported by efforts to secure access to finance for aspiring entrepreneurs who joined the programme. Productive youth-led business projects were able to access seed capital grants from a fund managed by the President's office, as well as specialized financing from Banca de las Oportunidades, Fondo Emprender and Economia Solidaria.
Originally piloted in 167 municipalities before its expansion nationwide in 2009, the programme undertook a rigor- ous impact evaluation to assess its longer-term effects on beneficiaries. The study found that the programme had a positive impact on the income of graduates. Nearly three quarters of the beneficiaries finished the programme with a business project to pursue, and participation increased the likelihood of starting a real business by over 75 per cent. Moreover, training provided during the programme improved the ability of beneficiaries to manage business finances, establish productive relationships with customers (reflected in the punctuality of client payments), build networks with other businesses, and minimize conflict with partners and suppliers.
workers are protected from wide-scale job loss, increased income inequality, and general disempowerment. To date, most institutions have been reactionary in the face of tech- nological change, playing catch-up in terms of reforming educational systems, labour regulations, business policies and practices, and social safety nets. Educational systems around the world need to undertake structural changes so that they are equipped to provide youth with the flexibility, adaptive capacity, problem-solving skills, and entrepre- neurial mindset they will need to compete in a rapidly changing work environment. Regulators, labour unions and the private sector need to think more about how labour market regulations should be adapted to the new envi- ronment and how the interests and rights of workers can best be protected. may need to be adjusted to address new challenges including covering an increasing number of retiring workers, absorbing the costs of retraining workers, and potentially covering the basic income needs of millions of new unemployed workers.
YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP Interventions designed to empower youth to start their own businesses are increasingly part of the youth-ori- ented development agenda. With the high levels of unem- ployment in many countries, entrepreneurship is seen as a means of engaging ambitious youth in creating their own employment opportunities while also generating work opportunities for other youth. Entrepreneurship is a path suitable for some young people but must be viewed in the context of a broader youth employment strategy and not seen as the main approach to youth employment.
Approaches to youth entrepreneurship promotion and support vary w idely around the world. Generally, training programmes include modules on creating a busi- ness plan and starting and running a business in the local environment, and they may also incorporate the devel- opment of life skills including securing and managing
business finance. Building on this foundation, the most successful programmes follow through in helping youth launch their businesses, providing small start-up grants and links to financial service providers. As with other skills training, the effectiveness of such interventions varies based on the quality and duration of training and the depth of the intervention. The best programmes provide continued support not just with financing but with the incubation of start-ups, mentoring, and facilitating access to potential investors. Costs can be high, but the impact and cost-effectiveness can be improved by careful target- ing of beneficiaries throughout a programme's life cycle.
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT
FOR SUSTAINABLE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH
T he past decade has w itnessed the emergence of a new approach to thinking about the issues explored in this chapter. Drawing initial theoretical inspiration from Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, experts in skills develop- ment (W heelahan and Moodie, 2011; McGrath, 2012; DeJaeghere, 2017) and in youth development (Bonvin and Galster, 2010; Dif-Pradalier, Rosenstein and Bonvin,
2012; Hollywood and others, 2012) have sought to adapt and apply Sen's approach to these areas.
T he human development approach is beginning to gain policy traction. Its influence can be seen in the Hu m a n D eve l o p m e nt R e p o r t 2 01 5: Wo r k fo r Hu m a n Development (UNDP, 2015), the UNESCO TVET Strategy for the per iod 2016-2021 (UNESCO -UNEVOC , 2016), and the Commonwealth Sec retar iat 's Global Youth Development Index (Commonwealth Secretariat, n.d.).
Report
At the national level, there has been discussion of the notion in countries such as Australia and South Africa.
Crucially, the approach includes young people from the start, focusing on their voice, agency and well-being as the core of any strategy for youth development. From Sen (1999), it includes both positive and negative freedoms. Positive freedom--the freedom to--is at the heart of Sen's notions of capabilities, functionings and agency. This is about what young people have reason to value with regard to what they want to be or do, and the extent to which they are able to realize those valued outcomes. Sen also puts forward the notion of negative freedom--the freedom
from. Second-generation human development thinkers have taken this further; Deneulin (2006) encouraged a
wider consideration of the structural barriers to achieving human development, and Alkire (2007) pioneered thinking about the multidimensional nature of poverty. Skills devel- opment and human development writers have added to these insights; as sociologists rather than economists, they look much more into the interplay of structure and agency at the individual, community and societal levels.
With its emphasis on human flourishing, the human development approach recognizes that education and work are valued both in and of themselves and for their
BOX 4.4.
CASE STUDY: ENHANCING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUNG WOMEN
Young Africa
Young Africa (YA), a small international NGO founded in the Netherlands in 1998, set up its first project in Zimbabwe but over the past two decades has expanded its operations to include programmes in Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia and Zambia. Like several previous schemes in Southern Africa, Young Africa tries to make up for the lack of a strong informal apprenticeship model in the region. YA rents premises and provides shared services to groups of local entrepreneurs who offer training for local youth. The programme focus is on providing young people with the techni- cal, business and non-cognitive (soft) skills necessary for success in micro and small enterprises. Graduates are sup- ported in setting up their own enterprises and receive business advice through the programme for up to six months.
There is a clear sense that youth, particularly young women, face structural obstacles as well as skills deficits. At the Beira centre in Mozambique, local women entrepreneurs have set up a creche. This acts as a business and a training provider but is also, most crucially, a facility that allows more young women to participate in the range of training programmes on offer across the centre.
Targeted training is also provided to orphaned female youth through the YA Hostel Programme in Mozambique and Zimbabwe. A social worker and a night matron help these young women develop life skills, including health maintenance and managing a home. Each hostel grows much of its own food, building the skills of the young women in vegetable gar- dening and poultry keeping. The orphan programme is showing strong evidence of a reduction in risky sexual behaviour, and 83 per cent of graduates make successful transitions to employment or self-employment. The programme is able to cover operational costs, though set-up costs for new centres must still be covered by external funding.
contribution to w ider human f lourishing. However, it also acknowledges that both education and work can undermine human flourishing (for example, through gen- der-based violence in education or precarious work). The human development approach acknowledges the power of education and work but also recognizes the need to examine how both actually operate and what the practi- cal consequences may be.
This approach has influenced the UNESCO TVET strapline of "sk ills for work and life", embody ing the concept that skills development cannot just be about employability but must support wider human flourishing. Within this framework, the transition from education to work is seen as part of the wider transition from youth to adulthood. DeJaeghere (2017) points to how, in East Africa, training leads to young people gaining trust from others in their communities; this, in turn, leads to access to various forms of capital, which allows youth to improve their lives. In the case of the State of Palestine, Hilal (2012) shows how training gives young women the opportunity to earn enough income to be able to get married if that is what they envision for their lives.
With the human development approach emphasiz- ing the importance of starting from what young people envision as a good life, it has been necessary to address questions about how such visions are formed and com- municated. Sen has long been concerned with the prob- lem of adaptive preferences--the ways in which people's visions of a better future are limited by what they can imagine given their current circumstances. For instance, if no one in the community has attended university or secured a well-paid formal job, is it unlikely that young people w ill even be aware of the possibilities of such future directions. More recently, attention has also been focused on the danger of unrealistic aspirations, or the misalignment between employment ambitions and edu- cation-related factors such as attainment levels, course choices, and academic performance (grades expected
or earned). Such considerations have led skills for human development scholars to focus on how young people can be supported both to envision better futures and to overcome obstacles that could prevent aspirations from being realized.
In writing about youth transitions to work, human development authors empha si ze the impor tance of recognizing that not all work is good and that young p eople might b e r ight in not wanting to take some forms of work or stay in them. Illustrative of this is the distinction between opportunity entrepreneurship and necessity entrepreneurship, particularly given the fact that far more young people are likely to experience the latter than the former.
THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND THE
GREEN ECONOMY
The human development approach has tended to focus on the immediate challenges of poverty. However, since the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals, there has been a stronger focus on intergenerational aspects of poverty and human flourishing and greater awareness of the need to ensure that sustainability remains a priority in all aspects, phases and processes of human develop- ment. This suggests that any approach to building skills for sustainability must minimize the costs and risks of any transformation for people living in poverty and make them secure in enjoying the positive aspects of sustain- able development. There are dangers attached to green industries, for example, in that the greening process takes the dirtiest, most precarious, and least decent work away from people in poverty but often leaves them with no work at all and increased costs for cleaner fuels.
If youth are to benefit from green skills policies, they need targeted education and training, as green jobs
typically require higher skill levels. However, it will also be necessary to determine how the most vulnerable youth, many of whom are already out of education, can be compensated for the immediate costs of greening. More radically, the human development approach supports the adoption of policies and practices that work with what those in deepest poverty know and can do so that the causes of greening and social justice can both be served (McGrath and Powell, 2016).
While the human development approach is only one way of thinking about the education-employment nexus, it provides a unique perspective for strategies that move from the language and practice of employability and entrepreneurship towards foregrounding decent work and livelihoods, active citizenship and human flourishing as the ultimate goals of policy and practice.
HOW SECURING QUALITY EDUCATION AND DECENT WORK FOR YOUTH ADVANCES OTHER
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
Advances made in quality education and decent work for youth are mutually reinforcing, but progress in these areas contributes to the achievement of other Sustainable Development Goals as well.
Su s t ain able D ev e lopment G o al 1 : no poverty. Decent work is essential for mov- ing youth and other s out of p over t y. Successful efforts to ensure that young
people have the opportunity to secure decent work will help developing countries meet their goal of reducing by at least half the proportion of men, women and children living in poverty. The social protection systems consid- ered under Goal 1 should include labour market regula- tions that prov ide minimum protections for workers. P rog ress made in achiev ing the Goal 1 objectives of ensuring that all individuals have equal rights to eco- nomic resources and access to basic services, property rights, inheritance, natural resources, technolog y and financial services is essential to improving outcomes for working youth, particularly ow n-account workers and micro business workers seeking greater sustainability and resilience.
Sustainable Development Goal 3: good health and well-being. Good health and access to health care can have a signifi- c ant impac t on youth e duc at ion and employment outcomes. Improving access
to sexual and reproductive health care, including educa- tion and information on sexual and reproductive health, helps ensure that young people, especially young women, can make informed choices about when to have children. Delay ing the age of f irst childbir th can increa se the chances of young women stay ing in education and securing decent work. Sexual and reproductive health education can also provide information on how to pre- vent the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV, leading to better outcomes for youth . Reducing harmful substance use (target 3.5) increases the likelihood that youth will stay in education and secure and retain decent work.
Sustainable Development Goal 5: gen- der equality. Achieving gender equality is a prerequisite for realizing all the Goals,
Including positive educational and employment outcomes. Girls and young
women continue to face bar r iers to par ticipation in
education, especially beyond primary school, and this has an impact on their ability to secure decent work. Improving labour market prospects and outcomes for women is an essential aspect of moving towards gender equality, providing the basis for increasing women's full and effective participation in economic life as well as in decision-making in domestic, political and public life. While improvements in labour force outcomes and the protections afforded to women therein will support the overall objectives of Goal 5, it is important to highlight the benefits to working women from concurrent gains in spe- cific targets for Goal 5. Here, the adoption of stronger safeguards against exploitation will better protect young women and encourage increased labour market partici- pation . P rov iding women w ith access to sex ual and reproductive health services and control over reproduc- tive rights will improve their ability to plan the size of their families and balance personal investments in family and work. Affording women equal rights to property owner- ship, inheritance, and financial services will empower them as own-account workers, entrepreneurs and busi- ness owners. Importantly, recognizing the vital role that women play in family care and domestic work (through the provision of public ser vices and social protection mechanisms) better enables them to transition in and out of the labour force in balance with family responsibilities. At the same time, encouraging public policy that pro- motes the sharing of household responsibilities between men and women w ill help reduce the double burden many young women bear.
Sustainable Development Goal 9: indus- try, innovation, and infrastructure. A broad goal in itself, Goal 9 lies at the heart of creat- ing the labour demand needed to bolster youth employment in both developed and
developing countries. International efforts to promote inclu- sive and sustainable industrialization will constitute a pri- mar y force for creating jobs for present and f uture generations of young people on the scale required to
address current and projected unemployment challenges. Importantly, Goal 9 includes a focus on small-scale indus- trial enterprises, with particular emphasis on increasing their access to financial services and integrating their output into international value chains. Such efforts are vital if SMEs are to become the engines of job creation they potentially represent. Likewise, infrastructure and ICT investments will provide the foundations on which competitive businesses are built, while enabling--in the context of public-private partnerships--increased opportunities for local private sec- tor growth and immediate job creation. Improvements in infrastructure also facilitate mobility and access for young women, youth with disabilities, and other young people excluded from effective economic participation.
S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m en t G o a l 1 0 : red u c ed i n eq u a l it y. P romoting decent work for youth means promoting decent work for all young people, regardless of class, ethnic or religious background, sex-
ual orientation, or disability status. In this regard, elimi- nating discr iminator y labour market reg ulations and p ra c t i c e s a r o u n d h i r i n g a n d f i r i n g i s e s s e nt i a l . Governments must prioritize the adoption and enforce- ment of laws and policies that effectively combat wage and employment discrimination. Goal 10 incorporates a broad range of objectives, including targets focused on effecting planned and well-managed migration policies and on reducing costs associated with workers' remit- tances so that young migrants are better able to support family members back home.
S u s t a i n ab l e D e v e l o p m en t G o a l 1 2 : responsible consumption and production. Education and employment are inextrica- bly linked to respon sible con sumption an d p ro du c t ion . Target 1 2 . 8 s e ek s to
ensure "that people everywhere have the relevant infor- mation and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in har mony w ith nature", and an associated
indicator (12.8.1) focuses specifically on the role of edu- cation , mea sur ing prog ress ba sed on the "ex tent to which (i) global citizenship education and (ii) education for sustainable development (including climate change education) are mainstreamed in (a) national education policies; (b) curricula; (c) teacher education; and (d) stu- dent a ssessment ". Under G oal 8, which fo c u ses on decent work and economic growth, target 8.4 calls for "improving  global resource efficiency in consumption and production and [endeavouring] to decouple eco- nomic growth from environmental degradation". In the pursuit of job-oriented economic growth, attention must be given to the economic devastation the global com- munity experiences from the pollution, global warming, and waste associated with unregulated production and rampant consumerism. As consumption and production habits change, so too will the nature of the jobs and skills req uired to suppor t them . Steps should be taken to ensure that youth are provided with the skills needed in those industries that promote sustainable solutions to environmental challenges.
S u s t a i n ab l e D e v e l o p m e n t G o a l 1 3 : clim ate ac t ion . Target 13. 3 stresses the imp or tan c e o f imp rov in g "e du c at ion , awareness-raising and human and insti- tutional capacity on climate change miti-
gation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning", and its accompanying indicator (13.3.1) uses as a meas- ure of progress the integration of these issues into sec- o n d a r y a n d te r t i a r y e d u c a t i o n --w h i c h h a s d i re c t relevance for youth. Target 13.b focuses on promoting "mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate ch ange-relate d planning and m an agement in lea st developed countries and small island developing States,
 focusing on women, youth and local and marginalized communities". The potential for such capacity-building in these areas should translate into expanded employ- ment opportunities for youth.
CONCLUSIONS
Progress in the realms of quality education and decent work is mutually reinforcing and acts as a catalyst for pro- gress towards other Sustainable Development Goals. For countries still grappling with high unemployment rates, ensuring decent work for youth is an almost impossi- ble endeavour. Similarly, many countries are struggling to provide youth with education and skills that will ade- q uately prepare them for the rapidly evolv ing labour market. Where youth population growth rates are high, greater investment in young people is needed to harness their human capital. Putting the skills and talents of youth to productive use contributes to economic prosperity and reduced poverty and inequality--all of which are key objectives of the 2030 Agenda.
W hen implemented jointly w ith gover nmental, non-governmental and international organizations, tar- geted vocational training programmes and programmes focu sed on the development of life sk ills (including effective communication and negotiation, decision-mak- ing and problem solving, leadership, personal finance management, and critical thinking) can help ensure that young people are in a better position to secure and retain decent work in a competitive labour market. The involve- ment of a wide range of stakeholders in the development, support and delivery of training contributes more effec- tively to bridging the skills gap and provides youth with expanded opportunities to acquire job-relevant knowl- edge. Training programmes and employment initiatives are particularly crucial for young refugees, as they can assist youth in building their economic lives.
Increased automation and the higher skill require- ments attached to digital technologies are also affecting employment prospects for youth as they transition from school to work. Although young people are generally more familiar with digital technologies than are older adults, they do not always have access to the education
and training they need to secure employ ment in the digital economy, and increased automation is putting many traditional jobs at risk. Access to advanced tech- nologies and relevant training is uneven, resulting in the exclusion of low-income youth and youth living in pov- erty, particularly in developing and least developed coun- tries. During what may prove to be a lengthy transition period, policymakers need to improve the adaptability of institutions to ensure that young workers are protected from the large-scale displacement of jobs by technology.
A key component of the education-employment nex u s is youth entrepreneurship, which can benef it greatly from a holistic approach to skills development. Basic modules on generating a business plan and starting and sustaining a business can provide a solid foundation for continued support, including mentoring for potential young investors. Integrating the development of life skills in entrepreneurship training is also critical. The human development approach holds that young people should be directly involved in shaping their futures, and in this context, the voice, agency and well-being of youth should inform any strategy for skills development and broader youth development.
The human development approach provides impor- tant insight into the role education and work both play in human flourishing. Proponents of this approach argue that not all work is good, and that young people may be justified in not wanting to accept or remain in some types of employment. This notion is worth exploring in the con- text of sustainable development, mainly because it repre- sents a strategic shift from the rhetoric of employability and entrepreneurship to a more practical, people-centred approach aligned with the imperatives of decent work and sustainable livelihoods. This discourse dovetails with the nexus of education and employment, particularly in their role as a cornerstone supporting the achievement of other Sustainable Development Goals.
CHAPTER V
WHERE'S THE EVIDENCE?
EVIDENCE-BASED
YOUTH POLICIES AND THE ROAD TO 2030
YOUTH development is assigned high priority in a number of national, regional and international instruments. However, young
people continue to face structural and societal barriers to full and effective participation in political, economic and community life (United Nations, 2016a), placing them at increased risk of poverty, violence, disadvantage, displacement and marginalization. The 2030
Agenda is universal in nature and sets out goals and targets to mitigate such challenges, but effectively addressing them requires targeted interventions through the development and implementation of youth policies and the mainstreaming of youth issues into broader policy and planning frameworks.
Youth policies can contribute to the success of the 2030 Agenda by enabling young people to fulfil their potential as active members of society. Targeted youth policies help reduce inequality not only among young people but between young people and the broader community by promoting youth empowerment and engagement in all aspects of life.
69
Recognition of the value of youth policies for develop- ment is not new. The World Programme of Action for Youth was adopted in 1995, providing the first global framework for youth policy development at the national and international levels; it has also served as a tool for monitoring and tracking youth development in key areas, particularly since the 2012 release of 49 proposed indicators to measure its implemen- tation. Over the past several decades, an increasing number of Member States have adopted and implemented youth policies and programmes to advance youth development, and youth employment has been a focal point, especially in recent years. Stubbornly high levels of youth unemploy- ment since the global economic crisis of 2008 have led many Member States to develop youth employment and entrepreneurship policies and programmes.
WHAT DOES A STRONG YOUTH POLICY LOOK LIKE?
T here is no one-size-f its-all approach to developing a strong youth policy. The nature of a youth policy will largely depend on the context in which it is being devel- oped (for example, in a least developed or developed country, or in a stable or conflict-affected environment), as well as on the thematic substance of the policy (youth employment, health, participation, or one or more other focal points). Such specificities notwithstanding, it is pos- sible to identify a number of core elements that inform the development and implementation of a strong youth policy; these are explored in more detail in the present Report and are outlined below.
 Evidence-based. Strong youth policies are informed by timely and accurate data and statistics on the
situation of young people, gathered through both quantitative and qualitative means. Sources may include, inter alia, national household surveys and evidence provided or collected by young people themselves.
 Participatory. Strong youth policies require direct youth input. The knowledge, experience and expertise of young people must be integrated
in the design, implementation and evaluation of youth policies; such input may be secured through the establishment of youth advisory bodies or cooperation with national youth councils, as well as through outreach to individual young people both online and offline. Engagement at all levels
of government and across different ministries and departments also contributes to the development of effective youth policies.
 Integrated and cross-sectoral. Strong youth policies should be cross-sectoral and well integrated into broader policy frameworks. Care should be taken
to ensure that youth policy objectives and out- comes are compatible with and supportive of other policies and mandates, including the Sustainable Development Goals, in a whole-of-government approach.
 Funded. Strong youth policies must be supported by adequate budget and resource allocations to ensure effective implementation.
 Committed. Strong political leadership and strategic vision are required to push for the implementation of youth policies at all levels of government.
 Accountable. Strong and transparent monitoring and accountability frameworks should accompany youth policies so that impact and progress can be tracked and measured, improvements can be made, and public officials can be held to account.
MAINSTREAMING YOUTH POLICIES
While stand-alone youth policies target youth-specific issues and challenges, the mainstreaming of youth poli- cies and priorities into the sectoral policies of line minis- tries can contribute to more holistic youth development and may reduce the likelihood that vulnerable and mar- ginalized youth will fall through the cracks in policy and programme implementation. Rural youth, for example, are often marginalized and hard to reach, and ensuring
BOX 5.1.
A TOOLKIT ON QUALITY STANDARDS FOR YOUTH POLICY
European Youth Forum
In 2016 the European Youth For um launched a toolkit on quality standards for youth policy, pro- viding youth organizations with a means of assess- ing the quality of youth policy in their own local, national and regional contexts. The toolkit outlines eight quality standards that represent good quality youth policy, and a set of indicators for each stand- ard allows a more precise analysis of the situation of youth in specific contexts.
T he standards are also a valuable reference for gover nm ent al an d intergover nm ent al in st it u- tions that work with youth policy or are involved in reviewing and developing national or European youth strategies.
While the toolkit is mainly used to assess youth poli- cies at the local to regional levels, it can also be used by youth organizations to examine and reflect on their own youth policies, help inform their advocacy plans, and promote the rights of young people in their work.
that the challenges they face--including limited access to education and broadband technology--are addressed in a country's livelihood/rural policy will increase the visi- bility of this youth demographic. Such an approach is fully aligned with the commitment of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind.
YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN POLICY DEVELOPMENT
Robust and comprehensive policies and strategies recog- nize young people as active agents of change and actors in their ow n and wider development. However, many polices with a direct or indirect impact on young people are developed and delivered without youth consultation or participation, reflecting both a lack of recognition of the value young people can bring to decision-making and a disregard for the rights of youth to participate in matters that affect them.
Young p eople are an essential resource in the development of youth and youth-related policies. They speak from personal experience of having lived as young people in today's world, giving them a unique perspective on their situation as well as innovative ideas and solutions that can guide policies to address some of the most press- ing challenges they face. Involving young people in policy formulation, implementation, monitoring and follow-up can enhance the success of policies and create a sense of ownership among youth--an important condition for inclusion and development.
Recognition of the value of youth input is grow- in g , a s ev i d e n c e d by th e g ra d u al in c rea s e i n th e number of government entities establishing youth partic- ipation mechanisms in policymaking and decision-mak- ing. Acknowledging the critical role young people can and should play in sustainable development, governments at all levels are leveraging this resource that is youth through the creation of youth parliaments; the designation of
youth delegates; the engagement of youth-led structures in policymaking design, implementation and follow-up; online and offline consultations with youth; and youth engagement in processes pertaining to the implementa- tion of the 2030 Agenda (see chapter VI).
FINANCING YOUTH DEVELOPMENT One of the biggest obstacles to achieving the objectives of stand-alone and mainstreamed youth policies is the lack of adequate financing.
The political commitment to youth development can most often be measured by budgetary allocations to youth policies and programmes. Historically, youth policy and development efforts have been considerably underfunded at all levels of government and at the international level. Even the most ambitious and well-designed youth policies stand little chance of succeeding when little or no budget- ary support is available.
Increased investment is needed to cover the costs of realizing the Sustainable Development Goals--including those directly or indirectly linked to youth development. UNESCO estimates that annual education expenditure will need to rise from $149 billion to $300 billion over the
15-year period covered by the 2030 Agenda if sustaina- ble development objectives are to be met. While there is evidence that many low- and middle-income countries have been increa sing their educational ex penditure commitments since 2000 (the start of the Millennium Development Goal period), much more financial support is needed. Factoring in projections for continued improve- ments in domestic revenue mobilization, UNESCO pre- dicts an annual shortfall of $39 billion in global education finance (UNESCO, 2016a, p. 134).
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the
through the means of implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, and this, in turn, offers an opportunity to scale up investment in youth.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda outlines an array of financing sources and instruments that could effectively suppor t sustainable development objectives and, by extension, youth policy objectives. Indeed, it explicitly promotes "national youth strategies as a key instrument for meeting the needs and aspirations of young people" (para. 16), highlighting the value and importance of incor- porating youth strategies and policies into sustainable development actions.
While the funding sources and instruments outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda are not specifically linked to youth development, they offer an opportunity to direct financing towards youth policy implementation. There is an increasingly diverse array of external, domestic, public, and private financing sources, including ODA, sovereign wealth funds, tax revenues, NGO donations, public bor- rowing, foreign direct investment, private borrowing, and philanthropic giving. Various financial instruments can be considered depending on the specific development context and needs of a country; examples include securities and structured funds, ethical funds, bonds, insurance, taxes, and results-based financing.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda lacks specificity on financing options for youth development. However, within the framework of the third International Conference on Financing for Development,numerous commitments were made to creating funding mechanisms for particular development priorities. An important example is the Global Financing Facility, a financing platform launched to support the United Nations Global Strategy for Women's, Children's and Adolescents' Health (2016-2030) and the Sustainable Development Goals (World Bank, 2015a); this platform is
Addis Ababa Action Agenda presents an opportunity	 	
to reinv igorate inter national f inancial commitments
designed to serve as a catalyst for innovative financing in the areas of reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health in the period leading up to 2030. Specific financing partnerships and instruments such as these allow targeted allocation of resources to youth-specific issues.
A political commitment to strategic resource devel- opment and allocation is essential if youth policies and the Sustainable Development Goals as a whole are to be adequately funded.
Some members of the international NGO community are demanding that global tax reforms be instituted to cover
the costs of realizing the Sustainable Development Goals. At the national level, tax incentives given to the wealthy and corporations have a significant impact on the government budget. Collectively, tax losses in developing countries are estimated to be as high as $339 billion (Archer, 2016), and global losses from multinational corporate tax manipu- lation and undeclared offshore wealth are estimated to amount to $800 billion (Cobham and Klees, 2016). A global financial transactions tax could potentially generate sub- stantial revenues. Financing for sustainable development (and, by extension, for youth development) could benefit from even a partial move in this direction.
BOX 5.2.
CASE STUDY: PHILANTHROPIC INVESTMENT IN YOUTH LIVELIHOODS
MasterCard Foundation
The MasterCard Foundation has been responsible for some of the strongest philanthropic investment in youth devel- opment programmes in recent years. In particular, the Foundation has sought to address issues of youth transitions to employment through its Youth Livelihoods Program.
This Program provides skills training for economically disadvantaged young people and focuses particularly on the agricultural and construction sectors owing to their high absorption capacity at the entry level. The training mod- ules deliver a combination of technical skills, foundational skills (numeracy/literacy), and soft skills (including critical thinking, communication and teamwork). There is a special focus on building financial literacy, and access to financial services is part of the programme as well.
Research commissioned by Williams and Pompa (2017) on youth livelihoods in Ghana and Uganda suggests that a focus on mixed youth livelihoods has important advantages. The report summarizing the research findings shows that many young people engage in diverse livelihood activities that reflect seasonal effects, combining informal sec- tor employment, self-employment, and agriculture-related activities to sustain their livelihoods. This diversification increases income and reduces risk, and diversification within these categories (for example, growing crops and raising livestock) has similar effects. The report acknowledges that entrepreneurship is risky but argues that the low capital intensiveness of most youth businesses means that youth are able to move in and out of entrepreneurship relatively easily and safely. Surrounded by poverty and with little prospect of even regular informal sector employment, many African youth will have to rely on mixed livelihoods for the foreseeable future. Skills programmes that recognize and respond to this reality have the best chance of success.
TRACKING YOUTH EXPENDITURE
Aside from designating specific budgets for youth poli- cies and programmes, issue-based mainstreaming into fiscal budgets is an increasingly popular mechanism that can be leveraged to support the implementation of youth development efforts by monitoring the amount of money spent on youth-related issues across broader policy and budget lines. The ability to identify and track youth-spe- cific expenditure helps inform the development of evi- dence-based youth policies. In turn, greater transparency promotes accountability and allows citizens to understand and influence decisions on how public money is spent.
This concept is not new. Gender mainstreaming, the most widely known example, offers a way to decide on and track budget allocations and spending through a gen- der lens. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) has devel- oped a handbook that presents the rationale for costing gender equality, outlines the steps of a costing exercise, and reviews case studies reflecting the application of this approach (UN Women, 2015). Similarly, the Poverty- Environment Initiative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has produced a handbook for main- streaming environmental issues for poverty reduction and sustainable development (Green Fiscal Policy Network and others, 2016).
Another tool gaining traction and supporting issue mainstreaming is the Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (CPEIR) (Dendura and others, 2015). The first CPEIR was conducted in Nepal in 2011 with the support of UNDP, and an additional 33 countries have since carried out CPEIRs. A diagnostic tool, CPEIRs are most often led by ministries of finance and planning to assess opportunities and constraints associated with the integration of climate change concerns in national and subnational budget allocation and expenditure processes
and to help accelerate budget accountability and respon- siveness for sustainable development. The CPEIR analyti- cal framework comprises three key areas: policy analysis, institutional analysis, and climate public expenditure anal- ysis. The tool provides a useful framework for assessing budget allocations for policies and programmes, particu- larly for cross-cutting issues such as youth development.
Somewhat more relevant in the present context is child-based mainstreaming, which is increasingly being used to track public spending on children. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) is monitoring the grow- ing number of countries developing tools to better meas- ure and report on child-related expenditures (Cummins,
2016). UNICEF predicts that because children are prominent across the Sustainable Development Goals, targets and indicators, this trend will continue to grow, particularly in countries where demographic changes are placing greater stress on budgets and consequently providing more of an impetus to monitor child-related public spending. UNICEF is leading efforts to develop a global methodology for child-focused public expenditure measurement that takes into account different country contexts and their respective public financial management capacities.
Adapting the above-mentioned approaches to youth development could provide a tool for measuring and monitoring expenditures on young people and facilitate youth mainstreaming in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Such an assessment would provide a better understanding of the financing and needs gaps in youth development efforts and strong justification for evidence-based budget and resource allocations support- ing youth development. Countries for which a World Bank public expenditure review is available could use this mech- anism as a starting point (World Bank, 2016). In support of such efforts, the World Bank BOOST initiative collects and compiles data on public expenditure and makes this infor- mation publicly available in a user-friendly format, currently for about 40 countries (World Bank, 2017).
While monitoring spending on children and other development priorities has gained momentum, monitor- ing of expenditure on young people lags behind. Youth expenditure tracking remains challenging owing to the lack of reliable and timely age-disaggregated data on youth populations. Efforts to increase the availability of age-disaggregated data in the context of the 2030 Agenda provide an opportunity to develop tools for better tracking of spending on youth across budget and policy areas.
THE ROLE OF DATA
IN EVIDENCE-BASED
YOUTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT
National, reg ional and inter national f ramework s can provide impetus for the development and implementa- tion of youth policies, but without timely and accurate data and ev idence the effectiveness and relevance of such policies remain uncertain at best and the desired outcomes unattainable at worst. Lacking robust data and evidence, policymakers may have a partial or inaccurate
v iew of the situation of youth, which can lead to the development of policies that inadvertently divert scarce resources from addressing the needs of youth who are out of sight, including those who are already marginal- ized and vulnerable.
Quantitative and q ualitative data and statistic s, scientific knowledge, and practical information are all required for the design, monitoring and evaluation of effective youth policies. Such data deepen the under- standing of the current situation of young people and serve to guide the development of appropriate and suc- cessful youth strategies and policies grounded in reality.
Reliable data are important because they help inform the design and development of youth policies, and when produced consistently using internationally agreed defini- tions, methods and standards, data can also be used to track the situation of youth over time, monitor changes, and allow policymakers and youth to assess the impact of policies. The use of standardized methods also allows intracountry and intercountry comparisons and the identification of best
practices to support policy development. These data are key to holding Governments and policymakers accountable in meeting their youth development commitments.
Both the 2030 Agenda (target 17.18) and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (para. 126) place great importance on the availability of up-to-date, high-quality disaggre- gated data for informed and transparent decision-making and for improving policymaking at all levels.
By 2020, enhance capacity-building support to developing countries, including for least developed countries and small island developing States,
to increase significantly the availability of high- quality, timely and reliable data disaggregated by income, gender, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, target 17.18)
We will seek to increase and use high-quality, timely and reliable data disaggregated by sex, age, geography, income, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, and other characteristics relevant in national contexts. We will enhance capacity- building support to developing countries,
including for least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, for this purpose and provide international cooperation, including through technical and financial support, to further strengthen the capacity of national statistical authorities and bureaux. We call on relevant institutions to strengthen and standardize data on domestic and international resource mobilization and spending, as well as data on other means of implementation. In this regard,
we will welcome proposals on improved statistical indicators for all means of implementation. We also
request the Statistical Commission, working with the relevant international statistical services and forums, to facilitate enhanced tracking of data on all cross- border financing and other economically relevant financial flows that brings together existing databases and to regularly assess and report on the adequacy
of international statistics related to implementing the sustainable development agenda. The availability of timely and reliable data for development could be improved by supporting civil registration and vital statistics systems, which generate information for
national plans and investment opportunities. (United
Nations, 2015e, para. 126)
For the Goal s of the 2030 Agenda to be f ully realized, tran sfor mative action s and improvements are needed in how data are produced, gathered and used, and in identif ying the types of data needed to best serve particular groups--especially the vulnerable and marginalized. T his w ill req uire investments and capacity-building in a number of areas, including the development of data systems, the improvement of data literacy and accessibility for citizens, and the fostering of public-private partnerships for data collection, sharing and analysis.
GLOBAL INDICATOR FRAMEWORK FOR THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
This new emphasis on evidence-driven action is mani- fested in what amounts to a "data revolution" for sustain- able development.Leading the charge is the Sustainable
Development Goal global indicator framework.The framework was developed by the Inter-Agency and Expert
Group on Su stainable Development Goal Indicators (IAEG-SDGs), established by the United Nations Statistical Commission in 2015 and composed of 28 Member States representing each region of the world. The framework con- sists of 232 indicatorsthat are classified into three tiers (see box 5.4) and are to be disaggregated at the national level. The indicators collectively serve as a tool to help countr ies monitor prog ress toward s the Su stainable
BOX 5.3.
CASE STUDY: YOUTH POLICY BUILT ON EVIDENCE
Rwanda
Since the conclusion of its devastating civil war and the genocide of 1994, Rwanda has experienced impressive eco- nomic growth, averaging nearly 7.9 per cent a year since 2000, and per capita GDP has more than doubled in real terms. The share of those living below the poverty line ($1.90 a day) has dropped from 77 to 60 per cent. For youth, though job quality remains a vital concern, the unemployment rate is estimated at 3.3 per cent. In spite of the political situation, Rwanda has made tremendous strides in resolving long-standing poverty, safety and employment issues for its youth. The efforts of the Government of Rwanda to improve development outcomes have garnered the support and praise of international agencies, along with occasional statements that its approach represents a new development model for the least developed countries.
Two key aspects of the Rwandan approach have been a commitment to evidence-based policymaking and the use of reliable data to ensure the effective and efficient use of scarce resources in all areas of development, including youth policies and programmes. Towards this end, Rwanda signed a programme of support with the United Nations in 2011, directing nearly $2 million towards strengthening local monitoring and evaluation capacities (UNDP, 2012). The assis- tance agreement included specific provisions for the strengthening of capacity at all levels of public administration and the preparation of a national monitoring and evaluation policy.
The country's openness and commitment to impact evaluation for pilot programmes is particularly noteworthy. Working with international donors, NGOs, and research institutions, Rwanda has undertaken a large number of experimental and quasi-experimental studies in recent years in order to better understand the direct impact of programmes in literacy and education, health-care provision, agricultural development, and youth economic empowerment. In terms of the country's approach to evaluation in the youth sphere, stand-out examples include evaluations of the Akazi Kanoze life skills and work readiness training programme and the entrepreneurship education programme in schools, both of which were run as randomized controlled trials. Despite employment declines for both the treatment and control groups, a higher percentage of youth in the Akazi Kanoze programme were employed after the programme ended (Alcid, 2014). The entrepreneurship education programme evaluation, currently under way, is examining the effects of a teacher train- ing programme on student academic, economic and labour market outcomes, based on the understanding that entre- preneurship training will only be successful if instructors can deliver the material effectively (Blimpo and Pugatch, n.d.).
Development Goals and thereby facilitate the devel- opment of evidence-based policies and more efficient resource allocation.
The global indicator framework provides an impor- tant impetus to gather better sex- and age-disaggregated information, which should produce a far more accurate picture of the situation of young women and young menand thereby lead to the development and imple- mentation of sound, ev idence-infor med policies and programmes.
BOX 5.4. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL INDICATOR TIERS
To facilitate the implementation of the global indicator framework, the 232 indicators are currently classified into three tiers based on their level of methodological devel- opment and the availability of data at the global level:
Tier 1: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an interna- tionally established methodology and standards are available, and data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per cent of countries and of the popula- tion in every region where the indicator is relevant.
Tier 2: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an inter- nationally established methodolog y and standards are available, but data are not regularly produced by countries.
Tier 3: No internationally established methodology or standards are yet available for the indicator, but method- ology/standards are being (or will be) developed or tested.
Youth-related indicators
Of the 232 indicators in the global framework, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs has identified 90 that can be considered related to youth development. The statistical annex to the present Report collates available global and regional data for the 90 youth-relevant Sustainable Development Goal indicators and for the 34 core indicators for the World Programme of Action for Youth. The enormous potential these indi- cators represent for youth development is limited by the large gaps in data availability. Moreover, not all of the indi- cators are disaggregated by sex, age, geographic location or other variables that would provide a clearer picture of
the youth situation. Data availability issues for both sets of indicators are evident in the statistical annex and are summarized in table 5.1.
While some of the Sustainable Development Goal and World Programme of Action for Youth indicators appear to be similar, there are distinct differences in their descriptions and in the data they are intended to cover. The two sets of indicators should be considered comple- mentary but do not overlap.
Using Sustainable Development Goal indicators to track Addis Ababa
Action Agenda commitments on youth
Although the two instruments complement one another, the structural differences between the 2030 Agenda (for- mulated around thematic goals and outcomes) and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (formulated around finan- cial and non-financial flows and instruments) can make it difficult to align and track indicators, targets and com- mitments (United Nations, Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development, 2016). As noted in the 2016 report of the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development, the successful implemen- tation of both agendas requires the harnessing of their
internal and external synergies. Synergies can be found through each Sustainable Development Goal draw ing on relevant sources and instruments of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda's seven areas, while each area of the Action Agenda can draw from the means of implementa- tion set out under every Goal. A comparison of the Action Agenda commitments with the Sustainable Development Goal indicators clearly demonstrates how the latter can help monitor and assess progress towards commitments in the former, including those pertaining to youth (de la Mothe Karoubi, Espy and Durand-Delacre, 2016).
This synergistic relationship is exemplified in the area of youth employ ment. Sustainable Development Goal indicator 8.b.1, which measures "total government spending in social protection and employ ment pro- grammes as a proportion of the national budgets and GDP", has been established to measure progress towards target 8.b, which is to "develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization" by
2020. As this is the same commitment as that set out in paragraph 16 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, progress
can easily be measured through the relevant Sustainable
Development Goal indicator.
As is the case with the Sustainable Development Goals, the availability of age-disaggregated data makes it possible to measure and monitor investments in young people in areas of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda that make no specific reference to youth. For example, progress on commitment 117, which focuses on maintaining an enabling environment for the sharing of technology and entrepreneurship, could be measured in part by Sustainable Development Goal indicator 4.4.1, which reflects the "pro- portion of youth and adults with information and commu- nications technology (ICT) skills, by type of skill".
Mind the gap: how the lack of
age disaggregation hinders potential
While the Sustainable Development Goal global indica- tor framework provides the opportunity and impetus to gather data on young people in important areas, it does not cover all areas pertaining to youth development. Youth nutrition is one such area, as noted in the recent
report of the Secretary-General on youth development links to sustainable development:
Although Member-States have repeatedly emphasized the need to increase youth awareness about nutrition, including eating disorders and obesity, it is currently not measured within the global indicator framework, as indicators 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 refer only to children under 5. (United Nations,
2017e, para. 29).
Similarly, no specific youth or youth-relevant indica- tors exist for key environmental goals such as Sustainable Development Goal 14 (life below water) or Goal 15 (life on land). Young people are greatly affected by environmen- tal policies and issues and have been at the forefront of efforts to mitigate environmental destruction, preserve the oceans, and sustainably manage natural resources.While Sustainable Development Goal target 15.c on the
pursuit of sustainable livelihood opportunities refers to local communities, which include youth, there are no youth-specific indicators to measure the contributions of young people.Such gaps highlight the necessity and value of mainstreaming youth into environmental policies and working towards age disaggregation of all indicators, whether specified or not.
Age disaggregation is encouraged for all Sustainable
Development Goal indicators. However, a s the 2030
Agenda ack nowledges in target 17.18, con siderable effort and substantial resources are necessary to ready national stati stic s and data system s to achieve thi s objective. T herefore, it is unlikely that w ide-rang ing
Report age-disaggregated data will be available in many coun- tries for years to come. Importantly, many other data collections currently have age included as a demographic variable, but they are not disseminated in age-disaggre- gated form, making it impossible for policymakers and researchers to analyse the data for different age cohorts.
Gaps in Sustainable Development Goal indicators on youth
Even if it were possible to gather age-disaggregated data on all 90 indicators relevant to youth, the story they would tell about young people would still be lacking.
A key requirement for effective monitoring of the Sustainable Development Goals is the standardization of the indicators (to the extent possible) so that progress can be measured and compared w ithin and between countries and regions. As noted, the capacity of some countries to collect, store and use data is extremely lim- ited. A delicate balance must be struck; it is important to reach agreement on a set of indicators that propel coun- tries towards realizing the Goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda while not overwhelming their capacity to collect relevant data and risk nothing being measuring at all.
The present list of 232 indicators, and indeed some of the 169 targets, fall short of other indicators for which many countries are already collecting and disseminating data and which more accurately measure development progress. When the indicators and targets are viewed through a youth lens, the issues with measurement can be magnified.
Such relative deficiencies are evident for some of the indicators relating to Sustainable Development Goal 4 on education. For example, the indicator established to meas- ure target 4.1 on free, equitable and quality education is based on a minimum proficiency level which will be meas- ured relative to new common reading and mathematics
scales currently under development. Given that even very low thresholds of this kind are not being met by the vast majority of learners in most developing countries, there is a risk that a very low threshold will be set that will have implications for fulfilment of the right to education.
Equality concerns within this context would include a focus on Toma\0x0161evski's 4-A framework (see table 2.1). However, there is little sense across the eleven Goal 4 indicators of notions of acceptability or adaptability. A limited exception is found in target 4.a, which calls for commitments to "build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning envi- ronments for all ", w ith indicator 4.a.1 capturing some elements of availability and accessibility. The draft educa- tion indicators formulated by the education community do reflect more of a rights perspective, but these are of a lower (optional) status than are those developed to meas- ure achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals; the latter indicators focus strongly on outcomes rather than on structural and procedural indicators that could hold States accountable for honouring their obligation to progressively realize the right to education.
Indicator 4.4.1 measures ICT skills rather than a broader set of "skills  for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship" (target 4.4). Clearly, target 4.4 should be conceptually linked to targets 8.6 and 8.b, but that has not been achieved with this proposed indicator.
Differences in measuring sustainable development skills, knowledge and attitudes
Sustainable Development Goal targets 3.7, 4.7, 5.6, 12.8 and 13.3 embody important messages that should be communicated to youth through education. In looking at what is already known about progress towards the new education indicators, UNESCO (2016a) notes that there is considerable unevenness in terms of what is addressed in
existing curricula and how well it is covered. Most coun- tries report that human rights education is integrated into curricula. Three quarters of the countries in Asia and Oceania include comprehensive sexuality education in their secondary curricula. However, a study carried out by UNESCO (2013b) found that in the 32 countries sur- veyed fewer than half of the schools provided life-skills- based HIV education. Moreover, what was covered on gender, sexuality and sexual behaviour was often inac- curate or incomplete or actually reinforced problematic behaviours. Across Africa generally, there was a tendency to ignore sexual diversity, often alongside increasingly homophobic legislation. Equally, child marriage was often absent from the curriculum, in spite of issues surrounding this practice in a number of countries in the region.
As mentioned in chapter II of the present Repor t, UNESCO recently surveyed 78 countries on their inclusion of a range of topics related to sustainable development in their national curriculum frameworks. While almost all showed evidence of topics relating to rights, democracy and sustainable development, notions of social sustaina- bility, gender sensitivity and gender empowerment were present in less than a quarter of the frameworks.
As with the other education targets listed above, there are concerns about who gets to define the related indicators and what is measured.
The problem with defining and interpreting indicators
Within the Sustainable Development Goal framework, the area of education offers a strong example of how issues with definition can affect the interpretation of indica- tors. For instance, in the indicators for target 3.7, there is nothing about the content of education, and the indi- cator pertaining to target 4.7 fails to address the target's acknowledgment of the need to acquire the necessary knowledge and skills "through education for sustainable
development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cul- tural diversity and of culture's contribution to sustainable development" by excluding any reference to sustainable lifestyles, a culture of peace and non-violence, and appre- ciation of cultural diversity and of culture's contribution to sustainable development. The sustainable lifestyles dimension also disappears between target 12.8 and indi- cator 12.8.1. However, indicator 13.3.1 is explicit about curricular inclusions--at the primary through tertiary lev- els--relating to "climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning". As UNESCO (2016a) observes, there is a need for consistency or coordination in responses to the challenges of measuring indicators
4.7.1, 12.8.1 and 13.3.1 where they overlap.
UNESCO notes that there are major challenges asso- ciated with these indicators (ibid.). There is a scarcity of rel- evant tools for assessment. The cultural appropriateness of such tools is a particularly serious issue, as is then moving from contextualized tools to comparative analysis.
How defining what is measured matters
Si mil a r c o n c e r n s ex i s t w ith re g a rd to Su s t ai n ab l e Development Goal 8 on decent work and economic growth. Target 8.6 incorporates the NEET concept. This measure has been criticized for its application to youth labour markets that are significantly different from those in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, where the concept or ig inally emerged. With its inclusion in the Sustainable Development Goals, the NEET concept has assumed global relevance. The chal- lenge is to make the concept work better as an accurate measure of what is supposed to be measured so that it leads to sensible policy interventions.
In a review of NEET measurement issues for ILO, Elder (2015) notes that a core group of organizations
dealing with labour market statistics, including Eurostat and ILO, define the NEET rate as the percentage of the population of a given age group and sex not employed and not involved in education or training.
The actual measurement, however, is dependent on how inactivity--in either labour market or educational terms--is defined. Eurostat, for instance, currently uses labour market status at the time of survey and educa- tional activity within the month preceding survey as their measures. Changing either or both of these parameters can be justified on theoretical grounds but has major implications for the NEET rate.
Moreover, what counts as employment is contro- versial, particularly among those economists who point to the systematic undercounting of household activities, most notably caring work. This issue is relevant across all economies. For low-income countries, there are also specific issues surrounding what the indicator means. The NEET concept was originally applied to those who had completed compulsory education (to age 16) and was often linked to debates about youth being able to rely on welfare payments rather than actively seeking employ- ment, but these realities are rarely mirrored in developing countries. What NEET means conceptually or policy-wise is not well defined.
The acquisition of reliable data is also a major issue. National data are typically derived from standard house- hold surveys, including labour force surveys. However, these are often conducted sporadically, particularly in low-income countries. In many settings, there is simply insufficient statistical capacity to obtain data at the nec- essary level of detail (ibid.).
Many young people are forced out of education before they want to leave and do not have the option of surviving on welfare payments. Rather, they must seek employment, no matter how precarious or informal. As Elder notes, "without a qualitative employment indicator,
we will never gain proper insight to the labour market challenges faced by the majority of the world 's youth population" (ibid., p. 7). Clearly, the achievement of target
8.6 must be linked to a range of other targets, including some of those under Goal 4. However, its closest link is to target 8.b.: "By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization".
CLOSING MEASUREMENT GAPS: USING COMPLEMENTARY INDICATOR FRAMEWORKS TO BETTER UNDER- STAND THE SITUATION OF YOUTH
Although 90 youth-related indicators for the Sustainable Development Goals have been identified, the lack of spe- cific age disaggregation and weaknesses in the measure- ment of some indicators make it likely that gaps in data collection will persist. Given these limitations, it is impor- tant that each country select and adapt its own set of national indicators, responding not only to global moni- toring and reporting commitments but to national reali- ties and priorities. From a youth development perspective, this could consist of adapting and using youth-related indicators from the Sustainable Development Goal global indicator framework and using indicators from comple- mentary frameworks at the national, regional and global levels so that the indicators selected address each coun- try's specific youth development priorities.
World Programme of Action for Youth indicators The indicator framework for the World Programme of Action for Youth--developed in 2012 and consisting of 34
core and 15 supplementary indicators (United Nations,
2012b)--remains an important tool for assessing the sit- uation of youth and can provide information beyond the Sustainable Development Goal indicators. Available
data for the 34 core indicators are set out in the statisti- cal annex to the present Repor t. The World Programme
of Action for Youth indicators were formulated with the
aim of being adaptable to national contexts, and as such could provide data on important areas of the Sustainable Development Goals that are not disaggregated by age and on issues not addressed in the Goals, bolstering efforts to reach and exceed sustainable development objectives by 2030 and beyond. In the area of nutrition, for exam- ple, World Programme of Action indicator 23 monitors the percentage of young people considered overweight and could inform targeted youth health policies in the context of implementing the 2030 Agenda.
W h e n u s e d to g e t h e r, t h e 9 0 y o u t h - r e l a te d Sustainable Development Goal indicators and the 49 indicators for the World Programme of Action for Youth provide a robust overview of the situation of youth. A comparison of the two sets of indicators shows that while many seem to be similar in wording, meaning or objective, there are distinct differences in the data they are intended to cover, suggesting that the Sustainable Development Goal indicators offer the potential, if data are disaggregated, to provide information to complement the World Programme of Action for Youth indicators for which data have not been collected or disaggregated. Where the two sets of indicators differ, each provides supplemental and supportive data not covered within the other indicator framework.
Other frameworks for monitoring the youth situation
For certain development priorities, adequate data collec- tion and analysis are not included in global frameworks such as the World Programme of Action for Youth and the Sustainable Development Goals. The following is noted in the report of the Secretary-General on youth develop- ment links to sustainable development:
Access for youth to land and employment opportunities for youth in agriculture are key points of the World Programme of Action for which no indicators exist. The corresponding Sustainable Development Goal target 2.3, on agricultural productivity, does not specifically mention youth, while indicator 2.3.2, on the average income of small-scale food producers, is not disaggregated by age. (United Nations,
2017e, para. 25)
The report further notes the following:
While technical and vocational education and training are mentioned in the preamble of the
2030 Agenda and the narrative of the World Programme of Action, there is no specific target or indicator related to those activities. This is also the case with other World Programme of Action priorities, such as leisure-time activities and armed conflict. (ibid., para. 26)
The Sustainable Development Goal global indicator framework and World Programme of Action for Youth indicators together provide a comprehensive resource for measuring and tracking youth development, but there are also a number of national, regional and international frameworks that have been set up to monitor youth devel- opment and well-being, including the Commonwealth Secretariat's global Youth Development Index, the UNICEF Adolescent Country Tracker, and regional youth indices (described in some detail below).
T he rep or t of the Inter-Agenc y Ta sk Force on Financing for Development mentions reliance on exist- ing data in relation to advancing commitments in the context of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, noting that
"international support to countries with particular needs and challenges can be monitored through existing OECD Development Assistance Committee indicators for ODA to child and youth-focused prog ramme areas", while monitoring of "youth-related commitments in other areas of the Addis Agenda can draw on recent international data collection and harmonization efforts, such as under
 the H4+ technical partnershipfor the Secretar y-
General 's Every Woman, Every Child initiative and the new Global Financing Facility for Maternal, Neonatal, Child and Adolescent Health" (Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development, 2016, p. 28).
It is clear that the 2030 Agenda is heavily dependent on existing and developing sources of data/information and means of implementation for its success. In order to optimize the impact of these tools, however, enhanced efforts are needed at all levels to improve the capacities of those collecting and using data--including not only official sources such as national statistical offices and institutions, but also the private sector and civil society, including youth.
HARNESSING THE DATA REVOLUTION Over the past several years, the importance of gathering youth-specific data has been increasingly recognized, and various tools and frameworks have been developed to improve the collection and mea surement of data on youth development. Such data should be used to better inform the development and implementation of evidence-based youth policies and contribute to efforts to meet the Sustainable Development Goals. Below is a selection of existing and upcoming tools created to help monitor youth development on the road to achieving the Goals by 2030.
T he Commonwealth Secretariat's global Youth Development Index measures progress in youth develop- ment in 183 countries (Commonwealth Secretariat, 2016). It includes 18 indicators relating to education, health and well-being, employment and opportunity, and civic and political participation (see http://youthdevelopmentindex.
org/ ).
T he UNICEF Adolescent Countr y Tracker, cur- rently being developed in collaboration w ith several
partners, is an outcome-based framework and a pro- posed set of indicators closely linked to the Sustainable D e v el o p m e n t G o a l s ( s e e h t t p s : //d a ta . u n i cef . o r g / w p - c o nt e nt / u p l o a d s /2 0 1 8 / 0 5 /A d o l e s c e nt- C o u nt r y -
Tracker-postcard-30Apr18-2 .pdf ).
T he Youth Progress Index is a joint initiative of the European Youth Forum, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, the Organization for Security and
BOX 5.5.
REGIONAL COLLABORATION: WORKSHOP ON EVIDENCE-BASED POLICIES ON YOUTH DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA AND
WORKSHOP ON PROMOTING THE SUSTAINABILITY OF THE YOUTH POLICY TOOLBOX IN ASIA-PACIFIC
Member States working together at the regional level are able to pool resources, knowledge and capacity to enhance sustainable development efforts. Regional collaboration offers the opportunity to streamline processes linked to identi- fying and addressing national policy priorities and reporting on progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals.
Bangkok, Thailand
Government officials, youth development practitioners and youth leaders representing 17 countries in Asia met in Bangkok from 29 May to 1 June 2017 to share their experiences with evidence-based approaches to youth devel- opment policies and programming. The discussions were part of an inter-agency effort spearheaded by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), and Commonwealth Secretariat, bringing together ILO, UNDP, UNESCO, UNFPA, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), United Nations Volunteers, and UN Women. Representatives from a number of regional organizations, including ASEAN and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, pre- sented regional youth frameworks including the ASEAN Youth Development Index.
More than 80 participants--including government officials, civil society and youth representatives, and international partners--discussed ways to increase the use of youth indicators and global data in national youth policy formulation.
Many participants acknowledged the vital role young people and evidence-based youth policies play in national development and called for investment in youth by Asian leaders. They also agreed to formulate national action plans to strengthen youth policy development and implementation in their respective countries.
Economic Cooperation in Europe's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, and the Social Progress Imperative. The Index has been set up to raise awareness of the factors contributing to the social progress of young people, offer input to stakeholders, and provide grounds for evidence-based policymaking to improve the lives of young people worldwide and ensure that they claim their rightful place in society (see www.youthprogressindex.org).
The ASEAN Youth Development Index, launched by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations' Ministers of Youth in July 2017, targets individuals aged 15-35 years using various indicators closely related to the ASEAN Work Plan on Youth 2016-2020. Because youth in the ASEAN region are 6.4 times more likely than their adult counter- parts to be unemployed (the global average is three times), youth employment and entrepreneurship are key to the Index and the Work Plan. The Index also focuses on edu- cation and leadership, health and well-being, participation and engagement, and values and identity. The Index is expected to serve as a key instrument in evidence-based policy formulation in the region and in the planning of new interventions and programmes for youth (see http://asean. org/?static_post=first-asean-youth-development-index).
T he European Youth Monitor, launched by the European Commi ssion in 2015, compr i ses 41 stati s- tical indicators and is used to measure progress in the eight fields of action of the EU Youth Strategy (culture and c reativ it y, education and t raining, employ ment and entrepreneurship, health and well-b eing, social inclusion, voluntary activities, youth and the world, and participation). The indicators cover young people aged
15-29 years across the 28 member States of the European Union and are based on data collected from 2010 onward, mainly from Eurostat and Eurobarometer.
The Ibero-American Pact for Youth was adopted by heads of State in Latin America in 2016, identifying youth development within the Sustainable Development Goal framework as its first priority (UNESCO, 2016c). A commit- ment was made to "introduce the participation of young people in the 2030 Agenda by setting up a regional sys- tem of youth targets and indicators" (Youth Employment Decade, 2016).
Leaving no youth behind: enhancing data on marginalized and vulnerable youth
T he lack of robust, disagg regated demog raphic data makes the development of effective policies aimed at m arg in ali zed and v ulnerable youth par t ic ularly dif- f ic ult. T he United Nation s S u s t a i n ab l e D e vel o p m e nt Goals Repor t 2017 notes that "children living outside of family care, persons with disabilities and older persons, for example, have largely fallen off the statistical \0x2018map'" (United Nations, 2017c, overview), and the same is true for specific groups of young people, including indigenous youth; young migrants and refugees; lesbian, gay, bisex- ual and transgender youth; and youth with disabilities.
Although efforts are under way to ensure that data are collected on persons w ith disabilities, indigenous persons, and other statistically neglected groups, the information gathered is often not broken down by age. In countries in which the collection of data on vulnerable and marginalized groups has not been initiated or is in the nascent stages, it is virtually impossible to assess the situation of youth from these groups.
Circumstances such as these inter fere w ith the ability of policymakers to develop evidence-informed pol- icies that take into account the needs and challenges of the most vulnerable and marginalized youth and provide them with resources and opportunities to participate and thrive.
Building capacity for data
A focus on quantitative and qualitative data, including open data, and statistical systems and administrations at the national and subnational level will be especially important in order to strengthen domestic capacity, transparency
and accountability in the global partnership. National statistical systems have a central role in generating, disseminating and administering data. They should be supplemented with data and analysis from civil society, academia and
the private sector. (United Nations, General
Assembly, 2015a, para. 125)
National statistical offices are at the heart of the data revolution, providing key statistics on the population at the country level. However, many national statistical offices, particularly those in least developed and fragile countries, struggle to collect accurate and timely data ow ing to a lack of infrastructure, including financial, technical and human resources. A massive increase in the capacity of data systems and institutions will be needed to enable national statistical offices to deliver and use data effectively and thereby contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. This is recognized as integral to the 2030 Agenda, as noted in the following:
We will support developing countries, particularly
African countries, least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing countries, in strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices and data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data. (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 76)
Enhancing national statistical capacity is a major undertaking. Factors such as the level of development of a country, infrastructure, conflict status, and human and financial resources all impact the quality and quantity of data collected. Too many countries still have poor quality data that effectively exclude key populations such as those with disabilities, indigenous peoples and youth. The time between gathering, releasing and using data can often be so lengthy that the data are rendered obsolete, informing policies that no longer reflect the situation on the ground. Census data, generally collected every ten years or at best
BOX 5.6.
GAPS IN DATA ON INDIGENOUS YOUTH
Data on indigenous youth remain extremely limited. In some countries, including Botswana, Burkina Faso, Morocco, Rwanda, Uganda, and the United Republic of Tanzania, a lack of consensus on the definition of the term " indigenous peoples" means they are not counted in national data sets and official statistics-- which renders them invisible in terms of policy deci- sions and resource allocations. Those data that do exist often reveal wide disparities between indigenous and non-indigenous youth. Such gaps are particularly evident in the area of education; for example, while several countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have made notable progress in primary education, statistics for the region as a whole indicate that of the
85 per cent of indigenous children who attend second- ary school, only 40 per cent complete their education at that level (Champagne, 2009, p. 135). Similarly, evi- dence points to indigenous youth struggling in the area of mental health; suicide rates for this demographic are high, especially among young indigenous men. In some countries, life expectancy is up to 13 years lower for indigenous youth than for non-indigenous youth (Naciones Unidas, CEPAL, 2014).
every five years, provide the foundation for national sta- tistical systems. With regular, wide-ranging census data and data from sample surveys and administrative records, national statistical offices can provide the comprehen- sive, up-to-date statistics and information required by the Sustainable Development Goal framework.
Even when data are disaggregated by sex, age or other criteria, this often occurs only at the national level. However, data can vary widely within municipalities and across the regions of a country. Subnational disaggrega- tion of data is therefore critical to better understanding variations and differences in the challenges and needs of youth at the local and regional levels and is key to inform- ing more accurate policy respon ses (United Nation s Secretary-General's Independent Expert Advisory Group on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development, 2014).
W hile ef for t s are u n d e r w ay to inte g rate th e Sustainable Development Goals into national and local planning processes (see chapter IV), action is also needed to ensure that national statistical offices and institutions are ready and able to collect timely, accurate, and usa- ble data for more robust policymaking at all levels. As emphasized in A World T hat Counts: Mobilising the Data Revolution for Sustainable Development,this requires
a new way of thinking and the adoption of innovative approaches that include integrating new technology for data collection and dissemination, leveraging public-pri- vate partnerships, complementing official statistics with new and varied data sources (integrating data gathered by civil society, for example), and creating an environment for civil society actors, including youth, to better access and use data, in part by providing data that is compatible with geospatial information systems (ibid., p. 9).
Financing data innovation
Inadequate financial investment in strengthening offi- cial data systems, infrastructure and administration is one of the clearest impediments to ensuring the provi- sion of more robust, timely, and accurate data. For least developed countries and countries affected by conflict, the investment of scarce resources in building the data infrastructure is naturally much less of a priority than the provision of basic goods and services. It is important to take the long view, however; a strong statistical infrastruc- ture can facilitate the production and use of more timely and accurate data, which in turn can make efforts to meet basic needs more fruitful.
In order to bridge this gap, the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data has set up a funding initiative to suppor t low- and low-to-middle-income countries in collaborative data innovations for sustaina- ble development. Through a series of pilot projects, the initiative focuses on data production, dissemination and use in 20 countries across Africa, Asia and the Middle East, encouraging collaboration, experimentation, knowl- edge acquisition, and capacity development in the field of sustainable development data (Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, 2017).
Such partnerships are consistent with the prevailing wisdom that the production of robust and accurate data is increasingly reliant on leveraging the nexus between official and unofficial data streams. Draw ing together stakeholders from government institutions, the private sector, technology, academia, and civil society (including youth) helps to inform a more holistic understanding of the challenges and opportunities surrounding efforts to meet the Sustainable Development Goals.
Collaboration and integration can extend in many directions, both within and between countries. Multiple- source data, effectively managed, greatly enrich national data sets and contribute to more informed policymaking.
Furthermore, through cooperation at the regional level, national statistical offices can support and build capacity in neighbouring countries.
Power to the people: democratizing the data revolution through new technology and open access to data
Every day, individuals produce more and more data about themselves, both passively (through monitoring by new technologies such as street cameras and trackers) and actively (through Internet searches, online purchases, and the use of social media and wearable technology). New technology is linked to a massive increase in the amount of data being produced; IBM estimates that 90 per cent of all data in the world have been created over a recent two-year period (2015-2016) (IBM Marketing Cloud and Comsense, 2016).
With the enormous amount of data being created, the speed of data acquisition, and the detail and accuracy of the data collected, it is now relatively easy to obtain up-to-date statistics and information on human needs and challenges for the purpose of informed real-time pol- icymaking (United Nations, Independent Expert Advisory Group on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development,
2014, p. 5). However, transforming massive quantities of raw data into actionable data requires careful analysis, classification and quality assessment. Fortunately, there are many data quality frameworks available; national quality assurance frameworks can be found using the United Nations Statistics Div ision search tool (United Nations, 2015c).
Technology offers a means of ensuring that data are open, accessible, fit for purpose, and usable. For data to be accessible and usable they must be concise, under- standable, and develop ed and presented w ith u sers in mind. Efforts to enhance user-friendliness through increased reliance on data visualizations such as info- graphics and interactive websites/databases highlight
the important role technology plays in bringing data to the people.
The nexus between the development of technology and the push towards open data provides opportunities to empower citizens to access and use data and to hold public officials accountable through the tracking of data related to policy outcomes over time. BudgIT in Nigeria offers a powerful example of how technology and data can work together to enhance transparency in financial planning and tracking within the national budget frame- work (see box 5.9).
Bridging the technological divide
Te chnolo g y p rov ide s an imp or tant op p or t unit y to improve openness and tran sparenc y in data collec- tion and availability; however, many countries still lack basic technolog y infrastructure, including broadband Internet, which greatly limits data accessibility for both policymakers and the public. People who are margin- alized, vulnerable or experiencing poverty are often at the greatest disadvantage, as they are less likely to have access to technology or to have the data and technology literacy skills they need to meaningfully access and use data. Situations such as these threaten to widen the dig- ital divide and expand inequalities between technology haves and have-nots (United Nations Secretary-General's Independent Expert Advisory Group on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development, 2014, p. 7).
Efforts to enhance not only statistical infrastructure but also technology infrastructure and access through, for example, increased broadband coverage, reduced technology costs, digital and data literacy skills develop- ment, and increased access to mobile devices will help narrow the digital divide and will also ensure that the data revolution leaves no one behind. Increased financial and human resource investment is needed to strengthen data capacity, infrastructure and skills development to close the gaps in data access and use. Youth-driven data Although the digital divide persists, w ith many of the world's most vulnerable at risk of being left behind, there Youth in Africa are using technology to contribute to the development of new, smarter agricultural practices.
Less than 10 per cent of Africa's 50 million small- holder far mers have adeq uate access to credit. Two recent computer science graduates from the University of Nairobi decided to use their skills and innovative ideas to bridge the gap between small- holder farmers and financial institutions, setting up FarmDrive to provide credit scores for small- holder farmers in Kenya so they can access credit to invest in eq uipment, fer tilizer, ir rigation and other key inputs and generate sustainable business opportunities.
FarmDrive has developed a technology platform that collects farmers' data and tracks their farming activ- ities via free short message service (SMS) on mobile phones while also acting as a financial record-keep- ing tool, making farmers financially aware of their businesses as they begin keeping records. It then combines this information with other agricultural data (from input suppliers and produce buyers, for example) as well as satellite, mobile and other data. These data are then transformed into a credit profile and shared with financial institutions for credit assessment and funding. In February 2017, FarmDrive was selected as part of telecommuni- cations firm Safaricom's $1 million Spark venture fund, which provided FarmDrive access to $250,000 in new funding. So far, the company has reached 372,000 farmers and approved 6,000 loans.
https://farmdrive.co.ke/ is promising evidence that young people are making sig- nificant strides in the use of technology. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimates that in 2017,
71 per cent of youth worldwide were online, in compari- son with 48 per cent of the general population (ITU, 2017). However, this high percentage masks significant varia- tions. While 94 per cent of youth in developed countries are using the Internet, the same is true for only 67 per cent in developing countries and 30 per cent in least developed countries. ITU estimates that nearly 9 out of
10 young people not using the Internet reside in Africa or in Asia and the Pacific. The vast differences in Internet access among countries have an enormous impact on the world's ability to harness sufficient data for the achieve- ment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Such challenges notwithstanding, it is often young people in developing and least developed countries who are adopting technology and effectively propelling their communities into the technological age. While access to reliable fixed-line broadband remains an issue for many countries, mobile broadband systems (wireless wide area networks accessed through mobile devices) are providing an alternative route to digital access, and this is allowing many developing countries to skip ahead in terms of technology advances. In the space of a decade, Africa has witnessed the fastest growth in mobile subscribers in the world, with the total estimated at 759 million in 2017 (ibid.). Young people have been at the forefront in embracing mobile technology; as shown in box 5.7, some are even using it to devise solutions to development challenges.
Young people have also been leading in the area of data v isualization and communication . T here are
numerous examples of young people transforming raw data into information that is readable and digestible; their input is critical to translating complex ideas surrounding sustainable development efforts into ideas that can be communicated not just to a youth audience but to civil
society more broadly.
The utilization of open source technology, access to open and transparent information and data sources, and own-means data collection have enabled young people to use data in a variety of innovative ways, helping to create a more robust analysis of their situation and bring
about positive change (see box 5.8).
BOX 5.8.
YOUTH IN ACTION:
MENSTRUAL HYGIENE INNOVATION CHALLENGE
U-Report in Pakistan
U-Report is a text-based mobile phone service designed to give young people a chance to voice their opinions on issues they care about in their communities, encourage citizen-led development, and create positive change.
Youth following @UReportGlobal on Twitter receive polls and alerts, and their input is processed using a system that allows for real-time response mapping and data collection. Issues polled relate to health, education, water, sanita- tion and hygiene, youth unemployment, HIV/AIDS, disease outbreaks, and anything else people want to discuss. The results are then shared with the community.
In Pakistan, results from a U-Report poll showed that 49 per cent of young girls had no knowledge of menstruation prior to their first period and that 23 per cent wanted to learn about menstruation in school.
A three-hour live chat allowed space for more than 2,500 young people to ask questions related to menstruation, such as "Can I take a bath during my period?" and "Why should girls not play games during periods?" The polls and feed- back from the live chat signified to UNICEF Pakistan Innovation and WASH colleagues that more needed to be done to enable young people to access information on menstruation without shame.
Based on the results, UNICEF WASH and U-Report in Pakistan launched the Menstrual Hygiene Innovation Challenge in June 2017, encouraging youth to take action on menstrual hygiene management in their communities.
As part of the Challenge, young people and U-Reporters were called upon to submit innovative ideas on tools, mod- els, and services that might be used to enable girls and women to manage their menstruation hygienically. UNICEF received 60 proposals; seven winners were selected and awarded grants to help fund their projects. The winning entries included an initiative to provide convenient, cashless and timely access to a range of menstrual hygiene prod- ucts, packaged around a digital media campaign; a virtual support network for menstrual hygiene management aimed at destigmatizing conversations around menstruation by educating young girls and boys in a fun and interactive way; animation featuring an adolescent girl dealing with diverse menstruation-related issues; and a mobile application to help girls track their period cycles.
http://ureport.in/ 
Young p eople h ave al so b een u sing d ata and technology to hold Governments accountable for their development efforts, monitoring progress and using data to explain and relay statistical information in easily digest- ible formats to a wider audience (see box 5.9).
Safeguarding privacy in a data-rich world
While exponential growth in the quantity, quality and types of data accessed and collected is linked to a corre- sponding expansion in the amount of potentially useful information available on people and planet, it also comes with a higher risk of privacy breaches and the misuse of sensitive information. Increasingly, concerns about online hacking and the release of personal information are mak- ing news headlines, and the issue of how information is used and tracked by private companies (such as social media and mobile service providers) and government entities is leading to greater levels of distrust in both.
With many young people already experiencing a crisis of trust in their Governments, creating robust and continually updated regulations that safeguard the rights of citizens to privacy and protect the security of infor- mation will be an essential component in ensuring that the data revolution is based on respect for human rights, equality and dignity for all (United Nations, 2016a).
CONCLUSIONS
Not only do sound youth policies make a vital contri- bution to advancing many Su stainable Development Goals today, but they also shape the leaders of tomor- row. Sound policies are necessarily tailored to local and national contexts but often share some common ele- ments. T hey are based on evidence. T hey seek youth participation in their design, implementation and mon- itoring. They are integrated and aligned with other gov- ernment policies. Most importantly, they are backed by a
strong commitment, accountability, and adequate fund- ing at the policymaking level.
Current levels of spending on youth-related devel- opment are inadequate. Without increased investment in areas such as education, many countries are unlikely to meet Sustainable Development Goal targets by 2030. Recent domestic and international initiatives aimed at boosting youth-focused investments are encouraging, but gaps remain.
Relevant and timely data on how much and how well public financial resources have been utilized to achieve youth-related goals are essential for ev idence-based policymaking, addressing gaps, and improving the effec- tiveness of existing spending. Recent efforts to monitor spending in other cross-cutting areas such as gender, children and climate provide a useful reference for similar approaches to enhance youth mainstreaming in the con- text of 2030 Agenda implementation.
The 232 Sustainable Development Goal indicators underline the critical role data play in the realization of the
2030 Agenda. They also reveal limitations in the coverage of youth-related goals and targets and the widespread lack of age-disaggregated data in reporting.
Innovative approaches and considerable capac- it y-building w ill b e ne e de d to addre s s the l ack of age-di sagg regated data a s well a s data ineq ualities and incon si stencies w ithin and b et ween count r ies . Gover nments should also take f ull advantage of the opportunities new technologies provide and should fos- ter partnerships among different stakeholders.
Evidence and transparency are necessary but are not sufficient to achieve real transformation in policies and the use of public resources. Greater participation by citizens--especially youth--and improved accountability on the part of Governments are needed to bring about the desired changes.
BOX 5.9.
CASE STUDY: SIMPLIFYING THE BUDGET THROUGH DATA VISUALIZATION
CHAPTER
5
BudgIT in Nigeria
Founded in 2011 by young entrepreneur Oluseun Onigbinde, BudgIT is a civic organization that works to simplify budget and related public spending data for citizens across all liter- acy levels using an array of technology tools (including info- graphics), with the primary objective of raising the standard of transparency and accountability in government.
BudgIT has four areas of focus:
	Budget access, which empowers citizens with budget and public finance data, allow ing them to demand improved service delivery and take action within their communities.
	Tracka, a project tracking tool used to build a commu- nity of urban and rural residents in Nigeria that can fol- low up on nearby public projects and demand efficient service delivery (see below). Offline, citizens participate in community engagement meetings and can give feed- back on development projects in their areas using SMS. Tracka is now functional in 20 of 36 states in Nigeria.
	E x t r a cti v e s , en l i g hten in g c it i z en s o n e x t ra c t iv e resource issues with a focus on accountability and fiscal inclusion.
	Institutional support provided to the media, other civil society organizations, and the Government to advance transparency and civic engagement.
So far, BudgIT has engaged more than 1.9 million residents of Nigeria, both online and offline, leading discussions on government finance and spending and public sector effi- ciency. BudgIT has rapidly become a trusted source for pub- lic finance data in Nigeria, receiving more than 5,000 unique data requests monthly from private, corporate, and devel- opmental entities/individuals. Its growing success has led to offices being set up in Sierra Leone and Ghana, and there are plans to cover more countries in Western Africa.
Tracka
Launched in 2014, Tracka (http://tracka.ng) is a social plat- form of and for active citizens who are interested in track-
ing budgets and public projects in their communities. Tracka is layered on open data and integrated with existing social media tools, enabling people with common interests to share photos, videos and documents and to post comments on existing projects.
Using grass-roots monitors and part- ners for public projects located across
Nigeria, this approach explores the use of technology to track budgets and monitor progress, with project tracking officers (PTOs) reporting feedback to the appropriate executive and legislative bodies. Social media is used to amplify discussions on projects. Tracka has more than 12,000 user-generated reports and has successfully advocated for the completion of more than 80 projects across 20 local communities.
BudgIT works with willing institutions interested in deepen- ing transparency, citizen engagement and capacity-building. It has supported more than 35 institutions in Nigeria and is working with the Kaduna State Government in implement- ing the Open Kaduna Project. BudgIT is working with other NGOs and the Federal Government on the Open Government Partnership, a cause it has championed for several years.
Tracka action: primary health-care centre in Magarza The construction of a primary health-care centre in Magarza Town (Kebbi State, Nigeria) has been a priority for the mem- bers of the community. Prior to the inclusion of this initia- tive as a constituency project, BudgIT PTOs "were informed that residents had to travel across rivers to the neighbour- ing community of Kalgo to access health-care services. Residents were  unaware of the existence of the project until they were met with and informed about it in August
2016 by the principal PTO.  The PTO encouraged them to monitor the implementation of the project by visiting the project location and speaking with their Representative, Hon. Abdullahi Farouk, to ensure speedy delivery" (BudgIT/ Tracka, 2017). This project represents the BudgIT model of engaging citizens with data, initiating action to demand accountability, and ensuring the delivery of service in an inclusive manner.
In September 2016, Tracka held a town hall meeting with residents of Magarza, further encouraging them to write let- ters to their ward representative and the Ministry of Health to make inquiries on the status of the project as captured in the 2016 budget. The head of the community reached out to Tracka in January 2017 to confirm that the construction of the clinic building had commenced. At the time of writing, the next phase of advocacy is to ensure that the health-care centre is properly stocked with adequate medications.

CHAPTER VI
YOUTH IMPLEMENTING THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
We are determined to mobilize the means required to implement this Agenda through a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, based on a spirit of strengthened global solidarity, focused in particular on the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable and with the participation of all countries, all stakeholders and all people.
(United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, preamble,
para. 9)
THE realization of the 2030 Agenda relies on the active engage- ment of all segments of society, with a shared focus on addressing
the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable. The job of transform- ing the Sustainable Development Goals into meaningful policies and programmes that address the needs and challenges of the world 's poorest and most vulnerable falls primarily to governments at the local and national levels. This is reflected in the 2030 Agenda, nota- bly in Sustainable Development Goal target 16.7, which stresses the
importance of "responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making at all levels" through accountable, effective and transparent institutions, and in target 17.14, which addresses the importance of enhanc- ing "policy coherence for su stainable development". Together, these targets reflect the indivisible nature of the 2030 Agenda and the impor tance of embracing a whole-of-gover nment approach to integ rating the Sustainable Development Goals into national develop- ment plans through cross-sectoral and multilevel policies and coordination.
Many countries have already started integrating the Sustainable Development Goals into their national and local development strategies and policies, establishing or rev italizing mechani sm s to enhance in stitutional and policy coherence through the creation of national Sustainable Development Goal coordination councils and bodies. Such mechanisms play a vital role in ensuring ownership of and buy-in to the Goals from all sectors and levels of governance and allow various ministries and government structures to work together when advancing and integrating their sustainable development objectives.
Cross-sectoral, whole-of-government approaches to development necessitate increased dialogue, planning and coordination horizontally across government bodies
and ministries and vertically to include multi-level gov- ernance bodies and mechanisms, as well as a new way of thinking about resource allocation. Including non-gov- ernmental stakeholders such as civil society youth organ- izations adds another layer of coordination and further enr iches the overall development perspective. W hile approaches featuring enhanced coordination may help leverage and promote the more efficient use of existing financial resources, they require substantial and increased investment in human resources to train and incentivize policymakers and public servants to work outside of their existing silos, and in particular with external stakeholders. At the institutional level, it is necessary to strengthen the ability of sectoral ministries and subnational governments to work in a participatory manner.
This inclusive approach to development is particu- larly beneficial for young people. The creation and imple- mentation of strong and effective youth policies require a whole-of-government approach, drawing in different line ministries and departments as well as various levels of government and multiple stakeholders to ensure that policy development and implementation are robust and reflective of the whole of youth. Such a process provides an important opportunity to strengthen youth main- streaming and youth policy implementation at all levels
BOX 6.1.
PRINCIPLES FOR YOUTH ENGAGEMENT
IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 2030 AGENDA
In 2017, the United Nations Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development's Working Group on Youth and the 2030
Agenda developed a set of guiding principles for development partners on youth engagement in the implemen- tation of the 2030 Agenda, with UNDP and Restless Development leading the process (see box 6.2). The principles are intended to provide "guidance on how to effectively, proactively and responsibly foster youth participation in [Sustainable Development Goal] implementation across development contexts so that the collective power of young people can contribute to real and lasting change" (Restless Development, United Nations Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development and UNDP, 2017, p. 1).
BOX 6.2.
INTER-AGENCY NETWORK ON YOUTH DEVELOPMENT
Guiding Principles for Supporting Young People as Critical Agents of Change in the 2030 Agenda
1. Approach youth participation and empowerment, in all actions, as an essential principle for the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
2. Promote youth participation and empowerment in all phases and levels of 2030 Agenda actions, including plan- ning, implementation and in monitoring and accountability for the Goals, including through youth-led initiatives.
3. Ensure that the alignment of development priorities with the SDGs at all levels addresses young people's specific needs and is responsive to their voices, respects, upholds and promotes their rights, especially by strengthen- ing avenues for youth participation and increasing investments in youth-led development. Applying a human rights-based approach and the application of international labour standards and other United Nations norma- tive frameworks relevant to the development of young people is key.
4. Foster and support overall enabling environments for inclusive and meaningful youth participation in all phases of 2030 Agenda processes, including through structured, substantive and effective participation in official policy processes, the promotion of formal and informal spaces where young people can engage with each other and the community at large, volunteering schemes, multi-stakeholder SDG initiatives and partnerships and sustaina- ble funding.
5. Strengthen youth agency by supporting capacity development for young people, youth organisations, networks and movements, and all other stakeholders, including authorities and duty-bearers, to enhance mutual respon- siveness, trust and collaboration in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
6. Recognise and value the diversity of young people's experiences by finding ways to systematically, sustainably and responsibly engage young people and their organisations, networks and movements, typically left out of development projects and programmes, in line with the Agenda's principle of "leaving no one behind".
7. 	Promote gender equality and girls' and young women's empowerment as critical for achieving the 2030 Agenda.
8. Advocate for youth-sensitive national and local SDG indicators, in addition to age disaggregation, as a critical avenue for ensuring development progress, make data sources youth-friendly and foster young people's role in generating data on the Goals.
9. Find creative ways to engage young people throughout the entire SDG programme, project or initiative cycle, from consultation and design to monitoring and evaluation of initiatives, while ensuring that M&E frameworks are sensitive and relevant to them.
10. Ensure that young people's participation in SDG action is meaningful by setting clear and substantive objectives and establishing channels whereby youth participation can have a visible impact on outcomes.
and to promote better integration of youth perspectives across ministries and mandates, contributing to a more holistic approach to youth development.
In a time of fiscal spending constraints and often meag re budget allo c ation s for youth development, mainstreaming allows for a more efficient allocation of resources and funding, fostering policies and program- ming that are designed and resourced in a more holistic way (see chapter V).
THINK GLOBALLY, ACT LOCALLY: THE ROLE OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
The achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals depends on Governments addressing national priorities by taking ownership of the global agenda and turning the framework into measurable policies and actions at the local level.
Local authorities are often well placed to implement development efforts in a comprehensive and integrated manner. Working more closely with people, including the poorest of the poor, they are positioned to better under- stand the needs of those to whom they are delivering services and infrastructure. They are often more inclined to take holi stic approaches to development, in par t because of their smaller size and resource allocations, and can often work across sectors in ser vice delivery. Because there tends to be greater overlap in functions, responsibilities, and practice between bodies and per- sonnel, local authorities often enjoy a strong advantage in policy integration.
Localizing the 2030 Agenda requires taking into account subnational contexts in each country, identifying and adapting specific goals, targets, and indicators, identi- fying the means of implementation and funding sources,
and establishing monitoring and reporting mechanisms. Another requirement is to ensure the meaningful par- ticipation of local citizens, particularly marginalized and vulnerable groups, to further strengthen the legitimacy and effectiveness of the policy and programme response being implemented.
Presently, Member States are in varying stages of developing structures, processes and policies to facilitate the implementation of the Su stainable Development Goals at the local level that allow for the vertical and hor i zontal implementation of p olicies, pro g rammes and activ ities. T his process prov ides an oppor tunity to analyse how youth policy outcomes can contribute to Sustainable Development Goals and targets and to enhance the integration and mainstreaming of youth policies and actions into local Sustainable Development Goal action plans and strategies.
YOUTH IMPLEMENTING THE 2030 AGENDA
The 2030 Agenda places strong emphasis on the engage- ment of all sectors of society in its adaptation, imple- mentation, monitoring, follow up and review. The 2030
Agenda states that "children and young women and men are critical agents of change and will find in the new Goals a platform to channel their infinite capacities for activ- ism into the creation of a better world" (para. 51). To date, youth engagement in Member States' implementation of the 2030 Agenda has been somewhat limited; however, it is starting to grow.
Young people have been at the forefront of activi- ties and initiatives aimed at furthering the 2030 Agenda and meeting the Goals. Youth are engaging in a myriad of ways including awareness-raising, data collection and use, grass-roots and national initiatives, monitoring and accountability efforts, and shadow reporting on progress.
BOX 6.3.
YOUTH BUILDING CAPACITY: PARTICIPATORY APPROACH FOR SAFE SHELTER AND SETTLEMENTS AWARENESS (PASSA)
Costa Rica
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and Habitat for Humanity International are working together to empower young people as agents of change in the twenty-first century. The two organ- izations are helping youth build resilient communities through the Participatory Approach for Safe Shelter and Settlements Awareness (PASSA), a tool aimed at developing local capacity to address shelter- and settlement-related risks, including mental health issues in fragile contexts. IFRC seeks to capitalize on the power of youth collectives and support the development of STEM skills in areas such as engineering and land mapping as well as skills in information acquisition, joint analysis and decision-making so that young people are equipped to take appropriate action in their communities, contributing to disaster preparedness in their neighbourhoods.
The priorities for moving from pilot to global roll-out are outlined below.
The first priority is to reach at least 10,000 adolescents in 70 cities and 10 countries over the next three years. A train- ing structure has to be in place both within IFRC and with global partners. In the first phase, a small core global team will train regional trainers who will, in turn, train facilitators who will then run PASSA Youth activities with young par- ticipants. As part of this first phase, regional trainers will be identified to expand the core team and make the second phase more cost-efficient.
The second set of priorities includes making PASSA Youth sustainable by connecting with synergic initiatives, culti- vating a PASSA Youth network to facilitate the sharing of resources and expertise, and devising a knowledge manage- ment strategy.
The third priority is to amplify the impact of PASSA by supporting the implementation of approximately 350 commu- nity projects that can benefit from seed funding and connections with local supporters, tool developers and potential cofounders.
The proposed approach will generate strategic opportunities for sustained youth action, encouraging young people to establish connections with communities facing similar issues, collect pivotal local data, and analyse aggregated data that can then be shared with the communities.
Example from the field
In June 2016, PASSA Youth was piloted in a disaster-prone area in Costa Rica. The training mobilized 20 young peo- ple between the ages of 12 and 18 from the community of Chacarita in Puntarenas Province, as well as a group of 15 young leaders from the community and the Costa Rican Red Cross. IFRC, Habitat for Humanity International, and the Costa Rican Red Cross contributed to the organizing team.
The training resulted in young people identifying floods as a critical problem in the area and waste disposal as one of the main factors contributing to flooding. To address this issue, the youth, under the leadership of two artist trainers and mentors, implemented clean-up activities and designed a mural to raise awareness in the community. They also developed an action plan to extend and expand their work.
Increasingly, Member States are recognizing how impor- tant multi-stakeholder participation is for the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals and are engaging civil society in national coordination and planning, reporting, and follow-up and review processes, including the VNRs submitted to the United Nations on progress achieved.
T he subsection s b elow highlight var iou s ways young people are engaged in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda in the areas of advocacy, awareness-raising
and capacity-building; decision-making and policy devel- opment; financing and budgeting; data generation and indicator development; monitoring and accountability; and follow-up and review.
Advocacy, awareness-raising and capacity-building
Through online and offline campaigns, workshops, pub- lications, and events, young people have been active in
BOX 6.4.
CASE STUDY: YOUTH AS TRAINERS --
TRAINING DISASTER MEDICINE TRAINERS
Established in 2015, Training Disaster Medicine Trainers (TdmT) is a student- and expert-led programme that equips medical students with the knowledge and skills they need to take action in disaster situations. The programme is hosted by the International Federation of Medical Students' Associations, together with the Research Center in Emergency and Disaster Medicine of the Universit del Piemonte Orientale, and is supported by experts from the World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, European Master Disaster Medicine Alumni, and Medecins sans Frontieres.
The aim of this initiative is to train medical undergraduates in disaster medicine. Students learn about ethical chal- lenges during disasters, the health consequences of different forms of disasters, international coordination systems, and international humanitarian law (including implementation challenges). Many medical programmes do not include a disaster medicine component, and this programme is designed to fill that gap.
TdmT students come from all around the world. After completing the programme, they return home and train others in their community using a peer-to-peer methodology. The programme utilizes various innovative teaching methods, including table-top and virtual simulations, role-plays, and real-size disaster simulations. Students also receive a men- tor from their region who works in disaster medicine and can provide them with professional and research guidance.
To date, more than 60 students have graduated from TdmT programmes and have delivered over two dozen peer-to- peer training courses in disaster medicine in their communities. Overall, the initiative has directly impacted more than
520 medical students around the world. A detailed analytical evaluation is undertaken after every workshop to ensure that specific audiences are able to adapt sessions to the individual needs of affected communities. Such flexibility ena- bles course graduates to tailor their activities to the specific challenges faced by their communities, which feeds into the individual yet collective approach to disaster risk reduction both globally and locally.
https://ifmsa.org/2016/09/18/expert-training-disaster-medicine-medical-students/
drawing attention to the 2030 Agenda, the Sustainable Development Goals, and key youth development issues (see boxes 6. 3-6.5). T hrough peer-to-peer education, training and capacity-building, youth-led organizations are also at the forefront in the planning and delivery of workshops and campaigns to provide a youth perspec- tive on national sustainable development discussions and to en sure that youth are meaning f ully engaged . While youth-led organizations are often well placed to provide training and support to policymakers and gov- ernment officials in their efforts to integrate youth pol- icies and participation into public planning processes, such organizations often suffer from a lack of resources, f unding and recog nition . Awareness of and capacity
for development activities could be greatly enhanced
through increased financial and regulatory support for youth-led structures.
Decision-making and policy development Coherence and coordination across government agen- cies, sectors and policies are needed to integrate the 2030
Agenda into development plans and to adapt the com-
mitments, goals and targets of global frameworks such as the Sustainable Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda to local and national contexts. Increasingly, Governments are recognizing the importance of estab- lishing and supporting mechanisms and structures for the meaningful engagement and participation of civil society stakeholders, including youth, in sustainable development
BOX 6.5.
CASE STUDY: THEGOALS.ORG -- RAISING AWARENESS ONLINE, DRIVING ACTION OFFLINE
Focusing on turning the first connected generation into the first sustainable generation, TheGoals.org uses an inno- vative and transformative crowd-learning approach that goes beyond traditional e-learning. It draws from digital and analog learning tools and combines them for a fun and engaging learning experience that connects young people worldwide, encouraging them to explore global challenges and take local action.
Launched in 2012 with the creation of a digital platform accessible from the simplest mobile device, The Goals.org has since grown into a learning platform for sustainable development based on the 2030 Agenda. It offers courses on each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, allowing youth around the world explore, create, share knowledge, and pro- vide feedback to each other as part of the learning process.
The platform generates unique mission stories based on distinctive youth voices. It was used by the Major Group for Children and Youth as an advocacy tool for the Ocean Conference held by the United Nations in June 2017. Participating in a course on Sustainable Development Goal 14, users immersed themselves in sustainability issues, carried out activities in their local communities, and reflected on issues concerning themselves, their lifestyles, and the oceans. The 1,500 users together generated approximately 3,000 mission stories that showcased their own activ- ities, ranging from plastic collection to awareness-raising campaigns. Most importantly, the stories had a significant impact on the users' ocean literacy, helping to bridge the gap between highly knowledgeable ocean scientists and activists and the general public in terms of understanding the importance of the world's oceans.
efforts. Such participation can take many forms, ranging from consultation to collaboration and partnership.
Youth engagement in decision-making processes often takes the form of large-scale online consultations at the national level that are meant to provide a sense of the issues of concern to youth. Such consultations produce a useful snapshot of the situation of many young people that can be used to inform and elaborate polices and strat- egies. However, broad, generic consultations run the risk of excluding young people who are hard to reach, vulnerable or marginalized; indigenous and rural youth, for example, may not have access to online participation mechanisms. Moreover, while such participation and feedback can
BOX 6.6. CONSULTATIONS FOR ADAPTING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Dur ing the process of def ining the 2030 Agenda , Turkmenistan held country consultations with sup- port from the United Nations to discuss the lessons learned from the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals, to inform the public of the global discussions on the Sustainable Development Goals, and to seek input to the 2030 Agenda. These consultations engaged diverse stakeholders such as parliamentar- ians, academics, youth and schoolchildren (the Youth Union), women (the Women's Union), private sector actors (the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs), and NGOs working with persons with disabilities. The consultations resulted in a very high level of govern- ment awareness of the Sustainable Development Goals and contributed to the introduction of a whole-of- government approach to the Goals.
provide a good overview of key issues concerning youth, it does not allow for a deeper discussion and understanding of why these issues are impacting young people.
From consultation to collaboration
Meaningful and sustained youth engagement requires that young people be involved in all aspects of policy- making and decision-making through mechanisms such as youth advisory boards for government entities, youth parliaments, and regular meetings and dialogue w ith members of parliament and local councils.
One way to facilitate such coherence is through the establishment of multi-stakeholder councils and similar bodies that provide advice to Governments on national development issues. Several countries have established national councils for sustainable development whose aim is to better coordinate sustainable development efforts and policies and facilitate their integration into existing plans and strategies. While examples of youth-led organization and youth representative involvement in Sustainable Development Goal coordination mechanisms remain sparse, the growing recognition of the value and impor tance of young people's engagement in policy development more broadly points to improved prospects for the meaningful and sustainable engagement of youth in Sustainable Development Goal coordination bodies.
A few countries have actively sought youth involve- ment in policy discussions. Canada, for example, has the Prime Minister's Youth Council, a group of young people aged 16 to 24 years "who provide non-partisan advice to the Prime Minister and the Government of Canada on issues of importance", including employment, access to education, strengthening communities, climate change, and clean growth (Canada, 2017, background). In Burkina Faso, the Government has appointed a youth leader to take on what is essentially an "ombudsman for youth " role during the Sustainable Development Goal advance- ment and localization process, and this individual reports
directly to the Prime Minister (Restless Development and the Commonwealth, 2016). The prominence of this role helps to elevate youth issues and to draw awareness to the importance of youth engagement at all levels.
National youth councils constitute a key point of reference for many Gover nments seeking to engage
young people in the development of youth policies. Such councils do not exist in every country, but where they do, they typically provide an independent, democratically structured platform for a country's youth-led organiza- tions to convene and work together on common priorities
and messages about youth development at the national
BOX 6.7.
CASE STUDY: SUPPORTING YOUNG WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION -- THE BUTTERFLY PROJECT
India--YP Foundation
Established as a youth-led and youth-serving group in 2002, the YP Foundation endeavours to strengthen young people's engagement in policymaking and community advocacy at the local, national and regional levels through a number of programmes and projects.
Through its Butterfly Project, the YP Foundation seeks to empower marginalized and vulnerable young women with the confidence and skills to tell their own stories and demand change. Initiated in 2006, the Project provides a forum in which these young women can address issues of identity, human rights, sexual and reproductive rights, and dis- crimination through digital media. Dalit, Muslim, and other disenfranchised young women and girls use the strength of their own digital stories to become powerful community advocates for equity, gender equality, and freedom from violence in their interactions with decision makers including families, community leaders and key stakeholders.
Currently, the Project works with more than 200 girls and young women living in three districts of Rajasthan and Delhi where gender inequality and rates of child and early marriage are high, female educational attainment is low, and women's health indicators are poor. Since its inception, the programme has successfully brought together young women and girls from Dalit and Muslim backgrounds in poor urban and rural areas. Empowered by the Project, girls and young women are advocating for their sexual and reproductive rights and have leveraged their collective influ- ence to resist and subvert oppressive gender norms in their communities. Young Women Leaders from the project such as Shabana, Fancy and Bhanwari have rebelled against child and early marriage conventions and have nego- tiated with their families to continue their education and follow their career aspirations. Shabana, a Muslim girl who lives in a resettlement colony in Delhi, has convinced her family to allow her to continue her education and has made her parents understand why attending Project sessions is important. She has also motivated other girls from her com- munity to join the Project. Bhanwari and Fancy, who are Dalit girls from a rural district in Rajasthan, conducted a short survey to assess the distribution of the workload between men and women in their village. They used their findings-- which underline the enormous load placed on women's shoulders--to rally their neighbours and other families to promote gender equality and recognition of women's unpaid labour.
http://www.theypfoundation.org/programmes/ 
level. Many Governments turn to the youth councils when developing and implementing youth policies and strate- gies. National youth councils can provide an important resource for policymakers in elaborating policies and efforts to meet youth-related goals and targets in the con- text of the 2030 Agenda.
Financing and budgeting
A s noted throughout the Rep or t, youth development efforts often suffer from a lack of adequate financing. The adaptation and implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda within the framework of national and local plans of action provide an opportunity to increase investment in youth development policies and programming. Young people play an important role in advocating for youth mainstreaming in financial planning and budgets and can work to ensure that a youth lens is used for decisions on sources and instruments of finance. Promoting better policy and programming coordination through a whole-of-government approach that includes ministries of planning and finance plays a key role in ensuring that youth issues, policies and programmes are considered in overall development decisions and are allo- cated adequate financial resources.
A number of tools exist to help development actors identify the best sources of financing for their sustainable development efforts. Development finance assessments (DFAs) accessible through the United Nations system, for example, provide decision makers with strategic support including a panoramic dashboard-like view of all avail- able financing options and the information needed to use them (Stratta, 2015). DFAs assess financing policies and institutional arrangements with a view to strength- ening coherence and connectedness between different financial flows and national priorities and the Sustainable D evel o p m e nt G o al s (Un ite d Nat i o n s D evel o p m e nt Group, 2017), and they offer the opportunity to integrate
The Arab Youth Climate Movement is an independent entity working "to create a generation-wide movement across the Middle East and Northern Africa to solve the climate crisis, and to assess and support the estab- lishment of legally binding agreements to deal with climate change issues" within the framework of inter- national negotiations. The Movement was launched in September 2012 by youth from more than a dozen Arab countries in the lead-up to the 18th annual session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC/ COP18) in Doha.
The Arab Youth Climate Movement believes that climate change constitutes a serious threat to humanity and that "young people--as the inheritors of this planet--are the key stakeholder[s] in humanity's response to the cli- mate crisis". In addressing the climate crisis, there is "an opportunity to create a more sustainable, prosperous, meaningful, just, and fair world".
By fostering "formal and informal climate and environ- mental education, building the capacity of local popu- lations to understand the effects of climate change on their communities and to take action", the Movement endeavours to empower "young people in their local communities to create change on a national, regional and inter n ation al sc ale" while engag ing youth in Conference of the Parties "and international climate pol- icy sessions, as well as in grassroots solutions in their respective countries".
http://aycm.org/about-us/ 
various perspectives into financial planning and decision- making. While integrating a youth lens and the monitor- ing of youth spending into financial planning is not yet the norm, DFAs could provide countries with a way to facilitate issue-based mainstreaming and, in particular, the integration of youth perspectives into budgets in the context of the 2030 Agenda.
Participatory budgeting, which engages citizens in decision-making on government financial allocations,
is another way to involve youth directly in f inancial planning processes, particularly at the local level. An approach that emerged in the city of Porto Alegre, Brazil, in 1989, participatory budgeting helps address inequality by expanding and strengthening the involvement of cit- izens in the allocation of public resources (LaJeunesse and Derr, 2016). It has been described as an "attractive an d p olit ic ally m alleable dev ic e,  [simplif ie d an d reduced] to a set of procedures for the democratization of demand-making" and increased transparency (Ganuza and Baiocchi, 2012, abstract). Over a period of almost 30 years, participatory budgeting has spread to more than
1,500 cities worldwide (Participatory Budgeting Project, n.d.). While the approach has historically not found much t rac tion among youth (L aJeunesse and D er r, 2016), recent developments indicate that this is changing (see
box 6.9).
Data generation and indicator development
As noted previously, regularly updated, high-quality disag- gregated data are needed to effectively monitor and review progress towards implementation of the 2030 Agenda. However, many countries suffer from a lack of robust data on youth, largely because a great many national data and statistical systems are weak and under-resourced. This interferes with efforts to monitor the situation of youth and ultimately affects the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Where gaps exist, complementary and supplementary systems for data collection and analy- sis must be set up to help provide a more robust and com- prehensive picture of development efforts.
Young people can play a key role in filling in these gaps through the generation and usage of youth-driven data, which in tur n can infor m policy decisions and
BOX 6.9.
YOUTH LEAD THE CHANGE:
YOUTH PARTICIPATORY BUDGETING IN SCHOOLS
United States of America
In 2014, the City of Boston launched Youth Lead the Change, the first youth participatory budgeting programme in the United States. Through this initiative, youth change agents volunteer to develop ideas for capital projects that will bring long-term improvements to the city and make it a better place for young people to live. Provided with some support and guidance, the change agents are responsible for not only conceptualizing projects but also creating budgets and proposals, which they vote on annually. In programme surveys, young people have identified height- ened civic awareness, skill-building, increased motivation to act, and feelings of empowerment as important benefits of participation (Grillos, 2014, in LaJeunesse and Derr, 2016).
Similarly, the Phoenix Union High School District in Arizona initiated a participatory budgeting process in 2016 that saw five schools undertake six months of training, outreach efforts, idea collection events, and meetings with district staff to transform ideas about ways to improve their schools into project proposals (Brennan, 2017). These student-led efforts culminated in an entire week of voting in which 3,854 students in the five public high schools (an average turn- out rate of over 80 per cent) directly decided how to spend $26,000 in school district funds. The district that initiated the process has established partnerships across Phoenix that have already inspired other school districts and cities to reimagine ways to work together (ibid.).
development efforts. Young people generating and using data are not only helping policy makers better under- stand the full situation of youth, but are coming up with initiatives and activities that help meet the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Young people, who have direct access to youth communit ie s , are of ten well pl ace d to colle c t and use q uantitative and q ualitative data on youth at the lo c al level . Such data and infor m at ion c an supple-
ment official data and statistics and contribute to the
BOX 6.10.
ACT!2030: YOUTH-LED, DATA-DRIVEN ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND HIV RESPONSE
ACT!2030 is a global movement of youth* demanding accountability around the Sustainable Development Goals and other frameworks relevant to young people's sexual and reproductive health and rights including access to HIV and other sexual and reproductive health services. Launched in 2013, ACT!2030 is a collaboration between the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the International Planned Parenthood Federation, and The PACT (a coali- tion of more than 80 youth organizations working on HIV and sexual and reproductive health and rights at the com- munity, national and international levels). ACT!2030 is in its fourth and final phase and focuses on empowering young people to prioritize policy barriers that jeopardize their access to sexual and reproductive health support (such as age of consent for HIV testing and treatment, access to youth-friendly health care, or the lack of comprehensive sexuality education), gather their own data and evidence on the impact that these barriers have on young people, and translate the findings into national advocacy strategies to build accountability mechanisms that respond to these challenges.
Since the launch of ACT!2030, more than 600 young people have been trained in data collection and research using a customized curriculum and have been carrying out their own research projects on the biggest barriers to young people's sexual and reproductive health and rights. In Algeria, young researchers gathered evidence on stigma and discrimination faced by targeted youth populations and engaged in advocacy with key stakeholders, including the Ministry of Health and UNAIDS, to influence the national strategic plan on HIV and AIDS. In Zimbabwe, young peo- ple are undertaking direct assessments of clinics in 20 districts according to youth-friendly-service criteria. They have presented their data to the Ministry of Health and Child Care and continue to advocate for better services for young people. In addition, the evidence produced by ACT!2030 Zimbabwe informed the country's 2017 Sustainable Development Goal VNR, and ACT!2030 advocates were invited to participate in the country's official delegation during the United Nations High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development.
Funding youth-led organizations directly has also supported organizational development, including new websites, better infrastructure, and capacity-building in grant management and budget tracking. This ensures that ACT!2030 invests in youth leadership and empowers young people to deliver sustainable programmes to end AIDS and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
http://www.act2030.org/ 
BOX 6.11. CODEPHIL: DEMOCRATIZING ACCESS TO DIGITAL LITERACY
The Philippines
CodePhil seeks to strengthen the digital literacy skills of youth in rural Philippines and other developing areas. Founded in 2016 and target- ing low-income high school students, this initiative provides instruc- tion in typing, computing and programming in order to prepare young people for decent jobs, promote community resilience, and break the cycle of poverty in the community. CodePhil piloted the ini- tiative in Northern Samar, the fifth poorest province in the Philippines, teaching computer programming logic (Scratch and Python), website development (HyperText Markup Language, Cascading Style Sheets, and Javascript), and three-dimensional architecture modelling (com- puter-aided design) to more than 150 high school students and also training teachers in these subjects. Significantly, 83 per cent of stu- dents said that they were more comfortable using a computer after a three-week workshop organized by CodePhil.
CodePhil developed free software called TypePhil (available online and offline) to improve basic keyboarding skills among youth in areas lacking Internet connectivity. TypePhil teaches students how to type properly in English, Tagalog, and various local Filipino dia- lects, enhancing digital literacy and preserving local traditions. In the summer of 2017, the TypePhil software was piloted at 13 ele- mentary and high schools spanning five municipalities in Northern Samar. In partnership with the Department of Information and Communications Technology of the Philippines, CodePhil is cur- rently distributing the software to 1,628 community e-centers (Tech4ED centres) across the country.
Encouraging youth entrepreneurship as a way to meet commu- nity-identified needs, CodePhil connects rural youth to men- tors in the information technolog y (IT) industr y through the annual Innovation Summit held in Northern Samar. The inaugural Innovation Summit, an ideathon for low-income high school and college students in the area, took place on 26 and 27 August 2017 at the University of Eastern Philippines in Catarman. There were
160 participants from five different high schools and three univer- sities in Northern Samar and Mindanao, and numerous high-profile keynote speakers from industry, government, and academia were present. The Innovation Summit built on the momentum of the
2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals by challenging young people in Northern Samar to identify challenges, contextu- alize them within local settings, and develop sustainable solutions with the support of mentors in an interactive and exploratory set- ting. By the conclusion of the Summit, the participants had devel- oped 20 different technological solutions to local issues.
https://www.codephil.org6
monitoring of progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Harnessing the technological advantage many young people have is key to strengthening data transparency and accessibility in support of devel- opment efforts. As shown by the BudgIT example in box 5.9, youth are well placed to transform large and often unreadable data sets into easy-to-read visualizations and infographics, which brings critical information on development indicators and pro- gress towards achievement of the Goals not only to other young people but also to policymakers and the general public. For such efforts to be successful, it is important that relevant data and information be transparent and accessible. Open access to infor- mation is at the heart of ensuring transparency in meeting the Goals, and in empowering young peo- ple as active stakeholders in the implementation of sustainable development efforts.
Monitoring and accountability
Monitoring the implementation of the 2030 Agenda holds government officials and policymakers at all levels accountable for their actions and decisions and contributes to the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals. Monitoring mechanisms can take many forms, ranging from official institutions such a s ombud smen and indep endent audit- ing bodies to community-led initiatives set up to monitor and track policy implementation, spending and progress.
Armed with the right tools, information, and methodologies, young people can play a critical role in the areas of monitoring and advocacy. They can review existing strategies and plans and identify gaps, map Sustainable Development Goal intercon- nections, make preliminary recommendations to the Government on how to mainstream youth in
6
planning and policies, establish nationally relevant targets, and formulate plans and strategies using predictive and systems analysis and other critical-thinking skills.
Many youth organizations have already begun the process of reviewing and monitoring national plans for alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals. Restless Development, a youth-led development agency, partnered with the Commonwealth Secretariatin 2016 to prepare Youth-Led Accountability for the SDGs: A Guide to National Action. Recognizing that "there is a lot of rhetoric around har- nessing citizens' role in formal review and accountability pro- cesses, but few practical suggestions" (Restless Development and the Commonwealth, 2016, p. 8), the Guide stresses that "it is vital to expand the enabling environment for young people's engagement in decision-making, and to mainstream youth- led engagement at national and regional levels" (ibid., p. 4).
Follow-up and review
Our Governments have the primary responsibility for follow-up and review, at the national, regional and global levels, in relation
to the progress made in implementing the Goals and targets over the coming 15 years. To support accountability to our citizens, we will provide for systematic follow-up and review at the various levels, as set out in  [the 2030] Agenda and
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The high-level political forum under the auspices of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council will have the central role in overseeing follow-up
and review at the global level. (United Nations,
General Assembly, 2015b, para. 47)
BOX 6.12. YOUTH IN ACTION: YOUTH-LED ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE SDGS: A GUIDE TO NATIONAL ACTION
Restless Development
Youth- L e d A c c ou nt a b ilit y fo r th e S D G s: A G u i d e to Nat ion al Ac t ion offers a series of concrete recom- mendations on how young people's involvement in review and accountability processes surrounding the Sustainable Development Goals can be implemented and operationalized in Commonwealth countries at the national and subnational levels. The Guide pro- vides practical ways for leveraging youth opportunities to participate in government processes for reviewing existing national plans and adapting the Sustainable Development Goals to national contexts. The recom- mendations (excerpted from the Guide) are as follows:
Youth participation in review and accountability mechanisms:
A. Assess and strengthen spaces for
institutionalising youth participation
B. 	Develop co-management structures for national and local accountability platforms
C. Implement regular dialogues and action planning with young constituents
D. Create official roles for youth at the national and regional levels
Data for monitoring and review:
E.	Empower a generation of SDG infomediaries
F.	Develop "shadow" indicators grounded in lived experiences
Transparency and access to information:
G 	Ensure open access to information for young people on the SDGs and state-led reviews
Emerging accountability approaches and practices:
H. Develop communities of practice on data-driven social accountability
I. 	Put ground level panels and platforms at the forefront of accountability
J.	Embed review in everyday life and popular culture
High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development
T h e H i g h - l e v el P o l i t i c a l F o r u m o n Su s t a i n a b l e
Development, a mechanism established at the 2012
Rio+20 Conference,is the main forum for the monitor- ing and review of progress made in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Forum meets annually at the minis- terial level and once every four years at the heads of State level, providing Member States the space to share experi- ences, successes, challenges and lessons learned in their development efforts through VNRs. These are "regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the national and subna- tional levels which are country-led and country-driven" (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015b, para. 79), and are aimed at strengthening policies and institutions and
mobilizing multi-stakeholder support and partnerships for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Crucially, as set out in paragraph 84 of the 2030 Agenda, VNRs are to be State-led and involve multiple stakeholders.
With the inclusion of youth perspectives in these reviews, the VNR process presents a leverage point for youth engagement at the national level in the follow-up and review of 2030 Agenda implementation. In 2017, the sec- ond year of reporting, some countries' reports mentioned or referenced youth, while others detailed how youth had been involved as consultants or active participants in the drafting and preparation of the reports.As part of its mandate, the Major Group for Children and Youth submits a sector paper as a formal input to the High-level Political Forum. This document includes the views of the youth

constituency on all aspects of the formal deliberations of the Forum and is welcomed in the ministerial resolution, translated into the six official United Nations languages, and recorded as a formal input document to the Forum.
A number of countries have included youth dele- gates or youth representatives as part of their delegations to the Forum, showcasing their commitment to youth engagement in the monitoring and review of their sus- tainable development efforts (see box 6.14).
Shadow reports
Informal "shadow" reporting is being carried out by civil society organizations to supplement the infor mation provided via official VNRs as part of the formal report- ing process. As noted by Global Policy Watch, "the most comprehensive report has been compiled by a civil soci- ety alliance of around 20 environmental, development and human rights organizations and trade unions under the title Spotlight on Sustainable Development " (Martens,
2016); published in 2016, the first Report by the Reflection
Group on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development included contributions f rom more than 50 countries (Adams and others, 2016).In 2016, the Spotlight on
Sustainable Development alliance compiled 35 country spotlight reports from civil society organizations around the world (Spotlight on Sustainable Development, 2016) and also produced a sy nopsis of the national reports (Bissio, 2016). Similarly, in 2017 the Japan Youth Platform for Sustainability produced a youth-led shadow report for Japan's Voluntary National Review, elements of which
Spotlight Spotlight on Sustainable Development 2016:
Report by the Reflection Group on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable DevelopmentSpotlight on Sustainable Development 2017: Reclaiming Policies for the Public Spotlight on Sustainable Development 2018: Exploring New Policy PathwaysBOX 6.13.
BIG IDEA
AND ACT!2015 -- TRACKING PROGRESS TOWARDS 2030
The global ACT!2015 meeting Tracking Progress Towards
2030, held in Lu saka , Zambia , 7-11 December 2015, brought together youth representatives of national alli- ances to build capacity on Sustainable Development Goal (SDGs) and indicator processes to ensure indicators on sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR) and HIV are adopted in country and global reporting mechanisms.
Recognising that young people in the AIDS response have strong experience in advocacy, the training focused on building technical knowledge on monitoring and evalu- ation processes. Young people also mapped accounta- bility "ecosystems" to ensure that no one is left behind in the AIDS response in the monitoring of the SDGs at [the] country level. As a result, participants will host national trainings with key youth partners, with support from UNAIDS, to build an effective knowledge-based advocacy strategy that influences country-level indicator processes.
were included in the official Japanese civil society shadow report. Shadow (or spotlight) reporting is an increasingly popular mechanism for youth interested in accelerating progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals and can serve as an important tool for advocacy.
CONCLUSIONS
Adapting the Sustainable Development Goal framework to national and local conditions and priorities is essen- tial both for stakeholder buy-in and for stimulating tar- geted development efforts at the country and community levels. This chapter highlights the enormous--and often untapped--potential of youth to contribute to the realiza- tion of the Sustainable Development Goals through advo- cacy and awareness-raising, capacity-building, policy development, data production, and monitoring progress to enhance accountability. Governments are starting to
recognize the importance of multi-stakeholder engage- ment in the realization of the 2030 Agenda and are
increasingly aware of the need to support youth initiatives
and activities at both the grass-roots and national levels to accelerate the process of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
BOX 6.14.
UNITED NATIONS YOUTH DELEGATE PROGRAMME
The United Nations Youth Delegate Programme, coordinated at the global level by the Focal Point on Youth, supports the participation of young people as part of their respective Member State delegations to intergovernmental delibera- tions and negotiations at the United Nations, most notably those of the Third Committee of the General Assembly and the Commission for Social Development.
Increasing numbers of Member States are including youth delegates as part of their delegations to the High-level Political Forum, helping to strengthen the youth voice at the event and, through the VNR process, highlighting the role youth play in implementing and reporting on the 2030 Agenda. The Netherlands, Slovenia and Sweden, which were among the nine countries that had at least one youth delegate as part of their delegations in 2017, allowed their youth delegates to speak on behalf of their country during their national review to detail the engagement of youth in the process.
Youth delegates have also been exploring other ways of bringing their views and work related to the 2030 Agenda to the attention of their Governments. The 2017-2018 youth delegates from Ireland prepared a report entitled Generation for Change: Spotlight Report on Young People, the Sustainable Development Goals and Ireland, 2018 (Dockery and Flanagan,
2018) to provide a youth perspective on key issues for gov- ernment departments leading Sustainable Development Goal work in advance of the country's 2018 VNR.
Slovenia
In 2017, the preparation of the Slovenia Voluntar y National Review on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda was car- ried out under the auspices of the Government Office for Development and European Cohesion Policy. As part of this process, the Office of the National Youth Council of Slovenia and the United Nations youth delegate from Slovenia were
invited to prepare a special report which provided direct input to the VNR. The report constituted a youth-based reflection on the Government's work in the area of sustainable devel- opment. It highlighted persistent challenges for young people in Slovenia, such as structural unemployment and the lack of skills for the future of work, as well as positive achievements, including youth participation in decision-making, education and gender equality efforts. The report was presented at the
2017 High-level Political Forum in New York, where the United Nations youth delegate of Slovenia was given a chance to address the plenary session on behalf of the youth sector in Slovenia. (Slovenia, Government Office for Development and European Cohesion Policy, n.d.).
Netherlands
The Dutch National Youth Council is responsible for the selection of United Nations youth delegates. The youth dele- gates often travel throughout the country gathering the ideas of young people aged 12-25 years on topics of relevance to the United Nations and work to translate complicated policy language into actionable ideas. In 2016, the Youth Council launched its own national Sustainable Development Goal project with three objectives: informing youth about the issues underlying the Sustainable Development Goals; inspir- ing young people to take an active role in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Goals; and inviting policy- makers to facilitate meaningful youth participation through- out the Sustainable Development Goal process. Ahead of the 2017 High-level Political Forum, and based on consulta- tions with its youth constituency, the Dutch National Youth Council prepared a paper on how youth thought the coun- try was performing in its implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The paper was included in the official process of drafting the country's 2017 VNR. (Dutch National Youth Council, 2016; Lebada, 2017)
CONCLUSIONS
THE Goals, targets and indicators associated with the 2030
Agenda offer increased opportunities to advance youth development
objectives in the context of social, economic and environmental sus- tainable development efforts. When coupled with strong policy frame- works for advancing youth development--incorporating both targeted youth policies and the mainstreaming of youth issues--the new devel- opment landscape offers innumerable opportunities for young peo- ple to thrive. For youth-related development objectives to be realized, however, much more is needed in terms of financial support, data col- lection and analysis, agreed standards of measurement, and targeted interventions. In the areas of education and employment, persistent deficiencies and disparities in data availability and development indi- cators are impeding progress on the achievement of the objectives set out in the 2030 Agenda and complementary frameworks.
YOUTH EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT IN THE 2030 AGENDA
The 2030 Agenda offers a positive vision for youth development; however, a great deal of effort will be needed to realize this vision. A few years into the implementation of the Agenda, unacceptably high numbers of young people are still experiencing poor education and employment outcomes, and future prospects remain uncertain.
Education
Education statistics indicate that there is still much work to be done. There are 142 million youth of upper secondary age who are out of school, and upper secondary enrolment rates average only 14 per cent
in low-income countries. Moreover, almost 30 per cent of the poorest 12- to 14-year olds have never been to school, and many of the youth of the future are still una- ble to obtain an acceptable primary education. In a num- ber of regions, young women face particular challenges in terms of securing an education, and many are unable to complete their studies. Disparities within and between countries in educational participation among youth are stark, with female gender, poverty, rurality, disability, and migrant/refugee status all being major determinants of disadvantage. Inequalities in access are reinforced by dis- crimination and violence often directed towards these same groups.
Us in g even a n ar row m ea s u re o f at ten d anc e, UNESCO projects that only 69 per cent of 15- to 19-year olds will complete upper secondary education in 2030, and most regions are not expected to meet this glob- ally agreed goal until after 2080. Moreover, the current process of developing indicators to measure progress on Sustainable Development Goal 4 may not fully reflect the breadth of what should be lear ned for a q uality education.
In spite of the a spiration s of the 2030 Agenda, UNESCO data show stagnating ODA support for edu- cation.Major funding initiatives have been launched, but they may be insufficient to meet the Sustainable Development Goal targets--and such initiatives typically focus on children in primary education rather than on youth. There have been civil society calls for tax reforms to fund education, but the international political will to engage seriously with this issue is absent.
Employment
Although the global economy has started to recover, the youth employ ment situation has worsened in recent years. There are presently 71 million young people unem- ployed, and many millions more are in precarious or infor- mal employment. ILO estimates that 156 million youth in low- and middle-income countries are living in poverty even though they are employed. The challenges of secur- ing and retaining decent work are even more serious and complex for vulnerable and marginalized youth includ- ing young women, those living in humanitarian settings, youth with disabilities, migrant youth, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth. While entrepreneurship offers opportunities for some youth, a diverse and robust employment strategy must include options and opportu- nities for all young people in society.
Global action is needed to stimulate job creation and resolve youth economic exclusion, with attention given to facilitating the school-to-work transition and provid- ing young people with opportunities for decent work. International organizations, along with bilateral donors in developed countries, will play a key role in helping countries move forward on the goal of generating oppor- tunities for decent work. In this regard, they serve not only as an essential resource for investment and grants to push the Agenda forward, but as providers of vital tech- nical assistance and as conveners of important voices in the youth space internationally. The United Nations, ILO, World Bank and other international and regional organ- izations are moving forward with efforts to implement Sustainable Development Goal 8 and related measures to stimulate youth employment and the creation of decent work for present and future generations of young people through the Global Initiative on Decent Jobs for Youth. This Initiative is an important step forward, but there are still some major issues to address with regard to the youth employment elements of Agenda 2030. In particular, the
measurement both of NEET status and of decent work could be better defined.
The case studies highlighted in this Repor t point to the possibility of building successf ul prog rammes adapted to the individual and socioeconomic contexts in which young people actually live; this would represent a significant departure from the oft-repeated skills-for- employability rhetoric which supposes that there are formal sector jobs available if only young people were not so unprepared. In such programmes entrepreneurship is viewed practically, as a part of livelihood strategy, rather than through an ideological lens. There is a firm convic- tion that young people can succeed in business but face risks and need support.
It is impor tant to recog nize that the f lour ishing of youth i s ab out more th an succes sf ul t ran sit ion s to employ ment. Young people have a spiration s that are far broader and need to be valued and supported. Approaches that focu s on pr ior itizing youth par tici- pation, respecting the rights of youth, and addressing individual youth aspirations are key. Rather than rating the success of prog rammes on nar row mea sures of educational or employment attainment, it is crucial that institutional, programme and policy evaluations be more f ir mly g rounded in young people's ow n accounts of what they value for their human development and for the sustainable development of their communities and this shared planet.
EVIDENCE-BASED YOUTH POLICIES The important role data and evidence play in the devel- opment and implementation of policies to meet the 2030
Agenda objectives is emphasized throughout the pres-
ent Report. Evidence-based youth policies, adapted and tailored to national and local contexts, help ensure that youth development challenges are addressed. The Report
identifies key priorities for the formulation and activa- tion of effective youth policies, including providing polit- ical leadership and strategic vision; securing adequate budgetary and resource allocations; gathering and using timely and accurate data on the situation of young peo- ple; harnessing the knowledge, experience and expertise of young people for the design, implementation and eval- uation of youth policies; mainstreaming and integrating youth policies across sectors; taking into account the linkages and impact of policy objectives; and establishing a transparent monitoring and accountability framework.
The Report further underlines the need to strengthen youth participation mechanisms to facilitate young peo- ple's engagement in policies and activities that enhance sustainable development ef for ts. Par ticular attention should be g iven to increa sing youth involvement in national sustainable development coordination councils, working w ith national youth councils, ex panding the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme and other opportunities for youth representation, and ensuring that young people contribute to voluntary national reviews of progress on the Sustainable Development Goals.
Relevant and timely data on how much and how well public s p ending h a s b e en ut ili ze d to achieve youth-related goals are essential for addressing gaps and improv ing the effectiveness of ex isting ex penditures. There are germane lessons to be learned from recent efforts to monitor spending in other cross-cutting areas such as gender, children and climate.
Evidence and transparency are essential for achiev- ing real transformation in youth policies and the use of public resources for youth development. Equally impor- tant are increased participation and advocacy (especially by youth themselves), improved accountability on the par t of Gover nments, and a commitment f rom both public authorities and private citizens to bring about the desired changes.
ENHANCING YOUTH DATA
One of the primary impediments to meeting youth devel- opment objectives under the 2030 Agenda is the lack of accurate, regularly updated age-disaggregated data on the situation of young people.
Filling the large gaps in data availability and address- ing data inequalities within and between countries will require significant capacity-building, substantial financial investment, and innovative approaches to data collec- tion, utilization and dissemination, especially in the least developed countries. Efforts to increase the capacity of national statistical offices and to support the collection and use of data by non-traditional sources (including young people themselves) will contribute to the devel- opment of a more comprehensive and holistic picture of the youth situation. An open and transparent Internet, accessible and usable data, and the presentation of data in ways that make sense to both young people and pol- icymakers are critical for effective policy development, implementation, and monitoring.
Appropriately leveraged, the data revolution and the emergence of new technologies offer a multitude of opportunities to amass a significant amount of data on the situation of youth. Supporting data sharing through public-private partnerships between the Government, the private sector, civil society and academia are also critical, as is the development of a robust regulatory framework to safeguard privacy rights and protect the security of information.
While 90 of the 232 indicators developed to meas- ure progress on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals can be considered relevant to young people, they do not cover all areas of youth development. Coordinated use should be made of indicators and other measures of progress for the Sustainable Development
Goals, the World Programme of Action for Youth, and other global, regional and national frameworks, as reli- ance on a broader range of indicators will help provide a more comprehensive measurement toolbox for assessing the situation of youth.
FINANCING YOUTH DEVELOPMENT Although funding for social sectors has increased in sev- eral countries over the past decade, many countries are unlikely to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 w ithout greater investment in areas such as education.
In the contex t of the Su stainable Development Goals, specifically Goal 17, developed countries are com- mitting to the full implementation of their ODA obliga- tions, and many are pledging to direct their assistance to the least developed countries most in need. In this regard, the 2030 Agenda encourages donor countries to consider providing at least 0.20 per cent of GNI as ODA to least developed countries. Sustainable Development Goal 17 also includes a number of targets related to technology transfer, investment and trade aimed at facilitating eco- nomic development in developing countries and improv- ing their economic welfare.
Beyond these broad commitments, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides for mechanisms to strengthen collaboration between Governments, civil society, the private sector, and other stakeholders in the areas of technology, infrastructure development and investment, and poverty alleviation. In support of youth employment, the Action Agenda specifically commits countries to pro- moting stable and affordable access to finance for SMEs, which are essential for promoting job creation. For devel- oped countries, the Agenda establishes important targets for increasing foreign aid.
LOCALIZING THE 2030 AGENDA
T he most ef fe c t ive youth development ef for t s are founded on national and local initiatives aligned with the unique needs of young people and other relevant actors in any particular country or community context. Applying a whole-of-government approach to development and policy formulation and implementation is key to local- izing the 2030 Agenda and ensuring that no one is left
behind. While the international community will play an essential role in providing overall leadership, bringing stakeholders together, channelling international financial support, and providing technical assistance, real solutions to the economic and social challenges facing youth will begin and end at home. Governments should therefore support those youth initiatives and activities at the grass- roots and national levels that contribute to the realization of the 2030 Agenda.


