 An Integrated Strategy for Sustainable CitiesThe multiple challenges that cities face also represent a strategic opportunity to build sustainable cities and reap the benefits of rapid urbanization. Urban de velopment should be understood as a balanced and inclusive development of four pillars: economic development, social development, environmental management and urban governance. The enabling mechanisms include an integrated investment on green industrial transformation, improved public infrastructure, access to and efficient use of social services, effective urban governance, and the protection and management of natural resources.About . billion people would be living in urban cen tres by , eighty per cent of which would reside in developing regions, concentrated in cities of Africa and Asia. For ex ample, African cities would house over  billion people, which would be three times the figure of urban North America, twice the figure of latin_america and the Caribbean or Europe, and comparable to Chinas urban population at that time. In many cities of developing countries the main challenge would then be how to provide adequate public services and job opportuni ties to residents, including marginalized populations in mega cities. In addition, the adverse impact of social inequalities on human health and the environment can multiply when we factor the adverse effects of natural disaster. The incidence of natural hazards linked to climate_change events has increased in intensity and frequency, which would likely compound the pressure on the use of natural resources and the environment linked to rapid urbanization and economic growth.The potential for building sustainable citiesIn cities of lowincome countries, residents often do not have adequate access to piped water, waste disposal, and electricity. Rates of poverty and infant and child mortality are higher, while capacity of governance tends to be weaker. The project ed significance of small and large size of urban settlements represent challenges for improving access to sound infrastruc ture and reducing vulnerability to various types of risk e.g. health, disaster. Challenges include the provision of decent employment to underemployed urban populations and with limited access to sound housing and goodquality schools. Uppermiddle and high income countries with urban popu lations that already have access to basic public services face the challenge of becoming more efficient in the use of energy and water, reduce the generation of waste, and improve their recycling systems.Nonetheless, cities can provide significant socioeco nomic benefits. By concentrating people, investment and resources, cities heighten possibilities for economic development, innovation and social interaction. Similarly, cities lower unit costs to provide public services such as water and sanitation, health care, education, electricity, emergency services, and public recreational areas. For poor countries, in particu lar, urbanization implies lower costs per household to provide infrastructure such as roads, water, sewers, electricity, and ser vices such as schools, public transportation, and healthcare.In general, the different complexities of cities realities dissuade a onesize fits all approach toward sustainability because their priorities, objectives, and paths are also diverse. The measure of progress should be tailored according to the particular challenges and opportunities found and prioritized by the main cities stakeholders. Governments should develop technical standards e.g. building codes, while working closely with the private sector e.g. civil_society and firms. The private sector should develop processes to partner with government, academia, and NGOs to ensure solutions that are both functional and economically feasible.A framework of four pillars to build sustainable citiesThe building of a green city has been proposed as a synony mous of urban sustainability. Yet, it is important to understand sustainability as a broader concept. That includes four pillars: (a) social development; (b) economic development; (c) envi ronmental management; and (d) effective urban governance.The figure below indicates the general sectors and areas within each pillar to ensure urban sustainability. The integration among the four pillars can generate synergistic feedbacks such as between waste & recycling management (environmen tal management) and access to water and sanitation (social de velopment); air quality conservation and green public trans portation; production & distribution of renewable energy sources and green energy access; as well as between the goal of reducing inequities (effective urban governance) and access to education & health (social development).An integrated and coordinated strategyDiagramme  suggests an integrated approach to build sus tainable cities. This involves the coordination of objectives and programmes between different city stakeholders (e.g. citiJune  united_nations desa Four pillars for cities sustainability zens, government, and business sector) as well as the linkages between and within socioeconomic sectors. Likewise, an in tegrated approach tries to improve synergies and efficiencies between activities such as e.g. public transportation, energy consumption, biodiversity, and human health.for rural workers who come to work temporarily in the city. Similar subsidized housing projects are planned in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur in order to reduce slums and squatter settlements. Support of biking programmes and infrastructure: The provision of adequate infrastructure such as bikes parking near Metros; bike lanes, free bike rentals, and bikesharing have facilitated the rapid adoption and fast growth of bicycles use in a few cities of both developed and developing countries.Water management: Cities need to improve water ac cess, efficiency, quality, and infrastructure. Successful programmes in Phnom Penh and Cape Town have been able to provide clean water at affordable rates for all peo ple, including the poor living on the outskirts. Similarly, Singapore has overcome a longterm water dependency with multipronged actions that included the installation of desalination plants and recycling of waste water.At the national level, the integration between rural and urban sectors is critical. Wider access to public services and development of linkages with industrial development can le verage the rural sector capacities to exchange resources, infor mation and social interaction with urban areas. In the medi umterm, investment in economic and social infrastructure  in rural settlements can be a catalyser for reducing excessive ruralurban migration that give rise to urban squatters and slums growth.Learning by doingThe following synthesizes relevant policy approaches and pro grammes implemented: Integrative approach between sectors: Integration and coordination between sectors such as land use, food se curity, employment, transportation infrastructure, bio diversity conservation, water, renewable energy sources, waste and recycle management; education, health, housing, and so forth. Integrative approach within sectors: For example, with in the transportation sector this includes the linkages be tween various transportation modes such as bus, tram, metro, bicycle, and walking in order to reduce travel time, gas emissions, and the use of private cars. Investment into sound housing: Access to sound housing can reduce health and environmental costs. Major subsidized housing plans are underway in Chinese citiesSustainable citiesEffective urban governance Decentralisation and planningReduction of inequitiesStrengthening civil and political rightsSupport of local, national, regional and global linksSocial developmentEducation and health Food and nutrition Green housing and buildings Water and sanitation Green public transportation Green energy access Recreation areas and community supportEnvironmental protectionForest and soil managementWaste and recycling management Energy efficiency Water management(including freshwater) Air quality conservation Adaptation to and mitigation of climate_changeEconomic developmentGreen productive growthCreation of decent employmentProduction and distribution of renewable energyTechnology and innovation (R&D) Waste reduction and recycling: For example, waste is treated as raw material and energy source in Freiburg, while cities such as Curitiba, Copenhagen, Kampala, Stockholm, Singapore, and Shanghai have made signifi cant progress in creating innovative recycling and waste reduction programmes.Prepared by Alex Julca and Willem van der GeestFor further information please contact the author at:Tel: +  ; email: julca@un.org un.org/en/development/desa/policy/index.shtmlFollow us on Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter united_nations desaJune 