UN/DESA Policy BriefNo. Achieving sustainable_development: the energy investment challengeThere is an emerging consensus holding that sustainable_development requires a radical transformation of the worlds energy system. For its part, WESS (,, and ) have argued that only through a significant transformation of the way we produce and use energy the world can converge towards high living standards and ensure that human activity remains within Earths carrying capacity. Transforming the world energy system calls for strong leadership, carefully designed policies, behavioural changes, and large investments, both in developed and developing countries. Estimates of the additional energy investments required to build a sustainable system are around . trillion dollars per year between  and .FIGURE RANGE OF ADDITIONAL ANNUAL ENERGY INVESTMENTS TO ACHIEVE SUSTAINABILITYTrillions of dollarsEstimates of additional energy investments needed to prevent an increase in worlds temperature larger than  oC vary significantly. A useful reference is the US$ . trillion a year of additional investments proposed by the compilation of the Green Economy Investment Report (). However, estimates of additional investments in energy to achieve sustainability vary significantly. For example, the Global Energy Assessment () proposes a range from US$. trillion to over US$ trillion per year (figure ). Such large variations in the estimates depend on the policies and technologies assumed to be in place between now and the medium and long term, the costs of related investments that will be required to make use of alternative energy sources, and on the foreseen cost of technology development, among others (see, for example, UNDESA ).Following the Global Energy Assessment (GEA), needed investments in energy supply tally . trillion a year (figure , column ); but if we account for the cost of additional investments necessary to adapt devices to the new sources of energy such as those required to adapt car engines, boilers for heating systems, compressors, etc. for the newly emerging energy system, required investments will almost double (figure , column ). Furthermore, if we also account for broad energy investments such as the cost of fostering innovation, market creation for alternative energy sources and technology diffusion, the investment requirements will multiply by a factor of five (figure , column ).The above estimates suggest that the additional investment effort needed to transform the energy system towards environmental sustainability represents a significant challenge. In comparison, achieving energy inclusion requires relatively modest investments. Outlays to provide universal access to clean fuel cooking and electricity can range between US$. trillion and US$. trillion per year (GEA , IEA ) and, even if the expansion of energy would be done from traditional sources, the greenhouse gas emissions generated would be negligible (figure  column ). Thus, achieving energy in- See, for example, Green Growth Action Alliance ().January  united_nations desa Broad energy (technology) ()Devices using energy ()Mainly energy supply()Energy inclusion ()clusion is not only affordable but also compatible with the aim of controlling the rise of worlds temperature below the target of  oC.The interplay of policies and technologiesThe GEA study is particularly useful to probe into the effects of needed additional investments arising from different combinations of policies and technologies. The GEA looks at  scenarios defined through a combination of policies dealing with energy, transportation and technology. First, the study defines three demand and supply energy paths: the supply path considers policies concentrated on meeting the worlds increasing demand for energy; the efficiency path consists of policies aiming to make efficient use of energy; and the mix path, a combination of the two alternatives. Second the study considers two transport modes: continued reliance on traditional technologies and fuels (mainly liquid) and the adoption of advanced technologies and fuels for transportation (mainly hydrogen and electricity). Third, the study considers ten technology portfolios defined by access to technologies: full access to all technologies; partial access to renewables and bioenergy; and the exclusion or phasing out of controversial technologies such as nuclear, carbon sinks, carbon sequestration, and bioenergy carbon sequestration. On the other hand, the definition of sustainability in the GEA study goes beyond keeping the increase in temperature within safe limits. A path is deemed sustainable if it meets all of the four See Rogelj et al  and UN .following criteria: a) it provides universal access to modern energy; b) it ensures good air quality to the majority of the worlds population; c) it contains the rise in global average temperature below  oC; and d) it limits energy trade and heightens the diversity and resilience of energy supply. Of the  scenarios considered,  meet GEAs sustainability test.The GEA analysis of alternative paths for the transformation of the energy system towards sustainability serves to make a very important point: sustainable energy strategies should give high priority to policies to promote efficient use of energy. This intuitive finding confirms the idea that policies emphasising efficiency can greatly contribute to sustainability and reduce the amount of resources needed to achieve it. While all efficiency paths succeed in meeting the sustainability goals, only eight of the  supply path scenarios do so and, equally important, the investment ticket increases. All supply paths require higher annual investment amounts to reach sustainability than any of the efficiency paths, except for one extreme case (figure ).FIGURE RANGE OF ADDITIONAL ANNUAL INVESTMENTS IN SUSTAINABLE PATHWAYS, BY SUPPLY, MIX AND EFFICIENCY POLICIESFIGURE RANGE OF ADDITIONAL ANNUAL INVESTMENTS IN SUSTAINABLE PATHWAYS BY REGION    -Billions of dollars per regionsBillions of dollars per yearExtreme value      SupplyMix policy pathsEfficiency needed to place the world on a sustainable path (united_nations Environment Programme, The Emissions Gap Report ). Given the importance of identifying and adopting the most appropriate policies, there is an urgent need to broaden the evidence and start building national capacities to identify and adopt the best policies. In addition to financial resources, setting the world on a sustainable path also requires intensive technological innovation and faster transfer of technologies to developing countries. Technological innovation in developing countries will require strong systems of innovation to undertake research, development and diffusion of renewable energy technologies in a way that responds to the needs and the particular characteristics of countries. Thus, the economics of a timely transformation of the energy system involves questions that go far beyond the amount of resources needed to generate clean energy. Countries will need to manage large and complex investment projects and implement policies to support the transformation of the energy systems. The timely design of coherent policies covering a wide-range of economic, social and environmental areas will become increasingly critical.REFERENCESGreen Growth Action Alliance (). The Green Investment Report The ways and means to unlock private finance for green growth. World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland.Johansson, Thomas B. and Nebojsa Nakicenovic, Anand Patwardhan, Luis Gomez-Echeverri, Global Energy Assessment Toward a Sustainable Future, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Cambridge University Press, .Rogelj, Joeri, David L. McCollum and Keywan Riahi (b). The UNs Sustainable Energy for All initiative is compatible with a warming limit of C. Nature PUBLISHED ONLINE:  FEBRUARY , DOI:./NCLIM ATE.united_nations (b). Sustainable Energy for All. New York. UNEP (). The Emissions Gap Report , A UNEP Synthesis Report.united_nations Task Team, Working Group on sustainable_development Financing (), Financing for sustainable_development: Review of global investment requirement estimates, UNDESA, New York.MEA LAM FSU NAM WEU PAO PAS CPA EEU SAS AFR Source: WESS  p. .The volume of investments required varies widely across regions. While in some regions local conditions, and existent policies and technologies result in actual savings when compared with business as usual, in other regions additional investment can be as high as  billion. Needed investments tend to be higher for low income regions and lower for regions with high income per capita. For example, the additional investment needed to arrive to a sustainable path in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa is larger than in Western Europe or the united_states (figure ). The challenge of generating and deploying such additional investments will be, of course, more daunting in low income countries given the size and resources available to these economies.Increasing energy investment to set the world on a sustainable path poses difficult challenges. Early adoption of policies aiming to increase energy efficiency, promote the use of renewables, and deepen social inclusion can significantly reduce the investment effortPrepared by Eduardo Zepeda and Diana AlarconUNDESA, DPAD. The opinions expressed here do not necessarily represent the views of the united_nations. For further information please contact the author at: tel: +  -; e-mail: alarcond@un.org un.org/en/development/desa/policy/index.shtmlsFollow us on Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter united_nations desa January 