 Finance for Forests and climate_changeThe significance of forests in combating climate_changeIn addition to providing multiple services and goods, forests can play a key role in tackling climate_change. Forestry, as defined by the IPCC accounts for around . per cent of global GHG emissions, the third largest source of anthropogenic GHG emissions after energy supply and industrial activity. Loss of tropical forest results annually in emissions which are comparable to the total annual CO emissions from the united_states or China. Emissions from deforestation alone could increase atmospheric carbon stock by around  parts per million (ppm) by . In order to stabilize the current CO e level of  ppm at a targeted ppm, forests will need to form a central part of any global climate_change deal.Financial needs for reducing deforestationThe Stern Review, among other studies, considers curbing deforestation as a highly cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions which could offer significant reductions fairly quickly. Comparing the reduction in damage costs and the costs of halving forest emissions between  and  the Stern Review estimates a mean net benefit of around $. trillion. The resources required to halve emissions from the forest sector till  could be between $ billion and $ billion per year if forests are included in global carbon trading. If the international community does nothing to bring deforestation to a halt, the global economic cost of climate_change caused by the degradation and losses of forests could reach $ trillion a year by . This is additional to the cost of the impact of industrial emissions. At present, only a very small share of the existing investment in the forest sector is allocated to address climate_change and less than  percent of that share is invested in developing countries and economies in transition. Fortunately, the importance of limiting deforestation and forest degradation has been recognized by climate_change negotiators as reflected in the final outcome of the COPin Bali.Forest related financing mechanismsTo fully realize the potential of reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD), several new financing initiatives have been launched recently. By far the most significant is Norways commitment to provide $ million annually towards efforts to reduce carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries. Other donors including Australia, Finland, Spain, Japan, Switzerland, the united_kingdom, and the united_states have contributed or signalled their intent to contribute funds to climate_change and forests programmes.The world_bank has established the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) to help reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation and to help build capacity for REDD activities in  pilot developing countries. The target capitalization is at least $ million. The world_bank is also currently developing the Forest Investment Programme (FIP) to support developing countries REDD-efforts, providing up-front bridge financing for readiness reforms and investments identified through national REDD strategies. The targeted level of funding for the proposed FIP is $ million.FAO, UNDP and UNEP have launched a joint UNREDD Programme with a portfolio of $ million (to be financed by Norway), to provide assistance in REDD capacity building to pilot developing countries. The immediate goal is to assess whether carefully designed payment structures and capacity support can create the incentives for emission reductions while maintaining and improving the other ecosystem services forests provide. To be successful, this initiative warrants the wider participation of UN bodies involved in climate_change and forests.Financing for sustainable forest management is the right approachThe experience of financing forest projects under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the UNFCCC as well as the current issues under negotiation within the context of REDD clearly signal the complexities of the forest-climate_change relationship. While afforestation and reforestation qualify for funding under the CDM, only one project was funded in the period between  and , pointing to the complexities of the sector, and the absence of a more comprehensive framework which defines the role of forests in the climate_change regime.The Bali decision to develop a road map towards constructively engaging forests in the climate_change regime is a major step towards reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries. However, toApril  united_nations desa maximize the contribution of forests to addressing climate_change, REDD should be defined and elaborated within an appropriate framework. The Bali Action Plan emphasizes that sustainable management of forests is essential. But, thus far the broader aspects of the sustainable forest management framework beyond REDD only have been cursorily addressed in the lead up to COPin Copenhagen.Negotiators should not only consider the potential of forests to contribute to climate_change mitigation (as seems to be the emphasis in the negotiations of REDD), but also to adaptation. COPshould address all components of the Bali Action Plan in an integral way. The Strategic Framework on Forests and climate_change, prepared by the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF), elaborates how sustainable forest management can contribute to both climate_change mitigation and adaptation.Financing sustainable forest management is key to the full realization of forests potential for mitigating GHGs as well as addressing other forest sector challenges. The nonlegally binding instrument on all types of forests (forest instrument), agreed to by the UNFF and adopted by the General Assembly in , provides a comprehensive framework to achieve sustainable forest management and aims at achieving four Global Objectives on Forests (GOFs): reducing deforestation and forest degradation; enhancing forest-based economic, social and environmental benefits, increasing the area of forests under sustainable management; and enhancing financing for sustainable forest management.UNFF (April ) will consider two major issues relevant to the climate_change negotiation process: forests and climate_change and financing sustainable forest management including for implementation of forest instrument. Sustainable forest management comprises the complete suite of concerns related to forests: from protection and conservation of forests, at one end of the spectrum, to sustainable use at the other. The UNFF will need to decide on financing arrangements to support sustainable forest management and consider the establishment of a mechanism, to be managed by the UNFF, to facilitate and catalyze the implementation of the forest instrument with dedicated funds.When properly designed, this mechanism should provide critically needed financing for sustainably managed forests to those countries with the most acute problems of deforestation and forest degradation. This will enhance the reduction of carbon emissions, while providing better livelihoods for the poor and preserving sustained supply of noncarbon ecosystem services such as biodiversity and water. The facilitative mechanism, if adopted, would include key actions focused on financing sustainable forest management and climate_change, including enhanced coordination and cooperation among the relevant financial mechanisms. Initial actions may give priority to small island developing States, low forest-cover countries, high-forest cover, low-deforestation countries, and other countries identified as having declining or non-existent funding for sustainable forest management. These countries currently do not have access to existing financing initiatives for climate and forests. At present, only  to  countries appear to be qualified for financing of forest pilot projects and programmes through other existing financial mechanisms.Conclusions and recommendations The global climate_change agreement should include actions on deforestation and forest degradation within the wider context of sustainable forest management. Current funding for sustainable forests management is far short of what is needed. The funding should be provided from various public and private sources including those mobilized through carbon trading. In the short to medium term, international public funding for sustainable forests management must be substantially scaled up. International action is urgently required to support developing countries in building capacity and preparing for forest carbon programmes. Substantial capacity building will be needed in three key areas: research, analysis and knowledge sharing; policy and institutional reform; and demonstration activities. To be effective, any forest-based response measure to climate_change has to be defined and addressed within its proper context. To this end, negotiations on REDD as well as its financing have to be based on the broader and comprehensive framework of sustainable forest management. The forest instrument represents a unique road map for sustainable forest management, as it integrates climate_change considerations. The international community should aim to support financing the implementation of the forest instrument and the achievement of the Global Objectives on Forests, as the effective tool to fight climate_change, and thereby promote sustainable forest management. 