 Is sustainable recovery possible for Haiti?After the devastation, the challenge of sustainable reconstructionIn Haiti, one of the poorest countries in the world, the earthquake of . on the Richter scale in early January  had devastating effects. The Government estimates that more than , people (or . per cent of the population) were killed; , were injured and . million were displaced. Early estimates of the economic cost of the damages range between  per cent and  per cent of GDP. Haitis immediate policy challenge is to rebuild homes, buildings, basic infrastructure, schools, health centres and businesses. But the real challenge is even greater. Haiti will need to aim at rebuilding its entire economy in a sustainable manner, to such an extent that it will be more resilient to future shocks and disaster and will be able to solve its problems of widespread poverty, job insecurity and environmental degradation. This will require not only large amounts of resources but also a much improved institutional capacity to manage those resources and to curb insecurity in the country.Haitis deep vulnerabilitiesHaitis socio-economic indicators lag well behind those of the rest of latin_america and the Caribbean (see table ). Even before the earthquake, more than half of the population did not have adequate access to electricity, running water and/or sanitation. Life expectancy was already by far the lowest in the Americas and child malnutrition and mortality rates were alarming.Its heavy dependence on rain-fed agriculture and lowproductivity services make the economy highly vulnerable to weather and macroeconomic shocks. Agriculture provides aboutTable : Socio-economic indicators half of total employment, represents a quarter of overall gross domestic product (GDP) and sustains a primary commodity export trade. Service activities represent about  per cent of GDP and provide  per cent of employment. Most jobs are insecure and informal.Economic volatility and a high incidence of natural disaster are the main factors in the lack of economic progress. In fact, the countrys per capita income has declined to almost half of the welfare level reached  years ago (see table ). More than  natural disaster have affected Haiti in the past  years. The frequency of climatic disaster (droughts, storms and floods) increased . times between and -, whilst the number of fatalities per disaster climbed  times (see figure ).Figure : Incidence of disaster in Haiti, -       FrequencyNumber of fatalities per disasterHaitiLA&CaElectric power consumption (kWh per capita),Sanitation facilities, urban (% population)Running water (% population)Life expectancy at birth, total (years)Malnutrition prevalence (% of children under )Mortality rate, under  (per ,)Average GDP per capita (constant  US$),,Average inflation for (annual %).Capacity development and ample resources are needed ...The humanitarian emergency and immediate reconstruction needs must be attended to with the greatest urgency, but the subsequent challenges for Haiti are long-term in nature. In fact, Haiti faces a twofold challenge in rebuilding its economy: while significant funding is required, the countrys administrative capacities also need to be improved significantly. The functioning of public institutions was grossly inadequate even prior to the disaster. Confidence in public sector action is low and problems of insecurity are deep rooted, which by some definitions make Haiti a clear case for the designation of fragile state.The united_nations has been operational in Haiti since , trying to safeguard a more secure environment. Haitis institutions and administrative capacities have been eroded further by the destruction of public registries and infrastructure, including those serving main administrative bodies of the--Database, em-dat.net, Universite Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.March  united_nations desa Units country, and by the significant loss of human capital caused by the earthquake. Thus, regaining the publics confidence in the Government should form an important component of the reconstruction process.Significant amounts of support have already been mobilized for Haiti. The united_nations $. billion flash appeal for Haiti is the largest ever launched in the Organizations history. Donors, the world_bank and the IMF have already sent some $ million in emergency assistance to Haiti, and have committed another $. billion. In addition, significant debt relief has been provided: the world_bank has waived Haitis debt obligations for the next five years, the Inter-American Development Bank has forgiven all of Haitis debts (worth $ million), while the G Finance Ministers have also pledged to provide debt relief.While the response so far has been heartening, Haitis recovery depends on continued and stable support of the international community, and more substantial foreign assistance will be needed for years to come. The post-disaster needs assessment suggests that at least $. billion will be needed for reconstruction; this is the level of support that the Haitian Government will be seeking during the March  donor conference.Managing the forthcoming vast influx of resources for reconstruction and sustainable_development will be a huge challenge. The massive resource inflows may create macroeconomic trade-offs, including upward pressure on the exchange rate and rising domestic prices. Such pressure may be particularly strong given that the Haitian Government may lack the capacity to utilize all the foreign assistance being mobilized for reconstruction or to reactivate economic activity quickly. Sound macroeconomic management and support to strengthen implementation capacity will swiftly need to be put in place to offset such pressures.... to seize opportunities to address structural vulnerabilitiesWith the necessary resources, Haiti will need to address the socio-economic and environmental vulnerabilities described above to avoid natural hazards becoming rampant human disaster in the future. Its current situation provides an opportunity to develop a long-term sustainable_development strategy.In consultation with local communities, such a strategy must include a thorough study of vulnerabilities, the establishment of sectoral priorities and a plan of implementation for the short and long term. To reduce disaster risk in Haiti, the strategy would need to consider the following:replenish natural resources, in particular forests. Urban planning. Building codes will need to be updated and will have to incorporate seismic design. Proper urban planning would avoid vulnerable settlements, such as slums and shanty towns, usually located in high-risk areas -for instance, on steep slopes that are prone to landslides, or on flood plains and ravines. Urban planning and construction must also consider the need for sustainable elements that large cities require, such as adequate transportation and communication networks as well as electricity, water and sanitation infrastructure. Social protection. The quality and coverage of social infrastructure, such as schools and health centres, need to be improved. This includes ensuring that Haiti can train and retain its human capital, particularly in the health and education sectors; it also means strengthening basic social protection by supporting old-age income systems and universal health care. Economic diversification and job creation. Measures would need to be introduced to provide stronger incentives for labour-intensive economic activities, such as by providing access to credits and technical assistance for productive activities on a small and medium scale. Dutyand quotefree access of the garment industry to the united_states that is currently granted to Haiti can help diversify the economy. In the medium run, Haiti should further consider expanding its nascent tourism industry. The importance of tourism in the region and the low cost of labour in Haiti point to the significant potential for tourism in providing off-farm employment. Moreover, it would reduce Haitis dependence on low-productivity services and agriculture (severely affected by soil erosion) and volatile commodity exports. The Government could further create incentives and opportunities in making agricultural production more sustainable, such as by supporting contour farming in Haitis mountainous areas, planting windbreaks and planting cover crops on idle land. Such measures would help reduce the vulnerability of the rural sector further by reducing soil erosion.The challenge to rebuild Haiti is enormous; significant financial resources and capacities are needed to implement a longterm sustainable_development plan that addresses Haitis vulnerabilities. This challenge is not insurmountable, however, as long as the international community is willing to sustain its support and commitment to Haitis development on a long-term basis.n