Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows: Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter?. IntroductionProponents of financial market liberalization have argued that increased presence of foreign banks in developing countries would reduce the cost of financial intermediation, increase the availability of credit and foster financial development. Competition from foreign banksit was claimedwould increase financial sector efficiency, reduce bank concentration, increase access to credit and reduce the cost of financial intermediation and enhance host countries access to international capital. A large body of empirical literature, however, finds evidence that increased foreign bank participation is associated with weak financial development, higher interest rates spreads and lower levels of credit to the private sector. These studies largely rely on different variations of cherry-picking models to explain why foreign bank presence does not necessarily increase availability of credit or promote financial development.This paper presents an alternative explanation as to why foreign bank presence does not lead to financial development, taking into account the adverse effects of foreign bank on the market share of deposits of domestic banksan issue that has largely been overlooked in the literature. Our paper shows that while foreign banks manage to take a significant share of deposits from domestic banks, they typically allocate a smaller fraction of those deposits to lending activities. As domestic banks lose their deposit base, they are forced to rely on non-deposit-based funding to retain their existing level of lending. But higher costs and uncertainty associated with non-deposit-based funding sources force domestic banks to reduce their lending activities.With bank level data from  developing and emerging countries, the paper shows that increased foreign bank presence is associated with increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding, which contributes to higher interest spreads, and lower levels of credit to the private sector. Moreover, the paper shows that non-deposit-based funding increases the volatility of bank loans.The presence of foreign banks, and their growing market shares, has often been the most visible feature of financial market liberalization in many developing countries. Since the s, the market share of foreign banksmeasured as the share of total banking sector assets of a countryhas grown significantly, especially in Eastern Europe, latin_america and Sub Saharan Africa. Advocates of financial market liberalization argue that foreign banks force their domestic counterparts to reduce operational inefficiencies, improve screening and lending standards and make the host country banking sector, on the whole, more competitive. It is further suggested that foreign banks strengthen supervisory, regulatory and legal frameworks by demanding better systems of regulation and supervision. In addition, they help reduce corruption and favoritism in lending decisions, as they typically do not engage in directed or relation-based lending. It is further argued that with better economies of scale, access to capital abroad and improved risk diversification strategies, foreign banks can make the host country banking sector more stable and resilient to shocks.  A body of literature, on the other hand, argues that foreign banks face considerable informational and locational disadvantages, which limit their ability to extend loans to creditworthy borrowers, especially smalland medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Efficiency and technological advantages that foreign banks typically enjoy do not sufficiently offset the informational disadvantages they face as outsiders. Foreign banks, many argue, are also more likely to engage in pro-cyclical, short-term and consumer lending activities, which can intensify boom-bust lending cycles in the host country. Others suggest that foreign banks increase financial instability and volatility in the host country, by providing avenues for capital flight during an economic downturn, or reducing lending when confronted with economic shocks in their home country. Still others have shown that increased competition from foreign banks makes domestic banks less profitable, shrinking their equity base and lending capacity. There are also claims that increased foreign bank penetration may reduce the franchise value of domestic banks, compelling them to gamble on risky projects. Foreign banks, with their global operations and complex accounting and reporting systems, may also increase the regulatory burden of the host country regulators.In this paper, we examine whether the so-called cherry-picking effect of foreign bank presence adequately explains the higher interest rates spreads and lower level of credit to the private sector. These models assume that foreign banks primarily compete with domestic banks in the lending market. In these setups, foreign lenders capture the low-risk borrowers, who usually meet their accounting standards and procedures, leaving domestic banks with a larger pool of risky borrowers with a higher probability of default. This, in turn, increases the monitoring costs of the domestic banks, requiring them to raise lending rates. Higher borrowing costs then force many creditworthy entrepreneurs to opt out of borrowing, explaining lower level of credit in the economy.Cherry-picking models provide a plausible, albeit partial, explanation as to why increased foreign bank presence is associated with reduced credit to the private sector. But they require a number of unrealistic assumptions, including that banks have unlimited access to funds and that the supply of loanable funds is fully elastic. In reality, the deposit base of a country is finite and changes rather slowly over time. Also, foreign banks typically do not lend in the host country with funds imported from abroad. With efficient cost structures, brand names and reputational advantages and better service quality, foreign banks can manage to take a sizeable portion of deposits away from domestic banks.Cherry-picking models assume that the banking sector of the host country is fully competitive. But in most developing countries, the banking sector experiences monopolistic competition, with banks offering differentiated products and services to their clients. Domestic banks, in particular, maintain long-standing relationship with their borrowers and offer specialized financial products that meet specific requirements of their borrowers. It is unrealistic to assume that foreign banks can offer competitive rates to a large set of domestic borrowers that can sufficiently offset the relational advantages that they enjoy with their long-term domestic bank partners. It requires us to assume that borrowers can switch their lending from domestic to foreign banks rather costlessly. Given the informational disadvantages they face in lending, foreign banks, we believe, find it more attractive to compete in the deposit market, where informational disadvantages pose no problem in attracting deposits.These cherry-picking models also assume that banks can ex ante ascertain the cost of monitoring (or screening) risky borrowers and accordingly offer a menu of interest rates contracts that internalize the higher monitoring costs. But monitoring cost can vary not only among borrowers but also with respect to the same borrower during the duration of a loan contract. If a borrower faces an adverse shock and finds it difficult toCredit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? pay an installment, banks may require increased monitoring to reduce the probability of a default. Hence, banks cannot fully internalize the monitoring cost in the menu of loan contracts they offer to borrowers with different probability of defaults.In this paper, we first show that foreign banks are fundamentally different from domestic banks in the sense that they are less inclined to engage in lending activities in the host country. Their portfolio structure is significantly different from that of their domestic counterparts as they allocate more of their resources in non-lending activities. We find that the average loan-to-asset ratio of foreign banks is lower than that of domestic banks and the difference is statistically highly significant in our sample of  countries (Table B and Table I). The portfolio composition of foreign banks partly explains the decline in credit to the private sector, as foreign banks typically divert deposits to non-lending, high-return activities such as investments in securities and trading activities.Second, we offer evidence that the growth rate of foreign banks market share of deposits is significantly higher than that for domestic banks. This confirms that foreign banks gain their market share at the expense of their domestic counterparts (Graph I and Table II). This also challenges the myth that foreign banks use their own capitalfunds that they bring from outside the countryto finance their lending and non-lending activities. We also find evidence that the deposit share of foreign banks is, on average, significantly higher than that of domestic banks (Table B). These findings confirm that domestic banks face stiff competition from foreign banks in the deposit market.Third, the paper presents evidence that, as foreign banks increase their share of deposits, domestic banks are forced to increase their reliance on non-deposit-based funding to finance their lending (and nonlending) activities (Graph II). Non-deposit-based funding typically involves inter-bank borrowing, including borrowing from foreign banks. We find evidence that the deposit share of foreign banks is positively and significantly correlated to the country average reliance on non-deposit-based funding (Table IV).Graph I: Deposit shares of domestic banks          Graph II: Increased Reliance on Non-deposit Based Funding    Domestic banksas they lose their deposit base to foreign banks and are required to raise funds through inter-bank borrowingface higher borrowing costs, which in turn, increase their lending rates. As lending rates go up, banks, on average, attract a riskier pool of projects that require higher returns on investment. Higher interest rates also force many creditworthy borrowers to opt out of borrowing, explaining the fall in domestic credit to the private sector. We find evidence that the share of non-deposit-based funding is positively and significantly correlated to interest spreads (Table V). We also find evidence that the share of deposits held in foreign banks is negatively correlated to the volume of credit to the private sector (Table VI).Finally, the paper presents evidence that loans from foreign banks are more volatile than loans from domestic banks, an issue that has so far been ignored in the literature on foreign banks. Bank-level data show that the loan to total asset ratio of foreign banks is more volatile than it is for domestic banks (Table B and Table III). The difference is statistically significant. The regression analysis confirms that foreign ownership of banks is a significant predictor of higher volatility in loans to total asset ratio. We also find evidence that non-deposit-based funding is strongly and positively correlated to bank-level volatility in the loans to total asset ratio. Our macro-level data show that average volatility in the loans to total asset ratio is positively correlated to the country average of non-deposit-based funding (Table VII). We conclude that increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding, such as inter-bank borrowing, makes lending less predictable. It also forces banks to provide more short-term loans. Both these factors explain why the loans to total asset ratio is more volatile when banks increase their reliance on non-deposit-based funding.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a review of relevant literature. Section III explains the limitations of cherry-picking models and presents an alternative explanation as to why increased foreign bank presence does not lead to financial development. Section IV describes the data source and provides a few summary statistics. Section V reports the regression results and analyzes key findings. The final section makes a few concluding remarks.   Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? . Literature ReviewProponents of financial market liberalization maintain that financial opennesseasing of entry barri-ers in the banking sector and removal of restrictions on international capital flowsenhances financial development, which in turn, promotes economic growth and welfare. A large body of empirical literature demonstrates the positive correlation between the development of a countrys financial sector and its economic growth. Levine () argues that foreign banks promote financial development in the host country directly, by providing high quality banking services, and indirectlyby forcing domestic banks to improve quality and reduce costs; by encouraging the upgrading of accounting, auditing and rating institutions; and by intensifying pressures on governments to improve the legal, supervisory and regulatory practices. We review four strands of literature on foreign banks that focus on: (a) efficiency gains; (b) effects on deposits; (c) effects on lending and availability of credit; and (d) volatility and instability in supply of credit.Efficiency gainsAlthough we do not address the efficiency-gains effects of foreign bank entry in this paper, it is a pertinent topic to fully understand how foreign bank presence affects the terms and availability of credit. Claessen,et al. (), using bank level data from  countries, show that foreign bank entry enables domestic banks to cut costs as they acquire superior banking techniques from their foreign competitors. They also show that foreign bank entry significantly reduces domestic banks profitability, non-interest income and overall expenses. Their data also show that foreign banks are less profitable than domestic banks in developed countries, as they are unlikely to enjoy a technological edge over their domestic counterparts. These findings allow Claessen, et al. () to conclude that in developing countries, foreign banks enjoy strong technological and efficiency advantage, which can be large enough to overcome any informational disadvantage they may encounter as outsiders.Bayraktar and Wang (), contradicting the findings of Claessens, et al. (), find no statistically significant correlation between foreign banks share in the host country and the performance of domestic banks. They find that domestic banks performance is, in fact, driven by the equity/asset ratio, the overhead cost ratio, and several macroeconomic factors. Levy-Yeyati and Micco (), using bank level data from eight latin_american countries, show that foreign bank penetration actually weakened banking sector competition in these countries.Effects on depositsThe literature on how foreign bank entry affects the deposit share of domestic banks is rather scant. One line of literature assumes that foreign banks bring new lending resources and do not depend on domestic deposits to support their lending activities in the host country. A second strand of literature, albeit less explicit,assumes domestic deposits to be highly elastic. As foreign banks offer better financial services and attractive deposit rates, they encourage more savings and mobilize new deposits. Domestic banks are not worse off, it is argued, as foreign banks largely pick up new and additional deposits that they mobilize in the host country.Crystal, et al. (), for example, claim that foreign banks generally rely less on deposit-based funding than private domestic banks. According to their research, the most likely explanation is that foreign banks largely rely on alternative funding sources in their home countries. Another strand of literature, however, shows that domestic depositors can punish poorly performing and risky domestic banks by transferring their deposits to more reliable and efficient foreign banks. Martinez-Peria, et al. (), for example, show that depositors shifted their deposits to more reliable foreign banks in Argentina, Chile and Mexico. Other studies claim that on-shore presence of foreign banks can facilitate the flight to quality and safety. Clarke,et al. () show that foreign bank deposits in Argentina increased during the financial turmoil of the mids, while Kraft () finds that foreign bank subsidiaries acted as havens for depositors during the  Croatian banking crisis.Looking at the balance-sheet data of  banks in  countries, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga () find strong evidence that banks increasingly rely on non-deposit-based or wholesale funding and non-interest income. They show that reliance on non-deposit-based funding can increase bank fragility and instability as the supply and terms of wholesale funding can be highly sensitive to the perceived riskiness of a bank. They also find that reliance on non-deposit funding can lower the return on assets and bank profitability. The paper, however, does not explain why banks are forced to rely on non-deposit-based funding or how the reliance on such funding can increase volatility in the supply of loans. In our analysis, we will show that foreign bank entry, and their market share of deposits, is a key determinant for increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding.Effects on lendingThe empirical literature on foreign bank entry and how it affects the aggregate level of credit largely focuses on whether foreign banks lend to SMEs. Many argue that foreign banks rely on hard informationand less on relationship-based lendingin extending credit to domestic borrowers. The presence of information asymmetry generally explains why foreign banks are less able to lend to small firms, which in turn, attempts to explain the negative association between foreign bank presence and credit to the private sector.Using a survey of  entrepreneurs in  developing and emerging countries, Clarke, et al. (), however, show that firms are less credit-constrained in countries with more foreign bank participation. Escude, et al. () find no bias against SMEs in foreign banks loan portfolios. In Eastern Europe, Giannetti and Ongena () find that foreign bank presence benefits all firms, though the effects are more pronounced for large firms and firms that are less likely to be involved in connected lending. Beck, et al. (), using bank-level data from  countries, find no evidence that foreign banks lend less to SMEs than other banks. They conclude that foreign banks simply use different lending techniques and organizational structures.On the other hand, Berger, et al. () present evidence that small businesses in Argentina are less likely than larger ones to receive credit from large banks or foreign banks. Looking at bank balance sheet data for Argentina, Chile, Columbia and Peru, Clarke, et al. () also find that foreign banks generally lent a smaller fraction of their funds to smalland medium-sized enterprises than similar domestic banks inCredit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? the late s. They, however, suggest that the difference is primarily due to the behavior of small foreign banks. They also find that in Chile and Colombia, large foreign banks actually lent more to SMEs than comparable domestic banks.Naaborg, et al. () find that while foreign-owned banks became major players in the financial system of Central and Eastern-European countries, the speed of financial development has been rather slow in these transition countries. Their data show that while banking sector assets in these countries have grown significantly since s, credit to the private sector has remained relatively low. Likewise, Haber and Musacchio () show that lending to the private sector actually declined as the presence of foreign banks grew in Mexico. The fall in private lending was more pronounced in foreign banks. In further research, Mian (), using a dataset of , loans in Pakistan, shows that, compared to their domestic counterparts, foreign banks lend less to informationally opaque firms that typically rely on relational lending.Detragiache, et al. () demonstrate the negative effect of foreign bank presence on aggregate private credit. Their cream-skimming model, using data from  low-income countries, show that countries with more foreign bank penetration have a shallower banking sector, and lower level of credit to the private sector. Gromley (), using firm-level data on credit across different regions of India, finds evidence both of cream-skimming by foreign banks and of a systematic drop in loans from domestic banks, which leads to an overall reduction in access to credit for many domestic firms, particularly smaller firms and those with fewer tangible assets.Volatility and instability in the supply of creditThe literature presents divergent views on whether increased foreign bank presence enhances financial stability in the host country. Most of the discussions center on how aggregate-level volatility in capital flows affects financial stability. Goldberg, et al. () show that while foreign and private domestic banks in Argentina and Mexico engaged in similar lending activities in the s, foreign banks showed stronger and less volatile loan growth. Their findings suggest that financial soundness of banksand not ownership per sedetermines the growth, volatility and cyclicality of bank credit. According to Goldberg, et al. (), ownership diversity enhances credit stability in times of crisis and when the host country financial system is under-developed. They also find no evidence of foreign banks causing instability in the domestic credit market.Demirguc-Kunt, et al. () claim that increased participation of foreign banks tends to lower the probability of a banking crisis, as foreign banks import better accounting standards and demand more effective prudential regulations. Other studies argue that large foreign banks with established local presence (e.g. branches or subsidiaries) are less likely to reduce their exposure during financial crises due to the high fixed costs involved with establishing a branch network and gaining market share. Peek, et al. (), for example, find that offshore lending was more volatile than onshore lending for Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.Economic theories, on the other hand, predict that capital and financial market liberalization increases volatility in capital flows. Stiglitz () shows how capital market liberalizationoften the precursor of large foreign bank presence in developing and emerging countriesreduces financial stability and adversely affects growth. Agenor () argues that pro-cyclical capital flows from foreign sources increase financial and macroeconomic instability. He shows that financial openness, which is associated with large foreign bank presence, increases volatility in capital movement. It is argued that foreign financial institutions,  constrained by information asymmetry, are less able to assess the consequences of an adverse economic shock in the host country and may demonstrate herding behavior, resulting in en masse capital flight during a crisis. DellAriccia and Marquez () show that capital market liberalization can reduce the cost of financing for banks, which can, in turn, increase the likelihood of both a credit boom and a banking crisis. They argue that competition from foreign bank entry can compel incumbent domestic banks to reduce screening of loan applications to retain their market share, which may deteriorate the quality of their loan portfolio and increase the likelihood of a banking crisis. A number of empirical studies show that foreign-owned financial institutions actually decrease the stability of aggregate domestic bank credit by providing additional avenues for capital flight during a crisis, either in the host or home country.Looking at banking and balance-of-payment crises in five developed and fifteen developing countries from  through the s, Kaminsky and Reinhart () show that financial liberalization usually predates banking crises. They find that financial market liberalization often leads to a boom in consumption, which is usually financed by an explosion in bank credit, with banks borrowing abroad. The foreign borrowings also lead to real exchange rate appreciation, which squeezes bank profit and gives rise to bankruptcies and capital outflows.. Beyond cherry-picking: An alternative explanationCherry-picking in lendingThe cherry-picking models, explaining the lending behavior of foreign banks, assume information asymmetries between the lender and the borrowers. Prospective borrowers typically know more about their ability to repay loans than lenders do, while lenders screen borrowers to select high-quality entrepreneurs and reduce the risk of default among the low quality ones. Detragiache, et al. () present a model that assumes that foreign banks are better than domestic banks in monitoring hard information, such as accounting information or collateral values, but not in monitoring soft information, such as the borrowers entrepreneurial ability or trustworthiness. They show that foreign bank entry induces cream-skimming, when the hard-information borrowers are no longer pooled with the soft-information borrowers, who are perceived to carry higher risks. The cost of monitoring the soft-information borrowers increases banks operating costs. Consequently, the soft-information borrowers face higher borrowing costs, which discourage them from borrowing. Accordingly, the model predicts that countries with a larger foreign bank presence, and relatively larger number of soft information borrower, are likely to see a lower level of credit available to its private sector.Gromley () presents a similar model showing that banks are likely to over-invest in bad projects and under-invest in good projects in countries where information asymmetries and screening costs are sufficiently high. His model shows that entry of foreign banks may induce a separating equilibrium, where foreign banks only finance the large projects of cream firms and domestic banks finance those of average firms. In this setup, bad firms do not receive bank finance.Sengupta () develops a model that argues domestic and foreign banks face observationally identical borrowerseither highor low-riskbut that domestic banks have better information about the See McKinnon,, et al. () The author presents a theoretical model in a forthcoming paper.Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? unobservable risks, which they acquire over time in the process of lending. The model shows that by offering cheaper loans, foreign banks with greater cost advantages can cherry-pick low-risk borrowers away from domestic banks. However, it predicts that foreign banks, even with moderate cost advantages, can pool all borrowers, but only in countries that have a higher fraction of low-risk borrowers.These models typically assume a perfectly competitive banking sector that satisfies market clearing conditions in lending. Detragiache, et al., for example, claim, Banks are perfectly competitive. They have access to a perfectly elastic supply of funds, and their cost of funds is normalized to one .... Banks can raise unlimited funds. Gromley () assumes that foreign banks relative cost advantage is derived from their more efficient deposit collection system and access to international capital, while Sengupta () contends that foreign banks are more efficient in converting deposits to loans. Gromley () further assumes that domestic lenders have access to an unlimited supply of domestic funds, while foreign lenders have access to an unlimited supply of international funds.Senguptas model predicts that foreign banks will pool low and high-risk borrowers together, and that no cherry picking will occur if and only if the foreign bank has a sufficiently large cost advantage, and the proportion of high-risk borrowers in the host country is relatively small. Gromleys model, on the other hand, requires us to assume that the number of bad firms is sufficiently high relative to average firms to demonstrate that foreign bank entry reduces access to credit for all firms. Detragiache, likewise, requires us to assume that firms maintaining hard information are less risky than firms that only have soft information. This ignores the possibility that large firmsskilled in providing hard informationcan also possess a higher capacity to deceive their lenders into funding negative NPV projects.Detragiache, et al. further assume that banks can ex ante ascertain the monitoring costs of borrowers and accordingly adjust their interest rates. Monitoring costs are unlikely to remain constant during the term of a loan contract and may well depend on the continued performance of a borrower. A borrower facing an exogenous shock may require more monitoring, which, in turn, can increase monitoring costs and shrink profit margin of the bank. Gromley makes a similar simplifying assumption that screening costs of firms, regardless of borrower type or loan size, are fixed. But in reality, screening costs are likely to vary by firm-size, sector and duration of a loan contract. While Gromley subsequently relaxes the assumption, he requires screening costs to fall with an increase in the size of a loan. Screening costs are likely to be non-linear and may even increase with firm-size or loan size.An Alternative ExplanationThese cherry-picking models do not address the question whether foreign banks are fundamentally different from domestic banks. Do foreign banks, on average, maintain a different portfolio structure from domestic banks, allocating a smaller portion of their deposits to lending? These studies typically do not take into account the effects of foreign bank entry on the deposit shares of domestic banks. Does increased foreign bank presence lead to increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding for domestic banks? Does increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding explain the increase in interest spreads? Also, cherry-picking models largely ignore the adverse effect of foreign bank presence on the volatility of credit and financial sector stability.It is unrealistic to assume a perfectly competitive banking market. Credit markets rarely clear, even when banks can offer a menu of loan contracts that fully reflect the risk of borrowers or when borrowers can fully meet collateral requirements of the banks. In reality, banks are heterogeneous agents, offering  specialized and differentiated financial products to their clients and engage in monopolistic competition in both deposit and lending market. Banking relations matter because people typically borrow from banks where they maintain accounts and keep deposits. Foreign banksoffering reputation, efficient service, prestige or international banking networkare likely to find it easier to compete in the deposit market.At the same time, domestic clients are also likely to find it easier to shift their deposits to foreign banks. Information asymmetry or lack of relationship poses little problem to shifting of deposits to foreign banks.Furthermore, while foreign banks are likely to be more efficient in mobilizing deposits, it is highly improbable that either set of banks has access to unlimited funds, even in a globalized financial market. Elasticity of savings and deposits is usually very low in developing countries. Total deposits available in a country do not increase rapidly. The marginal cost of raising deposits typically increases as competition in the deposit market intensifies. Moreover, under conditions of monopolistic competition, as is the case in the developing world, there can be excessive incentives for foreign banks to enter and compete for deposits by raising deposit rates to reap the business-stealing effect (Stiglitz and Hellman, ).Our empirical analysis relies on two very simple assumptions: that the supply of deposits is finite and inelastic, and that banks set lending rates that reflect the cost of their funds. In our empirical model,we make no assumption about the distribution of the borrower types and still manage to explain, without any restrictive assumption, why increased foreign bank presence is associated with higher interest spread, lower levels of credit to the private sector and higher volatility in the loans to total asset ratio. Regardless of whether a country has a large number of risky borrowers or whether they are better at monitoring hard information, we show that large foreign bank presence will contribute to decreasing credit supply to the private sector if they manage to reduce the share of deposits held in domestic banks.In our analysis, we first show that foreign banks are typically less inclined to lending in the host country, with the competitive disadvantages they face relative to domestic banks partially explaining this aversion. The liability of foreignness (Hymer, ) dominates their lending decisions, regardless whether they operate in the host market as a branch, subsidiary or through acquisition of domestic banks. The cost advantage that foreign banks enjoy is not necessarily sufficient to overcome the informational and locational disadvantages they face vis-a-vis domestic banks. This is also consistent with the conclusion of Stein (), who suggests that distance constraints (both cultural and geographic) between top management and loan officers force foreign banks to curtail discretion in lending decisions, resulting in less lending to informationally opaque smaller businesses. Our paper presents unambiguous evidence that foreign banks lend less than domestic banks in the same macroeconomic and regulatory environment. This contradicts the claims of Demirguc-Kunt, et al. () that the technological and efficiency advantage of foreign banks is large enough to overcome any informational disadvantage they may encounter in lending in developing countries.Contrary to popularly held belief, we find strong evidence that foreign banks largely rely on the deposits they collect in the host country to fund both their lending and non-lending activities. We find that domestic banks lose a significant share of their deposit base to foreign banks, which the latter largely deployCredit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? in non-lending activities such as securities, bonds and foreign exchanges. Information asymmetry and unfamiliarity with the local market pose no problem to foreign banks in attracting a sizeable portion of deposits away from domestic banks. Foreign banks superior service quality, and expertise in investment advisory services, coupled with a perception that they provide safe havens and greater access to an international network can encourage domestic depositors to switch their deposits to foreign banks, a relatively costless effort on the part of domestic borrowers. Our data also show that, on average, foreign banks have larger market share of deposits than domestic banks. These findings largely undermine the claims of Crystal, et al. () that foreign banks generally rely less on deposit-based funding than domestic banks.While banks take into account possible monitoring costs, they set lending rates primarily on the basis of their cost of deposit rates and the cost of inter-bank borrowing. The reduced deposit-base forces domestic banks to borrow from other banks, particularly from foreign banks, to meet their lending targets and commitments. This increases the cost of funds for domestic banks, which leads to increased lending rates. Higher lending rates then force a fraction of creditworthy borrowers to opt out of borrowing. They also attract more risky borrowers, including those who are unlikely to repay their loans, triggering the problem of adverse selection. This explains why increased foreign bank presence can lead to higher interest spreads in many developing and emerging countries.Furthermore, superior knowledge of investment and risk diversification strategiesincluding the capacity for developing and selling complex financial productsallows foreign banks to invest a larger portion of their deposits in non-lending activities, which usually yields higher returns. The diversion of deposits to high-return non-lending activities offers further explanation as to why increased foreign bank presence is associated with lower levels of credit to the private sector. In addition, since foreign banks are less familiar with the domestic credit market and usually less inclined to lend to firms that do not meet their accounting and information requirements, they not only allocate a smaller portion of their deposits to loans, but are also likely to extend loans of shorter maturity. This partly explains why loans from foreign banks are, on average, more volatile. The shrinking deposit base compels domestic banks to finance their lending activities through borrowing from foreign banks, which can be unpredictable and mostly short-term. As domestic banks increasingly rely on non-deposit-based funding, bank credit becomes more short-term and volatile.. Data and Summary StatisticsOur dataset includes bank-level data from  developing and emerging countries, obtained from the Bankscope database, covering the period -. Bankscope covers more than  percent of all licensed commercial banks operating in these countries. All banks available in Bankscope from our list of developing and emerging countries are included in our data set. To avoid potential problems with many small countries (i.e. island economies or financial centers) that have very large foreign bank presence (relative to the size of their GDP) that can skew the results, we only include developing and emerging countries that had a population of at least  million in  and had data for at least  (three) commercial banks in the Bankscope database. As such, the small island states of the Caribbean and the Pacific are not included in our data set. Financial centersHong Kong, Singapore, Panama, Bahrain or Lebanonare also excluded. We also exclude countries that experienced prolonged wars or conflicts (e.g. Afghanistan, Liberia, Iraq) or faced international economic embargos (e.g. Iran, North Korea, Cuba) to ensure that the variations in loans, deposits and other financial variables are not influenced by these non-economic factors. Please see Annex I for the list of countries included in our analysis.  The Bankscope database contains an ownership code that classifies banks as state-owned, private domestic, and foreign-owned, but the code is not available for all banks included in the database. We also looked at the Global Ultimate Owner information in Bankscope to determine whether a bank is foreign-owned. When Bankscope had no ownership code for a bank or did not list the name and address of a global ultimate owner, we checked an individual Banks annual report/shareholder information or other publicly available data to ascertain ownership of the bank. A bank is classified as foreign if at least  percent of its capital is in foreign hands and the variable foreign is coded . For domestically owned banks, the variable foreign is coded . We construct the variables loans_totalassets (the ratio of loans to total assets), equity_totalassets (the ratio of equity to total assets), nondeposit_ratio (the share of loans and other earning activities funded by nondeposits), depositshare_growth (growth rate of the market share of deposits of an individual bank) and volatility_loansassetratio from the bank-level data available in Bankscope. We construct our two other key explanatory variablesdepositshare_foreignbanks and countrymean_nondepositratio, adding up the share of deposits held in all foreign banks and calculating the average share of non-deposit based-funding of all banks in each country, respectively. For detailed explanations on all variables used in our analysis, please see Annex II.Our macroeconomic variableslog_gdppc, l_cpi, trade_gdp, markcap_gdp, govdebt_gdp , log_pop are drawn from the World Banks World Development Indicators (WDI) database. We create the variable creditcoverthe percentage of adult population covered by both public and private credit registries, using relevant data available in WDI. The variable dep_insurance is taken from the Levine-Caprio database on Bank Supervision and Regulation. We also use the World Banks Financial Structure database for data on financial development. This includesdbagdp (banking sector assets as percentage of GDP), bcbd (bank credit over bank deposits), concentration (market share of the three largest banks) and stutrnover (stock-turnover relative to stock market capitalization in the country).The financial market reform and regulation variablesintratecontrols (the level and intensity of interest rates controls), entrybarriers (the level of barriers to entry to the banking sector), creditcontrols (the level of directed credit and credit ceilings), and bankingsuperv (quality of banking supervision)are taken from the database developed by Abiad, et al. (), which measure the status of financial market reforms in  countries over period. We extend the coverage of this dataset to , incorporating updates from relevant central_banks websites. Our choice of control variables follows the standard practice in the literature on foreign banks. As Gelos () finds it in his survey of relevant literature, factors such as macroeconomic environment, the degree of banking competition, availability of information about borrowers and banking regulations influence the cost and terms of credit available in a country.The correlation matrix of our key dependent and explanatory variables is reported in Table A. Deposit share of foreign banks is significantly and positively correlated to domestic banks reliance on non-deposit based funding, while it is negatively correlated to foreign banks reliance on non-deposit based funding at % significance level.Furthermore, we find that the correlation between the share of deposits held in foreign banks and domestic credit to the private sector is negative and while its correlation with interest spread is positive, both significant at % level. The correlation between the share of deposits held in foreign banks and the volatility in loans to total asset ratio is positive but insignificant. The correlations between the country average reliance on non-deposit based funding and volatility in loans to total asset ratio and also with interest spread are positive and significant at % level. It is negatively correlated to domestic credit to the private sector, also at % level. Finally, interest spread is negatively correlated to domestic credit to the private sector.Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows: Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter?countrymean_ loanasset volatilityDo foreign banks lend less?We investigate whether foreign banks typically allocate a smaller portion of their total assets to lending activities. This will allow us to test the hypothesis that foreign banks encounter significant informational and locational disadvantages that compel them to allocate a larger fraction of their resources to non-lending and non-interest earning assets. There are three plausible arguments as to why foreign banks devote a smaller portion of their assets to lending. First, since foreign banks have superior knowledge of various financial and capital market products such as stocks, bonds and derivatives, they enjoy a comparative advantage in earning healthy profits from non-lending activities. Second, since they lack sufficient information about the range of borrowers in the host country, they find it less attractive to engage in lending activities. Third, foreign banks prefer non-lending activities, such as securities trading over lending because it allows them to quickly reduce their exposure and cut and run when necessary. It is usually harder for a bank to call back loans and reduce exposure during an economic downturn or crisis.Table I reports the regression estimates for banks loans to total asset ratio (loans_totalasset) and ownership, controlling for macroeconomic and regulatory environments. The dependent variable is the share of loans as percentage of a banks total assets. We include equity total asset (equity_totalassets) ratio to control for a banks level of equity investment.Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? The regression model includes a set of macroeconomic variables (column ) to control for the level of economic activities in the country, which directly or indirectly influence a banks level of lending relative to its total assets. The key macroeconomic controls are log_gdppc and l_cpithe natural logs of GDP per capita and inflationto broadly account for the level of economic development and economic uncertainty. We expect log_gdppc to be positively correlated to a banks level of loans relative to its total assets, while the log of inflation is expected to be negatively correlated to lending in a dynamic set up. Other macroeconomic variables are: govdebt_gdpthe level of public sector debt relative to GDP; trade_gdpthe share of import plus export relative to GDP, which can be a broad measure of private sector economic activities and markcap_gdpthe level of stock market capitalization relative to GDP, which is often an alternative source of finance. The model also includes creditcoverthe percentage of adult population covered by public and private registries.The OLS estimate in column  shows a negative correlation, significant at % level, between foreign and loans_totalasset. Column  reports OLS estimates with three additional variablesintratecontrols, concentration and entrybarriers, which measure the level of financial regulations in the economy, which can affect banks lending activities. Again, foreign is negatively correlated with loans_totalassets and the correlation is significant at % level. Both models have high adjusted R-squared, confirming the explanatory power of the model.We, however, know that OLS estimates are biased and inefficient in the presence of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation, which is often the case with large panel data. To account for heteroskedasticity, we replicate the basic model (as in column ) in generalized least squares (GLS) method, with random effects (column ). The Breusch-Pagan test Lagrange Multiplier test confirms the presence of random effects in our panel data. It is reasonable to assume that some omitted variablese.g. management style that affect banks lending decisions are time invariant but vary widely between two banks. The GLS estimate also confirms the negative correlation between foreign ownership of banks and loans to total asset ratio. Additionally, we find that loans to total asset ratio as positively correlated to creditcover. In column , we report the GLS, random effect estimates of the full model. Again, foreign ownership is significantly and negatively correlated to loans_totalassets. We also find that intratecontrols to be negatively correlated to loans to total asset ratio, significant at % level. This suggests that when interest rates are liberalized, banks are more likely to devote a relatively smaller fraction of their assets devoted to lending. We also find that lower level of entry barrier is associated with lower levels of loans to total asset ratio, again significant at % level.In panel data, the unobserved panel-level effects are usually correlated with lagged dependent variables, making standard estimators inconsistent. We estimate our model using the System Generalized Methods of Moment (GMM) estimation technique, developed by Arellano-Bover/Blundell-Bond, which addresses the problem of simultaneity in dynamic panel data. The system GMM estimator uses the level equation to obtain a system of two equations: one differenced and one in levels. By adding the second equation, the Arellano-Bover method obtains additional instruments. Thus the variables in levels in the second equation are instrumented with their own first differences, which help to increase the efficiency of the estimators. Columns  through  report the system GMM estimates of our model, with first, second and third lags of the dependent variable (loans_totalasset) included in the model. A banks loans to total asset ratio is expected to be sticky, with its lagged values at time t-, t-, and tpredicting the value at time t. We perform the Sargan test to check for the validity of the instruments included in the model. The Sargan test has a null hypothesis that the instruments as a group are exogenous.The Sargan test for system GMM estimates of the full model with one lagged dependent variable (Column ) is negative i.e. that the instruments are not valid. The coefficient of foreign is, however, negative but not significant. The Sargan test for estimations with nd (Column ) and rd lag (Column ) of the dependent variable confirms the validity of the instruments included in the model. The regression results reported in Column  re-confirms the negative correlation between foreign ownership of banks and the loans to total asset ratio. We find, as expected, log_gdppc and trade_gdp are positively correlated to loans to total asset ratio. This suggests, controlling for macroeconomic and financial market variables, banks are likely to have higher loans to total asset ratios in richer countries. Also, countries with higher trade to GDP ratio are likely to see higher loans to total asset ratio in their banks. Furthermore, we find that interest rates controls are negatively and significantly correlated to loans to total asset ratio of banks. All other explanatory variables carry the expected signs, though they are not statistically significant.The regression results reported in Table I confirm that foreign banks, on average, deploy a lower portion of their assets into lending, even when we control for the level of equity investment, level of economic activities and financial market regulations. The results also confirm that regulation matters interest rates liberalization can make lending activities less attractive for banks. interest rates controls can keep the cost of deposits low, which can reduce the cost of lending and help banks lend more. This has important implication for central bankers and policy-makers in developing countries.Do foreign banks compete for deposits in the host country?Table II reports the regression results for the dependent variable depositshare_growththe growth rate of the market share of deposits of an individual bank with respect to bank ownership. The market share of deposits is calculated as an individual banks share of total deposits in each country. Column  reports the regression result of the basic model, controlling for equity_totalasset, log_gdppc, l_cpi and dep_insurance and gdp_grow (the annual growth rate of GDP). dep_insurance is a dummy variable, which takes the value of  when the country has an explicit deposit insurance scheme. The model is estimated with Arellano-Bover/BlundellBond estimation method. We find that foreign is positively correlated to depositshare_growth, significant at % level, suggesting that, on average, the growth rate of foreign banks market share of deposits is likely to be % higher than the growth rates of the market share of deposits of domestic banks, when controlled for the levels of economic development, inflation, GDP growth rate and deposit insurance.Deposit insurance is negatively correlated to the growth rate of a banks market share of deposits. One plausible explanation is that banks in countries with deposit insurance schemes are likely to experience more stable market share of deposits. It suggests that depositors are less likely to switch deposits from one back to another if the country has an explicit deposit insurance scheme. The Sargan test confirms the validity of the instruments included in the model.Column  estimates the model with an additional control variable: concentration. The new estimates retain the significance of the coefficients of both foreign and dep_insurance. The coefficient of concentration is significant and negative, suggesting that a highly concentrated banking sector is likely to experience less change in the market share of deposits of an individual bank. The estimates in columns ,  and  add additional controls: bcbdthe ratio of bank credit to bank deposits; intratecontrolsthe level of interest rate controls; and entrybarriers. While, the coefficients of foreign, dep_insurance and concentration remain significant and carry the expected signs, none of the additional controls assume any statistical significance. The growth rates of the market share of deposits of foreign owned banks is %, % and % higher thanCredit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? the growth rates of the domestic banks in these three regressions. The coefficient of foreign is positive and significant at % level in all five regressions.These regression results confirm that foreign banks manage to increase their market share of deposits at a significantly faster rate. The higher growth rates of deposit shares of foreign banks also confirm that domestic banks lose their market share of deposits. This also suggests that foreign banks aggressively compete in the deposit market. It is important for policy-makers to note that existence of deposit insurance can reduce the intensity of competition for deposits and reduce the volatility in the market share of deposits. Also, an optimal level of concentrationi.e. a fewer number of bankscan make the deposit share of banks more stable and predictable. Furthermore, it is important to note that a banks equity investment or its level of lending (relative to deposit) does not influence the market share of deposits of a bank.Are loans from foreign banks more volatile?The literature has thus far ignored whether foreign bank entry increases the volatility in the supply of loans, which we believe should be an important factor for financial development. Bank credits should be predictable and stable to ensure that they facilitate productive investment and growth. When bank credit becomes volatilebecause more short-term loans are given or because loans are recalled prematurelyprivate sector cannot use bank loans for investments to enhance their productive capacities. To take into account the effects of foreign bank entry on the terms and availability of credit, we explore whether loans from foreign banks, on average, are more volatile than loans from domestic banks. To normalize variations in bank size, we estimate the volatility in the loans to total asset ratio, instead of estimating the volatility in the nominal level of loans. The level of volatility in loans to total assets is calculated by taking the mean and standard deviation of each banks loans to total asset ratio over the period -. The variable volatility_loansassetratio is the coefficient of variation of the variable loans_totalassetthe standard deviation of loans_totalasset divided by the mean loans_totalasset of each bank.In Table III, we present bank level evidence that volatility_loansassetratio of foreign banks is significantly higher than that of domestic banks. Given that the time dimension of the dependent variable volatility_loansassetratio is one (i.e. a single value calculated for the period -), we are unable to estimate the models in system GMM, which requires the dependent variable to vary over time. The initial model is estimated in OLS (column ), which shows that, on average, the volatility in the loans to total asset ratio of foreign banks is % higher than their counterpart domestic banks. The coefficients of all control variables equity_totalassets, log_gdppc, l_cpi, govdebt_gdp, trade_gdp and markcap_gdp are statistically significant. The coefficients of markcap_gdp and tade_gdp are negative, suggesting that higher level of market capitalization and higher level of trading activities are likely to be associated with lower level of volatility in loans to total asset ratio. It is, however, interesting to note that, holding all else constant, the coefficient of govdebt_gdp is positive, suggesting a positive correlation between volatility_loansassetratio and govdebt_gdp. One plausible explanation could be that when the public debt is high, the credit to private sector experiences faster turnover to account for limited availability of credit.Column  reports the OLS regression results with additional controlsstutrnover and nondeposits_ratio. The coefficients of both these variables are positive and statistically significant. While controlling for the level of nondeposits_ratio, the coefficient of foreign is still positive and significant at % level. The final model (column ) includes two additional variablesintratecontrols and concentration, both of which are significant at % level. The model shows that as interest rates are liberalized, the loans to total asset ratio  of banks are likely to experience higher volatility. Given that OLS estimates yield biased coefficients, we estimate the final model with instrumental variables in two-stage least squares (SLS) and in single equation GMM. We consider that l_cpi, govdebt_gdp trade_gdp, market_gdp, stutrnover and nondeposits_ratio as endogenous variables and they are instrumented with log_pop (natural log of population), british (= if the country is a former British colony), french (= if the country is a former French colony), spanish (= if the country is a former Spanish colony), Portuguese (= if the country is a former Portuguese colony), cis (= if the country belonged to the Soviet block or was part of the Soviet Union) and others (= if the country does not belong to any of the aforementioned group).The SLS and GMM instrumental variable estimates are reported in columns  and . In both estimates, coefficient of foreign is positive and significant at % level. All control variables, except for l_cpi and log_gdppc, are significant. In particular, the coefficient of intratecontrols is positive and significant at % level, confirming the positive correlation between interest rates liberalization and volatility in loans to total asset ratio. It is equally important to note that even when we control for bank ownership, volatility_loansassetratio is positively and significantly correlated to nondeposit_ratio. This finding has important policy implications, especially if the policy-makers intend to make loans more predictable and less volatile.Can the share of deposits held in foreign banks explain the increased reliance on non-deposit based funding in the host country?In Table IV, we report the regression estimates for the dependent variable countrymean_nondepositratio, and the key explanatory variable depositshare_foreignbanks, while controlling for macroeconomic conditions and financial regulation. We create the variable countrymean_nondepositratio with bank-level data obtained from the Bankscope database. For each bank in our dataset, we first calculate the share of non-deposit funding with following calculations: (loans + other-earning assetsdeposits)/(loans + other-earning assets). This gives us the fraction of a banks loans and non-lending activities is financed with funding other than deposits. The variable countrymean_nondepositratio is then calculated as the average non-deposit funding ratio of all banks in the country. We also calculate the share of deposits of all foreign banks in the country depositshare_foreignbanks, by adding the deposits of individual foreign banks and dividing the sum by the total deposits held in all banks (foreign and domestic) in the country (Graph III).Column  estimates the basic model in system GMM (Arellano-Bover/Blundell-Bond estimation method), controlling for financial development, measured in terms of dbagdpdomestic banking sector asset as percentage of GDP, economic development (log_gdppc) inflation (l_cpi) and concentration in the banking sector. The coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is positive and significant at % level, suggesting that a higher fraction of total deposits held in foreign banks is likely to result in increased reliance on non-deposit based funding for all banks in the country. The results also show that, holding all other factors constant, countries with higher level of economic development are likely to see an increase in non-deposit based funding. Interestingly, we see a negative but significant association between inflation and non-deposit based funding, which suggests the possibility that high inflation expectations (as it is captured in the dynamic setup of system GMM, which includes the lagged values of inflation as instruments) is likely to encourage banks to reduce their reliance on non-deposit based funding. As deposits rates are not inflation indexed, banks can reduce their cost of borrowing by relying more on deposit based funding when inflation is high. We also find a negative and statistically significant correlation between countrymean_nondepositratio and concentration, suggesting that a concentrated banking sector (with few banks controlling the market share) is likely to rely less on non-deposit based funding to finance lending and non-lending activities.Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? Graph III: Foreign Banks Deposit shares and Increased Reliance on Non-deposit Based FundingFunding      In columns  through , we add additional variablesintratecontrols, creditcontrols, entrybarriers and bankingsupervto control for variations in financial regulations among countries. None of these variables assume significance in the regression estimates. In the full model (column ), the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is significant at % level. The coefficient suggests that if the depositshare_foreignbanks in a country increases by %, the country-average reliance on non-deposit based funding (countrymean_nondepositratio) will increase by .%. The coefficients of log_gdppc and l_cpi are significant and carry the expected signs in the full model (Column ). In addition, we find that a reduction in credit controls (e.g. directed credit or credit targets) is negatively correlated to reliance on non-deposit based funding of loans and other earning assets. We run the Sargan test for all system GMM estimates to confirm that these models are not over-identified. For robustness check, we also estimate the full model in Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS) method (column ), correcting for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the data. In FGLS estimate, the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is positive and significant at % level. Finally, we report the OLS estimates of the full model in column . We know that OLS estimates of panel data, with large cross-sectional variations, yield biased estimates. In the OLS estimate, the coefficient of dbagdp is significant and negative, suggesting the possibility that few large variations in dbagdp is influencing the regression estimates. The coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is still positive and significant.The regression results in Table IV confirm our hypothesis that an increase in share of deposits held in foreign banks, holding all else constant, increases the reliance on non-deposit based funding for all banks. This correlation is robust under different model specifications. As foreign banks take a sizeable portion of deposits away from domestic banks, the latter is forced to secure funding form non-deposit based sources, including borrowing from foreign banks. The reliance on non-deposit based funding can increase the cost of funds for all banks, resulting in higher interest spreads and lower levels of aggregate credit to the private sector.      Can the increased reliance on non-deposit based funding explain higher interest rates spreads?We regress countrymean_nondepositsrtio on average interest rates spread (int_spread) in the country to find out whether an increase in reliance on deposit-based funding can explain the increase in interest spreads, as observed in many developing countries (Graph IV). Table V summarizes the regression results. Column  reports the system GMM estimates of the basic model, controlling for the size of the banking sector (dbagdp), the level of economic development (log_gdppc), inflation (l_cpi) and the level of economic activities (trade_ gdp, markcap_gdp and govdebt_gdp). The coefficient of countrymean_nondepositsrtio is positive and significant at % level. Inflation, rather surprisingly, is negatively correlated to int_spread, suggesting the possibility that the lagged values of inflation influence the correlation, forcing banks to reduce spreads when inflation expectations are high. While the coefficients of dbagdp and log_gdppc are insignificant, the result shows a negative and significant correlation between spread and trade_gdp ratio. One plausible explanation could be that countries more integrated with the global economy through imports and exports are likely to be more open to capital flows and are likely to have less domestic control over bank spreads. A relatively closed economy, holding all else constant, is likely to be able to more able to maintain higher interest spreads.In column  through , we report the results of system GMM estimates with additional control variablesintratecontrols, concentration and depositshare_foreignbanks. The coefficient of countrymean_nondepositsrtio remains positive and statistically significant in all three regression estimates. In addition to trade_gdp and l_cpi, the coefficient of concentration also assumes significance when included in the models. The positive coefficient of concentration suggests that % increase in banking sector concentration is likely to result in .% increase in interest spread. This is consistent with what we should expect to see when the banking sector of a country is highly concentrated. The coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is positive though insignificant, suggesting that the effects of foreign bank entry on interest rates spread is largely transmitted through its positive effect on countrymean_nondepositsrtio. The regression results of Table V show that increased foreign bank presence, inducing increased reliance on non-deposit based funding sources in the host country, can lead to higher interest rates spreads, as observed in many developing and emerging economies.Graph IV: Non-deposit based funding and interest spreads     Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? Can the share of deposits held in foreign banks explain the decline in credit to private sector?Table VI reports the regression results for the dependent variable domcreditpvt_gdptotal credit to the private sector as the percentage of GDP. This is one of the most critical indicators of financial development since it broadly measures the private sectors access to credit. A number of recent empirical paperslooking at both bank-level and macro level datahave shown that increased foreign bank presence is associated with lower levels of credit to private sector. We present an alternative explanation, showing that depositshare_foreignbanksthe total share of deposits held in foreign banks can explain the fall in credit to the private sector (Graph V). Our initial model (column ) is estimated in system GMM, controlling for dbagdp, log_gdppc, trade_gdp, markcap_gdp and govdebt_gdp. We find that the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is negative and statistically significant at % level. The Sargan test, however, cannot confirm that the estimated model is not over-identified. The revised model (column ) adds creditcover as an additional control and the Sargan test confirms the validity of all instruments included in the model. Again, we find that the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is negative and statistically significant at % level. The coefficient value suggests that % increase in depositshare_foreignbanks will reduce domcreditpvt_gdp by .%. As expected, loggdp_pc and trade_gdp are positively and significantly correlated to domcreditpvt_gdp, while the correlation with l_cpi is negative and significant.Columns  through  report regression results with additional control variablescreditcontrols, intratecontrols and concentration. In all these specifications, the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is negative and statistically significant. Estimates of the full model (column ) suggest that % increase in depositshare_foreignbanks can lead to .% decline in credit to the private sector. The Sargan test confirms that the model is not over-identified. The coefficients of log_gppc and l_cpi retain their significance and signs. Moreover, we find that concentration, holding all else constant, is positively correlated to credit to the private sector. This suggests that a concentrated banking sector, with fewer banks dominating the market share, can increase the supply of credit to the private sector.Graph V: Deposit share of foreign banks and credit to private sector    Can the increased reliance on non-deposit-based funding explain the increased volatility in loans to total asset ratio in the host country?In Table VII, we report the regression results for the dependent variable countrymean_loansassetvolatilitythe country average of the volatility in loans to total asset ratio (Graph VI). Our key explanatory variable is countrymean_nondepositsrtiothe country average of banks reliance on non-deposit-based funding. Given the cross-sectional nature of the data (by construction, countrymean_loansassetvolatility does not have a time dimension), we estimate the model first in OLS and also in Feasible GLS, that takes into account the presence of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error terms. The basic model (column ) includes log_gdppc, l_cpi, dbagdp, markcap_gdp, trade_gdp and govdebt_gdp. The coefficient of countrymean_nondepositsrtio is positive and significant at % level, suggesting that a % increase in countrymean_nondepositsrtio can lead to .% increase countrymean_loansassetvolatility. The coefficients of l_cpi, log_gdppc and trade_gdp are positive and significant, while it is negative and significant for markcap_gdp, consistent with what we observed in the regression estimates for bank-level volatility in loans to total asset ratio. The model is re-estimated (Column ) with additional control variablesintratecontrols and concentration. The coefficient of countrymean_nondepositsrtio remains positive and significant at % level. We also see that concentration assumes significance, suggesting that an increase in concentration can lead to higher average volatility in loans to total asset ratio.In column , we report the estimates of the model with stutrnover, which is, as we should expect, positively and significantly correlated to countrymean_loansassetvolatility, while markcap_gdp remains negatively and significantly correlated to average loans to total asset volatility. Our key explanatory variable, countrymean_nondepositsrtio remains positive and significant at % level. The result also shows that interest rates liberalization isas we should expectpositively and significantly correlated to volatility in loans to total assets. The full OLS model (column ) is estimated with an additional control variable, depositshare_foreignbanks to see whether it can explain the variations in countrymean_loansassetvolatility, when controlling for countrymean_nondepositsrtio and other variables. Though the coefficient of depositshare_foreignbanks is positive, it is insignificant, while the countrymean_nondepositsrtio remains significant at % level.Graph VI: Non-deposit based funding and volatility in loans     Credit to Private Sector, Interest Spread and Volatility in Credit-Flows:Do Bank Ownership and Deposits Matter? Recognizing that our OLS estimates are likely to be biased, we estimate the final model in Feasible Generalized Least Squares to correct for potential heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the data. Again, the estimate yields positive and significant coefficients for countrymean_nondepositsrtio and also in case of intratecontrols. We run the model in Two Stage Least Squares (SLS, Column ) and GMM (Column ) Instrumental Variable Estimation methods. We assume that our controlsl_cpi, dbagdp, markcap_gdp, trade_gdp, govdebt_gdp and stutrnoverare endogenous variables and they are instrumented with log_pop (natural log of population), british (= if the country is a former British colony), french (= if the country is a former French colony), spanish (= if the country is a former Spanish colony), Portuguese (= if the country is a former Portuguese colony), cis (= if the country belonged to the Soviet block or was part of the Soviet Union) and others (= if the country does not belong to any of the aforementioned group). Both SLS and GMM estimates confirm the positive correlation between countrymean_nondepositsrtio and countrymean_loansassetvolatility, showing that a % increase in countrymean_nondepositsrtio, holding everything else constant, can increase countrymean_loansassetvolatility by .% (.% in the GMM estimate). The results also confirm the positive association between interest rates liberalization and volatility in loans to total asset ratio.The regression results of Table VII confirm our hypothesis that an increase in reliance on nondeposit-based funding can make the average loans to total assets ratio in the country more volatile. For central bankers, this finding has important implications especially if they intend to make the availability of bank credit more predictable and stable. central_banks may also need to take into account that liberalization of interest rates can make bank credit not only more costly but also more unpredictable and volatile.. ConclusionBank ownership is an important factor in explaining not only who banks lend to, but also how much they lend and under what terms and conditions. Cherry-picking modes only focus on foreign banks lending preferences for a particular type of borrowerthe so-called creams who maintain better accounting standards or are more likely to succeed in implementing positive NPV projects. These models, implicitly or explicitly, suggest that improved legal protection for foreign lenders, greater availability of information on domestic borrowers, objective credit-ratings or transparent accounting systems will sufficiently correct the cherry-picking problems and enable foreign banks to lend to the non-creams. The onus is therefore on the host country legal, informational and regulatory environment to ensure that foreign banks do not cherrypick their clients.Our analysis shows that foreign banks are fundamentally different from domestic banks. For a number of reasons, as argued in the paper, they are less inclined to lending and their loans are likely to be more volatile than those offered by domestic banks. Our empirical analysis shows that bank ownership does matter. It also shows that deposits matter. We also find compelling evidence that financial regulations matter. Foreign banks may contribute to the financial development of the host country so long as their presence does not erode the deposit share of domestic banks. Many developing countries have welcomed foreign banks and exploit the benefits of their specialized skills and services without allowing their domestic banks losing market share of deposits. We were able to run FGLS estimates in Stata  when the matrix size remained below . Stata  was unable to perform FGLS on bank-level data when the matrix size was larger than .