The Scorecard on Development, -: Closing the Gap?This paper is the third installment in a series (the first and second editions were in  and ) that traces a long-term growth failure in most of the worlds countries. For the vast majority of the worlds lowand middle-income countries, there was a sharp slowdown in economic growth for the two decades during -, as compared to -. By , the story had still not changed very much.As would be expected, this long-term decline in growth also brought a decline in progress on social indicators, including life expectancy, infant and child mortality, and education. This was not the result of diminishing returns, either in economic growth or in the achievable progress in social indicators, as we showed previously. More likely, it was a result of policy failures. But this widespread, historic long-term slowdown in economic growth and social progress received very little attention or investigation.The past decade has shown a rebound in economic growth as well as progress on social indicators for many countries. In this paper, which looks at data for economic growth as well as health and education indicators for  countries over the last fifty years, we look at the economic performance of the last decade, as well as available social indicators, to see if the long slow-down in growth for the vast majority of countries has finally been reversed.The question that we raised ten years ago, and is still relevant, is: how much of this growth slowdown can be attributed to the policy reforms that characterized the postera? For most lowand middle-income countries, these reforms included tighter fiscal and monetary policies (including inflationtargeting regimes and increasing independence of central_banks); a large reduction of tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade; financial deregulation and increased opening to international capital flows; privatization of state-owned enterprises; increased protectionism in the area of intellectual property; and the general abandonment of state-led industrialization or development strategies.Identifying econometrically the contribution of the various reforms to the growth failure would be a daunting and possibly intractable exercise. But the fact that these reforms, often referred to as neoliberal, coincided with a sharp, long-term decline in economic growth for the vast majority of lowand middleincome countries is at least prima facie evidence that on the whole, these reforms contributed to the economic failure. It is also striking that so very few countries have, in the last  years, caught up with the living standards of Europe, the united_states, and the high-income countries that were the first to industrialize. More recently, only three small countries out of Botswana, the Maldives, and Cape Verdehave moved up from the group of Least Developed Countries since the category was created by the united_nations four decades ago. These long-term patterns, by themselves, suggest that there are barriers and obstacles that have their origin in international relations, rather than simply within countries.In this paper, countries are divided into quintiles according to the level of per capita income, or social indicator (e.g. life expectancy, infant mortality). The three periods are () () and () -. It is important to emphasize that we are not comparing the same set of countries in each quintile over the different time periods. Rather, we are comparing all of the countries that start each period (e.g. ) at a certain level of per capita GDP or social indicator, with those that start the next period (e.g. ) at the same level. This methodology eliminates the possibility that any slowdown in progress is a result of diminishing returns.Economic GrowthFor growth in per capita GDP, as noted above, there was a sharp slowdown from the first (-) period to the second (-) for all quintiles. At an annual rate, every quintile saw per capita growth that was slower by roughly halfor morein the second period as compared with the first.For all except the top quintile of countriesi.e. for the vast majority of lowand middle-income countriesthere was a sharp rebound to the growth rates of the period during -.There are a number of possible contributing factors to the apparent turnaround. First, if the growth failure of were primarily a result of policy errors, we would expect at least some recovery eventually. For example, the shock therapy that Russia and other transition economies experienced in the s was a tremendous failure, especially as compared to the high-growth transition managed by China; but after some of the worst output losses in recorded economic history, there was an economic recovery.In other cases failed policies were abandonedfor example, the fixed exchange rates in countries such as Argentina, Brazil, and Russia that contributed to the crises and output losses of the late s. Indias moves away from the neoliberal policies of overly-high interest rates and an over-valued exchange rate were an important part of its growth acceleration. After the Asian economic crisis of the late s many countries began to accumulate reserves, so as to prevent the liquidity problems that played a major role in the crisisand also to avoid having to borrow from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and accept unwanted conditions attached to the borrowing.Partly as a result of these developments, the influence of the IMF collapsed during most of the past decade, with its worldwide lending portfolio falling from $ billion in  to under $ billion in . The IMF, in the prior three decades, had been one of the most important promoters of neoliberal, and often pro-cyclical, policies in lowand middle-income countries. Prior to the past decade, it headed up a creditors cartel whereby borrowing countries that did not reach agreement with the Fund would not get credit from the world_bank, regional banks such as the Inter-American Development Bank, and sometimes even the private sector. This was a very powerful influence on economic policy, and by , it had collapsed.In , with the world economic downturn, the IMF increased its resources enormously, with its capital tripling from $ billion to $ billion. This was an unprecedented level of resources for the Fund, but it did not give the IMF the kind of influence that it had previously had on most lowand middleincome countries. The middle-income countries of Asia and latin_america, for example, mostly remained outside the Funds orbit. Instead, the IMF has played a major role in Europe, especially Eastern Europe and the weaker Euro zone countries (Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Greece). Although the Fund did play a role in the implementation of pro-cyclical policies in many countries during the world economic downturna look at  agreements at the end of  showed that  contained pro-cyclical macroeconomic policiesit was considerably more moderated than its role in the past. In many countries the policies were reversed as the downturn worsened. And the IMF also had some positive impact: the Funds lending that did not have pro-cyclical or other harmful conditions attached, which was significant in the last few years, made a positive contribution. It is difficult to measure the overall impact of the Fund since the beginning of the world recession, but clearly, it did not have anything approaching the negative impact that it had from  to . Also, there was a coordinated intervention by central_banks in response to the financial crisis, and expansionary monetary and fiscal policy in many countries, especially in high-income and some middle-income countries, in response to the downturn.The past decade also saw a lot of bubble growthwith big real estate bubbles in the united_states, much of Europe including the UK, Spain, and Ireland, and elsewhere. It was a period of very low real interest rates worldwide, anduntil the crash of unusually favourable financial conditions. Rising commodity prices also increased growth in many commodity-exporting countries, including in Sub-Saharan Africa. As a region, Sub-Saharan Africa more than doubled its overall (not per capita) growth rate, to . percent annually for the last decade, from . percent in the prior  years.The growth of China also contributed increasingly to world growth in the past decade, as compared to previous decades, as China became the second largest economy in the worldand the only economy near its size with a state-led growth strategy. This affected not only regional growth, but also helped to spur growth in many commodity-exporting countries.The Chinese success storyGDP per capita grew seventeen-fold over the past  years, to $,cannot be attributed to the reforms that most countries adopted in the postperiod. Although both foreign direct investment and exports contributed substantially to Chinas growth, both were heavily managed and handled quite differently than in other developing countries. The government has played a major role in shaping investments that would fit in with the countrys development goals. These include such priorities as producing for export markets, a high level of technology (with the goal of transferring technology from foreign enterprises to the domestic economy), hiring local residents for managerial and technical jobs, and not allowing foreign investments to compete with certain domestic industries. Chinas policy toward foreign investment has therefore been directly opposed to the major worldwide reforms of recent decades, including the rules of the world_trade_organization; the same is also true in the important area of intellectual property. The international financial press reported that China became the second-largest economy in the world in , on an exchange-rate basis (see, for example, Barboza  and BBC ). However, on a purchasing power parity basis, China rose to the second largest economy in the world in  (IMF ).  The Chinese economy is still, after more than three decades of reform, very much a state-led economy. State-owned enterprises account for about  percent of the assets of major industrial enterprises. The financial system is state controlled, with the government owning the four largest banks.India, with more than . billion people and now the worlds fourth largest economy, has also had a fast-growing economy in recent years, with per capita GDP growth accelerating to . percent annually for -. While Indias growth acceleration has not been state-led as in China, it seems that the movement away from two important neoliberal macroeconomic policies is a big part of the story: the country moved toward lower interest rates and a much more competitive exchange rate. The Indian experience does, however, differ considerably from prior late-development experiences in that it has been a net capital importer (as opposed to running long-term trade surpluses as in China or other fast-growing Asian countries); and in the leading role of the expansion of the service sector, both as a share of the economy and exports.Health and EducationAs noted previously, the sharp slowdown in economic growth for coincided with a significant decline in progress on health indicators. This is to be expected over any long time period since these indicators are correlated with a countrys income per capita. But they are also affected by policy, and it may be that the shift toward neoliberal policy reforms also had some impact in reducing progress on health indicators in the postera.Progress in life expectancy fell from the first to the second period for the bottom three quintiles of countries. It rose for all quintiles over the past decade, except the second quintile, which consists of countries that started out with a life expectancy between  and  years.The decline in progress during the last decade, for the second quintile, was mostly the result of the HIV/AIDS crisis. This was driven primarily by African countries, including South Africa, Swaziland, and Lesotho, with high rates of HIV infection. Of course, it is also important to emphasize that the AIDS crisis is not completely exogenous, and many of the failures of treatment and prevention are policy failures.There is also a divergence between male and female life expectancy for the lower life-expectancy quintiles, with females doing much worse during the last period. This appears to be the result of the feminization of the HIV-AIDS crisis (with women suffering much higher infection rates), the lack of progress on maternal health, and associated health policy failures.Adult male mortality shows some relationship to the growth slowdown and recovery for the second and third quintiles. However, for the lowest quintile, there was no slowdown in progress during the  period; rather this came in the most recent decade, again due to the HIV/AIDS crisis.For adult female mortality, we see the same pattern as for male mortality in the first and third quintiles. But the second quintile shows a decline in progress on mortality across all three periods. This is also the result of the HIV/AIDS crisis, which has hit women in Africa much harder than men, and with the worst-affected countries in this second quintile.Infant and child mortality also show patterns related to the growth slowdown and recovery for the bottom three quintiles of countries.Looking at education spending as a percentage of GDP, there is also a pattern that relates to the growth slowdown and recovery, for the middle three quintiles. For primary school enrollment, we see this pattern only in the bottom two quintiles, with an especially large increase for -. This is, at least in part, a result of the end of a policy by the world_bank prior to this decade, of requiring borrowing countries to charge user fees for primary education. For secondary education, there is also a pattern of growth that follows economic growth for the bottom three quintiles.Looking forward, it is too early to tell how much of the rebound in growth over the last decade will continue. At this moment it is the high-income countries, where the financial crisis and recession originatedincluding Europe and the United Statesthat are most in danger of pursuing pro-cyclical and other harmful neoliberal policies that could produce long-term stagnation. Since these countries still make up the majority of the world economy, their policies will continue to have a heavy influence over world growth over the next decade, even though the developing economies have seen a much faster recovery so far. But at the moment, it seems that a good part of the developing world has developed a growth dynamic that is capable of achieving fairly rapid growth even as the high-income countries recover relatively slowly.Ten years ago, at the turn of the millennium, we published a paper that called attention to a long-term economic failure that had been almost completely ignored by the major media, and had received very little attention from economists. For the vast majority of the worlds lowand middle income countries, there had been a sharp slowdown in economic growth for the two decades during -, as compared to -.Furthermore, as would be expected, a long-term decline in growth of this magnitude had also brought a decline in progress on social indicators, including life expectancy, infant and child mortality, and education. We documented this in our  paper.We updated the analysis in , and the story had not changed very much. For the -year period -, there had still been a sharp slowdown in growth for the vast majority of lowand middle-income countries, and reduced progress on most social indicators. As will be explained below, this was not the result of diminishing returns, either in economic growth or in the achievable progress in social indicators. Still, after  years, this widespread, historic long-term slowdown in economic growth and social progress received very little attention or investigation.To illustrate how important this phenomenon is, we can look at the growth of per capita GDP (or income) for two countries that grew rapidly during -, but then took sharply divergent paths. Figure  shows per capita GDP for Brazil and South Korea. Brazil started out much less poor than South Korea in , with per capita GDP of $, as compared to just $, for South Korea. Both countries had rapid growth for the next two decades, so by  the gap had more than doubled in absolute terms, and was about the same in relative terms ($, for Brazil and $, for South Korea). For more on current austerity and recovery prospects across countries, see Dean Baker () and Weisbrot and Montecino ().But then something dramatic happened. Both countries were hit by the world recession and other external shocks in , but while South Korea recovered and even surpassed its prior growth rate, Brazil stagnated. Twenty years later, Brazil had barely budged from its  level of per capita GDPvirtually zero increase over two decades. But South Korea had grown by  percent. By , South Korea had achieved the living standards of Western Europe, with income per capita of $,. By contrast, Brazil in  is still a developing country, with income per person of just $,.The differences between these two paths are huge as measured by any number of other indicators. The united_nations Human Development Index (HDI), for example, attempts to measure progress in health and education as well as income. South Korea is now ranked  among all countries on the HDI, while Brazil is at . The average number of years of schooling in South Korea is , versus  for Brazil. Poverty is still a widespread problem in Brazil: Despite the progress over the past decade, some . percent of the population (about  million people) are living on less than $ per day; . percent on less than $ per day. South Korea is listed as having less than  percent of the population living below the $ per day poverty line; the actual percentage is probably well below  percent. Brazils infant mortality rate is nearly four times that of South Korea, at . versus . per  live births.This comparison also illustrates how important economic growth is, at least for developing countries, to achieving social progress. Of course, there is much more to economic and human well-being than income per capitawhich does not even take distribution into account. The whole purpose of the HDI, for example, is to provide a broader measure of human progress that captures the ability of people to live long, healthy lives, with improved education and related opportunities. And the UNDP Human Development Report documents some sizable divergences between countries per capita income levels and their achievements in health, education, gender equality, and other measures of human development.But improvements in health and education, and other quality-of-life indicators are for most low and-middle income countries difficult to achieve without increasing income levels. Politically, it is generally much more difficult to redistribute income when it is stagnant than when it is growing. And of course the poorest countries cannot do very much at all without increasing their income levels. While it may be argued that the higher income countries of Europe, for example, have only to concern themselves with full employment and reducing inequalitywhich, in theory, could be accomplished with little income growthmost of the world is not in that situation.To a large degree, the story of Brazil shown above is the story of latin_america over the last half-century. This is shown in Figure . There was considerable economic progress from  to , with the region as a wholenot the average of individual countriesgrowing by an annual per capita rate of . percent,for a cumulative gain of . percent over the two decades. During -, this fell to just . percent annually, or just . percent over  years. This was the worst long-term economic growth performance for the region in more than a century. Over the past decade (-), there has been some improvementto . percent annual per capita growthbut this is still far below the rate of the prior decades.The rest of the world is of course more diverse; but as noted above and examined in detail below, there is a similar pattern for most countriesespecially for the years -. The question that we raised ten years ago, and is still relevant, is: how much of this growth slowdown can be attributed to the policy reforms that characterized the postera? For most lowand middle-income countries, these reforms included tighter fiscal and monetary policies (including inflation-targeting regimes and increasing independence of central_banks); a large reduction in tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade; financial de-regulation and increased opening to international capital flows; privatization of state-owned enterprises; increased protectionism in the area of intellectual property; and the general abandonment of state-led industrialization or development strategies.The fact that these reforms, often referred to as neoliberal, coincided with a sharp, long-term decline in economic growth for the vast majority of lowand middle-income countries is at least prima facie evidence that on the whole, these reforms contributed to the economic failure. Identifying econometrically the contribution of the various reforms to the growth failure would be a daunting and possibly intractable exercise. But economists such as Ha-Joon Chang, for example, have long argued that the success of not only the handful of late-industrializing countries such as South Korea and Taiwan that actually made it to the high-income worldbut also the united_states, Europe, and Japanwas characterized by policies that were vastly different from the neoliberal policies that the governments of high-income countries now recommend to others. And even aside from long-term development strategy (or lack thereof ), it is not difficult to find cases where neoliberal macro-economic policiesinflation-targeting regimes and/or over-valued exchange ratesand contractionary fiscal and monetary policies have reduced economic growth considerably below its potential.In what follows, we will look at the economic performance of the last decade, as well as available social indicators, to see if the long slow-down in growth for the vast majority of countries has finally been reversed.Standards of ComparisonIn this report, we compare the countries for which data is available on per capita GDP growth over three periods: -; -; and -. There are several points about this comparison that are worth emphasizing.First, the period is a reasonable benchmark. While the s were a period of very good economic growth, the s suffered from two major oil shocks that led to world recessionsfirst in , and then at the end of the decade. So using this period as a benchmark is not setting the bar too high. If there were good comparable data for the s, these could be includedbut they would not change the story, since this was also a period of good economic growth for most countries.Second, it is very important to keep in mind that we are not comparing the same set of countries across the different time periods. Instead, we are comparing all of the countries that start the period (e.g. ) at a certain level of per capita GDP (or life expectancy and the other variables) with countries that start the next period (e.g. ) at the same level. So this is different from the example of latin_america and the Caribbean above.The reason for this method of comparison is straightforward. Over time, as countries reach a certain level of GDP or life expectancy, it becomes more difficult to make the same gainsi.e. there are diminishing returns. For example, it is much easier to go from a life expectancy of  to  than from  to . There are also diminishing returns in the area of GDP growth; high-income countries are not expected to have the same potential for rapid growth as developing countries. In the example of latin_america above, the region had not reached a level of GDP that we would expect would reduce its potential growth below what was achieved in the period; so we can conclude that the slowdown since then was not a result of diminishing returns. But when looking at the world as a whole, these diminishing returns will exist, not only for growth but for social indicators. The method used here eliminates the possibility that any reduction in progress that is observed is the result of diminishing returns.In fact, this method of comparison is likely to bias the result in favour of the later time periods. It should be easier for a country starting out at a certain level of development in  to make progress than one beginning at that same level in simply because the world in  had a higher level of scientific, technical, and medical knowledge. It is striking that so very few countries have, in the last  years, caught up with the living standards of Europe, the united_states, and the high-income countries that were the first to industrialize. More recently, only three small countries out of Botswana, the Maldives, and Cape Verdehave moved up from the group of Least Developed Countries since the category was created by the united_nations four decades ago. These long-term patterns by themselves suggest that there are barriers and obstacles that have their origin in international relations, rather than simply within countries.Finally, the unit of analysis for this method is the countrythere is no weighting by population or GDP. A small country such as Iceland, with , people, counts the same in the averages calculated as does China, with . billion people and the worlds second largest economy. The reason for this method is that the individual country government is the level of decision-making for economic policy. If there are a number of economic reforms that were carried out in more than  countries, and economic failure ensues for the vast majority of them, then this is evidence that the reforms contributed to the failure. Of course, India and China make up most of the developing world, and thus their progress will have the predominant influence on measured changes in overall human welfare in the developing world. But the economic policy choices of just two governments will not provide much evidence on the success or failure of economic reforms adopted by most of the governments in the world.Economic GrowthFigure  shows economic growth for the countries divided into five quintiles. The quintiles are defined by the countries that fall within the per capita GDP levels at the beginning of each period. Thus, the first quintile includes the poorest countries, with per capita GDP between $ and $, at the beginning of each period.As can be seen in the graph, there was a sharp slowdown in economic growth from the first () period to the second (-) for all quintiles. At an annual rate, every quintile saw per capita growth slow by roughly halfor morein the second period as compared with the first.The poorest (first) quintile saw its annual growth of income per capita fall from . to . percent. At the lower end of this quintile were countries such as Mali, Guinea-Bissau, Tanzania, and Ghana; at the upper end were Niger, Central African Republic, Rwanda, Egypt, and Thailand.The second quintile (GDP per capita between $, and $,) was the slowest growing for the second period, falling from a . percent annual rate to just . percent. Over time, this is a huge difference; at an annual growth rate of . percent, per capita GDP would double in  years; at . percent, it would take  years. Countries that started out in the second quintile in  included Cote dIvoire, Haiti, Morocco, Nigeria, and South Korea; at the upper end were Brazil, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Turkey. The Dominican Republic, Honduras, Panama, and Malaysia were towards the middle of the quintile.The third and fourth quintiles also plunged, from growth rates that were somewhat higher in the period. The third quintile, with GDP per capita between $, and $,, grew by an average annual rate of . percent per capita from  to , but only . percent from  to . Among the countries starting off in the third quintile in  were, towards the bottom, Colombia, El Salvador, Guinea, Gabon, and Hong Kong. At the higher end were Jamaica, Chile, South Africa, Spain, and Japan.The fourth quintile, with incomes between $, and $, per capita, had the sharpest drop, from . percent average annual per capita growth for -, to just . percent for -. Countries starting out in this quintile in  included, at the low end, Uruguay, Ireland, and Greece; at the high end were high-income countries including New Zealand, united_kingdom, Denmark, Sweden and Canada.Switching for a moment to a constant-country comparison: of the  lowand middle-income countries with data for both and -, only  grew at a faster rate in the second period. This is not including three countries that had zero or negative growth in both periods: Madagascar, Gambia and Senegal.Returning to the quintile comparison, there is a clear rebound in the third period, -, for all quintiles other than the fifth, or highest income quintile. As can be seen in Figure , the first four quintiles all equaled or surpassed the average annual per capita growth of the first period.What accounts for the rebound in economic growth over the last decade? It is beyond the scope of this report to try to give a definitive answer to this question. However, there are a number of possible contributing factors to the apparent turnaround. First, if the growth failure of were primarily a result of policy errors, we would expect at least some recovery eventually. Brazil, for example, has had among the worlds highest real interest rates for decades. It may never achieve its prior economic growth with these levels of real interest rates, but the economy has to some extent adapted to them. The shock therapy that Russia and other transition economies experienced in the s was a tremendous failure, especially as compared to the high-growth transition managed by China; but after some of the worst output losses in recorded economic history, there was an economic recovery. Similarly, the weaker Euro-zone economies and some others today (e.g. Latvia) are pursuing pro-cyclical policies that are intended to restore economic growth through an internal devaluation. This may lead to, as growth projections continue to be revised downward, continued output losses and a prolonged and unnecessary period of recession and/or stagnation; but eventually these economies will recover.In other cases failed policies were abandonedfor example, the fixed exchange rates in countries such as Argentina, Brazil, and Russia that contributed to the crises and output losses of the late s. As noted below, Indias moves away from the neoliberal policies of overly-high interest rates and an over-valued exchange rate were an important part of its growth acceleration. After the Asian economic crisis of the late s, many countries began to accumulate reserves, so as to prevent the liquidity problems that played a major role in the crisisand also to avoid having to borrow from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and accept unwanted conditions attached to the borrowing.Partly as a result of these developments, the influence of the IMF collapsed during most of the past decade, with its worldwide lending portfolio falling from $ billion in  to under $ billion in . Most of the latter was owed by just two countriesTurkey and Pakistan. The IMF, in the prior three decades, had been one of the most important promoters of neoliberal, and often pro-cyclical, policies in lowand middle-income countries. Prior to the past decade, it headed up a creditors cartel whereby borrowing countries that did not reach agreement with the Fund would not get credit from the world_bank, regional banks such as the Inter-American Development Bank, and sometimes even the private sector. This was a very powerful influence on economic policy, and by , it had collapsed.In , with the world economic downturn, the IMF increased its resources enormously, with its capital tripling from $ billion to $ billion. This was an unprecedented level of resources for the Fund, but it did not give the IMF the kind of influence that it had previously had on most lowand middle-income countries. The middle-income countries of Asia and latin_america, for example, mostly remained outside the Funds orbit. Instead, the IMF has played a major role in Europe, especially Eastern Europe and the weaker Euro-zone countries (Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Greece). Although the Fund did play a role in the implementation of pro-cyclical policies in many countries during the world economic downturna look at agreements at the end of  showed that  contained pro-cyclical macroeconomic policiesit was considerably more moderated than its role in the past. In many countries, the policies were reversed as the downturn worsened. And the IMF also had some positive impact, for example, by creating some $ billion of its reserve currency, Special Drawing Rights (sdr), in , and distributing this to its member countries to increase their reserves. The Funds lending that did not have pro-cyclical or other harmful conditions attached, which was significant in the last few years, also made a positive contribution. It is difficult to measure the overall impact of the Fund since the beginning of the world recession, but clearly, it did not have anything approaching the negative impact that it had from  to . Also, there was a coordinated intervention by central_banks in response to the financial crisis, and expansionary monetary and fiscal policy in many countries, especially in high-income and some middle-income countries, in response to the downturn.Some pro-cyclical and currently contractionary policies supported by the IMF, the European Commission, the ECB and other authorities do not always affect the data for very much. For example, countries such as Latvia and Estonia are projected by the IMF to need  or  years to reach their pre-recession level of per capita GDP. But these countries show high growth for the past decade, more than four per cent annually per capita. Other countries such as Greece and Spain have lower growth for the past decade than Latvia and Estonia, but still show better growth for than they are projected to have in the coming years, as recent austerity measures become fully felt. If these contractionary policies are continued for a prolonged period, bad results can be expected for the future.The past decade also saw a lot of bubble growthwith big real estate bubbles in the united_states, much of Europe including the UK, Spain, and Ireland, and elsewhere. It was a period of very low real interest rates worldwide, anduntil the crash of unusually favourable financial conditions. Rising commodity prices also increased growth in many commodity-exporting countries, including in Sub-Saharan Africa. As a region, Sub-Saharan Africa more than doubled its overall (not per capita) growth rate, to . percent annually for the last decade, from . percent in the prior  years.The biggest change in overall GDP growth by region was in former Soviet nations that make up the Commonwealth of Independent States: this group shrank by an enormous . percent annually in the sdue to a badly managed transitionbut grew by . percent annually in the past decade. Central and Eastern Europe, where the transition was not nearly as badly managed, also showed significant improvement in the past decade, at . percent versus . percent over the s. A good part of this improved growth can be attributed to recovery from the policy mistakes, some of them enormously destructive, in the prior decade.There was also significant improvement for the Middle East and North Africa (. percent versus . percent for the s and . percent for the s). The fastest growing region of all was, of course, developing Asia, dominated by China, with . percent average annual growth for the region over the past decade; but it also had quite a rapid rate of growth in the previous decades, at . and . percent for the s and s respectively.The growth of China also contributed increasingly to world growth in the past decade, as compared to previous decades, as China became the second largest economy in the worldand the only economy near its size with a state-led growth strategy. This affected not only regional growth, but also helped spur growth in many commodity-exporting countries.The Cases of China and IndiaChina was foremost among developing countries that bucked the trend, growing at a record-breaking . percent annually per capita during -, as compared to . per cent in the first period. For , it has grown still faster, averaging . percent annually per capita. It is worth noting that Chinas growth rate does not show signs of decelerating, despite having increased its GDP per capita seventeen-fold over the past  years, to $,.Chinas success cannot be attributed to the reforms that most countries adopted in the postperiod. Although both foreign direct investment and exports contributed substantially to Chinas growth, both were heavily managed and handled quite differently than in other developing countries. The government has played a major role in shaping investments that would fit in with the countrys development goals. These include such priorities as producing for export markets, an increasing level of technology (with the goal of transferring technology from foreign enterprises to the domestic economy), hiring local residents for managerial and technical jobs, and not allowing foreign investments to compete with certain domestic industries. Chinas policy toward foreign investment has therefore been directly opposed to the major worldwide reforms of recent decades, including the rules of the world_trade_organization (WTO); the same is also true in the important area of intellectual property.These policies with respect to foreign investment have continued to this day, even after China joined the WTO in . For example, over the last decade, China has used local content requirementsforbidden by the WTOin the wind turbine industry, along with other restrictions to get foreign investors to train and recruit local suppliers, helping China become one of the largest producers of wind turbines in the world.The Chinese economy is still, after more than three decades of reform, very much a state-led economy. State-owned enterprises account for about  percent of the assets of major industrial enterprises. The financial system is state-controlled, with the government owning the four largest banks. The Chinese governments control over the commanding heights of the economy, especially finance, proved crucial in maintaining rapid economic growth during the world recession. In , Chinas net exports had a negative . percentage point contribution to the economys GDP growth; but growth was maintained at . percent, due partly to a nearly  percent surge in capital formation. It is difficult to imagine this having happened without the governments control over bank lending and state-owned enterprises generally.India, with more than . billion people and now the worlds fourth largest economy, has also had a fast-growing economy in recent years. India adopted a number of liberalizing reforms beginning in , including sharply reducing the peak tariff rate (from  to  percent); the loosening of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, which reduced barriers to entry; some privatizations, and liberalization of foreign investment. For many analysts, Indias growth acceleration since  demonstrates the success of these liberalizing reforms.However, this conclusion is not consistent with the data. First, Indias growth acceleration preceded the  reforms by a decade. Per capita GDP grew by about . percent annually in the s and . percent annually in the s. This is indeed much higher than the . percent annual average for -, but it is about the same for the two decades, and thus, the  reforms cannot be seen as decisive. While some have argued that the acceleration postcan be attributed to a government shift toward pro-business policies,as Rodrik and Subramanian (a) pointed out, pro-business is not the same as pro-market. (The example of South Korea in the s and s can be seen as one of pro-business, rather than pro-market policies.)Indias biggest growth acceleration was for the fiscal years -, with per capita GDP growth averaging about . percent annually for this period. Per capita growth fell with the world recession in / fiscal year to . percent, but has rebounded to about . percent for /. There has been a huge acceleration of the countrys rate of savings and capital formation. Gross fixed capital formation has risen from . percent in the s, to . percent for the years -. The domestic savings rate has risen from . to . percent in the same years. These are huge changes that, if sustained, could make India one of the fastest growing economies in the world in the foreseeable future.There has been a good deal of debate over how to interpret Indias growth acceleration, its causes, and whether it is something that is likely to continue. Bhalla () has put forth a compelling argument that emphasizes the role of interest rates and exchange rates. There was a growth spurt following the  reforms, with three consecutive years of growth that were greater than . percent beginning in fiscal year . But real interest rates increased by about  basis points from  to . Growth slowed from . percent (. percent per capita) in fiscal / and / to . percent (. per capita) in /, and  percent (. per capita) in /. During -, real interest rates fell by about basis points; this contributed significantly to the rapid acceleration of growth, to Chinese levels, beginning in /.The Indian economy also got a boost from a large change in the exchange rate to a more competitive level. As Rodrik and Subramanian (a) note, after remaining broadly unchanged during the first half of the s, the rupee experienced a large real depreciation of over  percent in the second half of the s. Rodrik () characterizes its recent state as an undervaluation of around  percent.These two most important macroeconomic policy changeslower interest rates and a real exchange rate depreciationare in the opposite direction of the neoliberal reforms that accelerated worldwide in the s. With the increasing independence of central_banks, tighter monetary policy, and inflation-targeting regimes, unnecessarily highand sometimes, pro-cyclicalpolicy interest rates were probably one of the most important contributors to the worldwide slowdown in growth that most countries experienced in the period. In many cases, central_banks inflation targeting regimes and over-concern with inflation has also led to overvalued exchange rates. In many developing countries, central_banks target an inflation rate and allow the exchange rate to rise, worsening the trade balance and thereby slowing the domestic economy. (An overvalued exchange rate also directly lowers inflation by making imports cheaper.) So, to and Rodrik and Subramanian (a). Of course, there are different ways to measure exchange rate undervaluation or overvaluation; Bhalla () has significantly different numbers, but the same general trend of a very large real depreciation over these years. There is a rich literature on the primacy of policy interest rates as a determinant of economic growth. See, for example, Diaz-Bonillo (), Ocampo and Taylor (), Romer and Romer ().the extent that Indias transition to a rapidly growing economy was driven by these macroeconomic policy shiftsand it seems to be a big part of the storyit would be an example of the success of transitioning away from important neoliberal policy mistakes. Nonetheless, it is still a quite different story from the stateled development strategies of China.There are other interesting aspects of Indias growth acceleration that are worth noting. One is the rapid growth of the service sector, both as a percentage of overall GDP and of exports. The service sector share of GDP increased from about  percent in  to  percent in -. The fastest growing service sectors have included wholesale and retail trade, banking, communications, and business services (which included the call centers and data entry services that have been widely discussed). There is some debate over whether this kind of economic expansion driven by services can be a feasible growth and development strategy; in any case, it is certainly a major divergence from the industry-led growth strategies that have characterized the most successful later development experiences.Another distinguishing feature of Indias growth acceleration is that the country has run current account deficits for six of the last  years, and trade deficits for  of these years. This means that Indias growth has not been export-led in the sense that China and South Korea have had export-led growth during most of their rapid-growth years. This is more in accordance with the textbook, neoclassical development model, in which developing countries are net importers of capital. The idea is that capital should flow from developed to developing countries, seeking a higher return; developing countries, in theory, should be able to run sustainable trade and current account deficits and thereby take advantage of the additional resources to supplement their own domestic savings. This might take the form of foreign direct investment, which has its own potential for increasing productivity, or other inflows that allow for greater imports of capital goods. But most of the fastest growth experiences in recent decades have been the opposite; e.g. countries such as China, South Korea, and other Asian countries running trade and current account surpluses, and therefore exporting capital to the rich countries. These have been among the most successful growth experiences in history, but they have been successful in spite of the handicap of being net capital exporters to the rich countries; although the strategy has other advantages, such as the contribution of a trade surplus to aggregate demand, and technology transfer in export industries. But to the extent that India can continue accelerated growth while being a net capital importer, that is one advantage that other fast-growing developing countries did not have.Returning to the quintile comparison in Figure  and the rebound that it shows for the past decade, we can say that the above changes in the world economy undoubtedly contributed to the turnaround in the last decade. Some of this growth was a result of movement away from destructive neoliberal policies of the s and salthough many of these policies are still firmly entrenched in central_banks, finance ministries, and other national and multilateral institutions where policy is made. Mostly, it seems that these policiesfor a variety of reasons noted abovehad less negative impact on lowand middle-income countries over the past decade than they did in the s and s.Looking forward, it is too early to tell how much of the rebound in growth over the last decade will continue. At this moment it is the high-income countries, where the financial crisis and recession originatedincluding Europe and the United Statesthat are most in danger of pursuing pro-cyclical and other harmful neoliberal policies that could produce long-term stagnation. Since these countries still make up the majority of the world economy, their policies will continue to have a heavy influence over world growth over the next decade, even though the developing economies have seen a much faster recovery so far. But at the moment, it seems that a good part of the developing world has developed a growth dynamic that is capable of achieving fairly rapid growth even as the high-income countries recover relatively slowly.HealthAs was shown in the last report five years ago, the long-term slowdown in growth experienced by the vast majority of developing countries during the postera was associated with a noticeable decline in the rate of progress on health indicators, including life expectancy and adult, child, and infant mortality. This is to be expected over any long time period since these indicators are correlated with a countrys income per capita. Of course, they are also affected by policy, and it may be that the shift toward neoliberal policy reforms also had some impact in lowering health indicators in the postera.It should be noted that life expectancy would be expected to change more slowly than some other indicators, since it is calculated on the basis of mortality rates from cohorts spanning the range of an entire life span. So changes in income during -, which is much shorter than the first two periodsand -would not be expected to have as much immediate influence as in the previous periods. Nonetheless, we can see in Figure  that for quintiles  and , the quintile with the lowest life expectancies and the middle quintile, respectively, the same V-shaped pattern that reflects the change in per capita GDP growth rates.Figure  shows the annual average change in life expectancy for each quintile. For the bottom quintile, which started out each period with a life expectancy of years, there was an average annual gain of . years during -. This means that the typical country in this quintile would gain about nine years in life expectancy over the period. During -, this progress slipped to . years annually. It then recovered part of the way over -, to . years. The third quintile also shows a V-shape, falling from . to . from the first to the second period; then recovering to . for the third period. These are countries that started each period with a life expectancy between  and  years.It is worth noting that in the first quintile, there are two outliers that kept the depth of the decline from being somewhat steeper: Timor-Leste and Cambodia. These countries had a very large increase in life expectancy during of . and . years annually, respectively. This is a result of the end of the wars and mass killings that depressed life expectancy in the prior years. Without these two countries, the annual increase in life expectancy for the quintile would have fallen to . for -, instead of ..Quintile , which consists of poor countries with a beginning life expectancy in each period of years, shows a different pattern than the first and third quintiles. Progress in life expectancy plummets by almost half, from . years annually in to . years for -. But it does not recover in -, instead falling further to . years. Why does this group of poor countries look so different than the first (lowest life expectancy) quintile?Table  shows countries that were in the second quintile during that had negative annual average changes in life expectancy (Part A). Almost all of these countries (except Ghana) had extremely high rates of HIV infection. Swaziland and Lesotho had the highest and third-highest infection rate in the world, at . and . per cent of the adult population (age -), respectively, living with HIV/AIDS. Swazilands life expectancy declined by . years annually during -; for Lesotho it fell by . years annually. South Africa came in fourth highest with an infection rate of . percent; life expectancy there during declined at an average annual rate of . years. These countries pulled down the average for the quintile enormously, as did the others in Part A.In Part B of Table  are countries that had an increase in life expectancy, but less than the average annual improvement (. years) for the nd quintile in the years -. Most of these countries also had high rates of HIV infection, and help explain why the second quintile did not have a rebound of progress in life expectancy for the third period.The higher life-expectancy countries in the fourth (years) and fifth (years) quintiles show a completely different pattern than the lower life expectancy (mostly poorer) countries. These countries do not show a decline in progress in life expectancy for any period. The best-off quintile actually doubles its rate of progress, from . in to . for -. The fourth quintile also shows improvement in each period, although smaller.This is what we would expect to see as medical science advances. A country starting out with a certain level of life expectancy in  or  should show more rapid improvement in life expectancy than one starting out with the same life expectancy in . The fact that this did not happen for the three bottom quintiles, and in fact progress declined from the first to the second period, represents a severe policy failure.As noted above, some of this policy failure caused the slowdown in economic growth in the second (-) period, and the V-shape of the graphs for the first and third quintiles reflects the pattern of per capita income growth. But the role of the AIDS crisis in lowering life expectancy is not a completely exogenous variable, and also reflects specific health policy failures, especially with respect to the impact of neo-liberal and macroeconomic structural adjustments on health-related spending.Figures  and  show male and female life expectancy at birth arranged by quintile, as in Figure . Although both reflect the same basic pattern of overall life expectancy, there are pronounced differences. The most striking difference is the relative lack of recovery of progress in life expectancy for women during the third period, for the lower-life-expectancy quintiles. For quintiles  and , there is almost no improvement from the second (-) to the third (-) period. For the second quintile (life expectancy between  and  years), progress in the third period plummets much further for females than it does for males, to just . years annually. This also appears to be the result of the feminization of the HIV/AIDS crisis, the lack of progress on maternal health and associated health policy failures.Figure  shows adult male mortality, which is the number of men age  who will die before the age of , per . Since a negative annual change is an improvement, these graphs show improvement when they are sloping downward. For quintiles  and , we see an inverted V-shape that reflects a similar pattern as for life expectancy. In quintile , which begins each period with a relatively high mortality of deaths per thousand, there is a sharp decline in progress, from -. annually (that is, a reduction of mortality of  per thousand) for the first period, to just -. for the second period. This rebounds to -. for the third period, which is only a partial recovery. The relative weakness of this recovery is also apparently due to the HIV/AIDS crisis. The third quintile shows a more complete recovery in the third period, dropping from -. in the first period to -. in the second period, and rebounding to -. for -.Quintile , however, shows something very different from the life expectancy pattern; there is a slight improvement from the first to the second period, and then a sharp decline in progress for the third period. This lack of decline from the first period to the second is unusual because this is a period in which most of the worlds poor countries experienced a sharp slowdown in economic growthin Sub-Saharan Africa; there was negative per capita GDP growth. Yet, we do not see a slowdown in progress on adult male mortality, which declines at a rate of . per year during -, as compared with . in the previous period. Countries in the first quintile such as Benin, Sudan, Chad, Senegal, Guinea, and the Gambia had large, double-digit declines in adult male mortality during this period. Although the first three of these countries had modest positive per capita GDP growth during the two decades, the other three did not. Djibouti, Niger, Togo, and Mauritania also had large declines in mortality (. to . annually) for while their income per capita was shrinking. This quintile did not contain the countries that were hardest hit by the HIV/AIDS crisis, which were mostly in the second quintile, although there were some, such as Zambia and Uganda, where this caused mortality to actually increase over the period; and this was also true for the  genocide in Rwanda. But this group of poor countries is especially noteworthy for the declines in adult male mortality that were achieved in spite of the lack of economic growth.In the third period, -, the first quintile shows a sharp slowdown in progress on adult male mortality. This is largely because of the HIV/AIDS crisis where ballooning infections during the s resulted in higher death rates in the s; Lesotho, Swaziland and South Africa dominate this (much smaller) group, with huge annual increases in mortality (,  and . respectively).The fourth and fifth quintiles, which contain mostly middle-income and high-income countries, show continued progress in reducing adult male mortality. This is most likely because these countries are reaping the benefit from past advances in medicine. Of course, this should also be true for the poorer countries, but because of the inadequacy of domestic and international funding for health, the advances in medicine do not necessarily translate into reduced mortality there. We might expect that reductions will show up soon, however, because of increased donor funding for adult health during the s, especially more recently for AIDS treatment.For adult female mortality, shown in Figure , we see the same pattern as for male mortality in the first and third quintiles. But the second quintile shows a decline in progress on mortality across all three periods, from -. per year for -, to -. for -, to almost no progress for -. This is again the result of the HIV/AIDS crisis, which has hit women in Africa much harder than men, and with the worst-affected countries in this second quintile. As Table  shows, the countries in Quintile  with the worst changes in adult female mortality often show much better statistics for changes in male mortality. It also shows that women have much higher HIV rates in these countries than men do, though women are more likely to access treatment at the end of this decade. The other noticeable difference from the pattern of change for male mortality is that the female fourth quintile does not show a steady progress in reducing mortality through all three periods, but rather a decline in progress from the first to the second period, with a strong recovery in -.The results for child mortality are shown in Figure . These reflect the pattern of economic growth for the bottom three quintiles, with an inverted V-shaped pattern, since more negative numbers reflect an improvement in the reduction of child mortality. For the worst-off quintile, with child mortality betweenFigure : Average Annual Change in Female Adult Mortality, -, by QuintileSub-Saharan Africa, did not increase their government spending on education as their economies rebounded over the past decade (prior to the global recession).Figure  shows the annual change in primary school enrollment, with the quintiles arranged from lowest ( percent to  percent) to highest (percent) in terms of their level of enrollment. The bottom two quintiles show a V-shaped pattern correlating with growth, with an especially pronounced acceleration in enrollment for the third period (-). This upsurge in primary enrollment could reflect a change in policy by the world_bank in poor countries. Prior to , the world_bank had a policy of requiring borrowing countries to charge user fees for primary education (and health care). During -, the U.S. Congress, in response to a campaign by advocacy groups, passed legislation requiring that the U.S. executive director at the world_bank and IMF oppose any loan or debt relief agreement that required such user fees. After this legislation was enforced through congressional follow-up hearings in , the practice was abandoned, and there was an upsurge in primary school enrollment in certain borrowing countries, for example in Africa.The rate of change for secondary education over the three periods is shown in Figure , again with quintiles arranged by level of enrollment at the beginning of the period. In this case, it is the bottom three The gross enrollment rate can be over % because of the way it is measured. The world_bank (b) defines the indicator as the ratio of total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the age group that officially corresponds to the level of education shown. Where there are high numbers of non-traditional age students, the number of students can be higher than the overall traditional-age population, pushing the gross enrollment rate over %. However, where that is the case, enrollment rates would be expected to fall eventually, as the non-traditional age population catches up with the traditional-age population. For more on the elimination of school fees, and the role of US civil_society and government in advocating for their elimination, see Alonso i Terme () and Dugger ().The Scorecard on Development, -: Closing the Gap?Figure : Average Annual Change in Primary School Enrollment (Gross), -Average Annual Change in Gross Primary School Enrollment (percentage points per year)After a decades-long slowdown in economic growth in the postperiod, there has been an acceleration for much of the lowand middle income world over the past decade, and a consequent improvement in the rate of progress for a number of social indicators for many countries. As explained above, it is still too early to tell how much of this improvement is likely to be sustained. On the positive side, much of the developing world seems to have been recovering from the world recession with its own growth dynamic, at a much faster pace than the high-income countries. Part of this is due to policy changes described above, and part is also due to the increasing weight, in the world economy, of countries whose policies are less neoliberal and more pro-development, most importantly China. On the other side, much of the high-income world, especially Europe and the united_states, has had a much weaker recovery and is plagued by faulty macroeconomic policies and other problems. Some of their problems can still spill over to much of the developing world, as happened during the recent world recession. And the vast majority of developing countries are still far from adopting development strategies that might be analogous to what has worked in the past. It remains to be seen whether the next decade will be able to match or exceed the progress that has been seen since . Nonetheless, the past decade marks a significant break from the long period of economic policy failure that most lowand middle-income countries experienced from  to .