Is the Distribution of Foreign Aid MDG-Sensitive?One of the positive features of the mdg is their ability to galvanise global support, mainly mobilisation of resources to finance their achievement. In this respect, foreign aid is a key instrument. According to the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the objective of aid is to ensure that it helps developing countries reduce poverty and build sustainable economic growth. If this is the aim, then we would expect the allocation of aid to reflect recipient needs in terms of reducing poverty and achieving the mdg. However, two strands of the literature on aid have doubted this assumption on aid allocation.First, researchers have argued that aid allocation is determined by the self-interest of donors. The work by Alesina and Dollar () and Schraeder et al. () show that aid allocation, particularly bilateral assistance, for the most part is determined by non-economic factors such as geopolitical interests and colonial ties. Berthelemy (a and b) stated that aid is given to deepen commercial interests and trade linkages with recipient countries. Second, Burnside and Dollar () argue that aid should be given where growth and poverty reduction are expected to follow, and not on a needs basis, for instance in terms of MDG achievement gaps. The logic is that aid works better in an environment of good policy conditions, measured by economic indicators such as low inflation rates, and hence, aid should be directed to countries with good policies.Given the commitment of countries to achieving the mdg, including MDG (Global partnership for Development), it is worth looking into if MDG agenda has changed the patterns of aid allocation. There is little formal assessment of whether foreign aid flows to the countries that need it most or not, in terms of the need to achieve the MDG targets. There are some attempts, for instance by Berthelemy (a and b) who used per capita income (in PPP), life expectancy, child mortality, literacy rates and school enrolment ratios as measures for development need. While these variables showed some correlation with foreign aid allocation, the results were not robust. For instance, Berthelemy (b, p. ) notes that:A reduction of income per capita (in logarithm) of the average recipient country by one standard deviation would increase its assistance from the average donor by USD ., assuming unchanged export ratios, but if imports were assumed to be proportional to income, the net result would be a reduction of assistance by about USD . per capita.Perhaps one reason for the lack of robust relationships between recipient needs and aid allocation in the study by Berthelemy is the period covered. The data used covers  through , well before the Millennium Declaration and the mdg. While this paper is in effect an assessment of the progress on MDG, whether donors begun to allocate relatively more aid to those countries in greater need of support or not.An important motivation for focusing attention on the MDG needs of recipients is clear  countries that are far from achieving the goals need higher aid financing. In our earlier paper, Hailu and Tsukada  (), we introduced a methodology that measures the effort made by countries in achieving the mdg. We corrected for two biases ignored in previous methodologies that assess MDG performance: non-linearity in the rate of change and effort appreciation. By correcting for the first, we showed that the rate of progress in MDG indicators is not linear across time. In the case of the second bias, we showed that natural constraints hinder countries from achieving the targets as they approach their upper or lower bound limits. These two corrections allowed us to identify countries that are making respectable progress on MDG acceleration, in contrast to the established practice of labelling countries off-track or failure. Our findings were that the least-developed countries made faster progress on mdg compared to more developed countries. Hence, it is likely that countries further away from MDG achievement targets could derive the highest marginal utility from aid (see also Osorio a and b; and Kakwani,  for discussion of effort appreciation and non-linearity).The paper is structured as follows: Section  introduces the data. Section  presents the methodology. Section  discusses the results from the statistical exercises. Concluding remarks are provided in Section .DataMDG score indexWe propose an index that measures MDG performance by ranking countries in terms of their MDG achievements. This ranking is a distribution of MDG achievement among countries that are close to meeting the MDG targets and those further away from them. The innovation in this index is that it compares the relative achievement level of the MDG indicators among a set of developing countries.We measure a countrys position by the achievement of the  targets which are monitored by  technical indicators (following the official UN MDG monitoring approach). To assess each countrys MDG achievement, we translate the multidimensional information contained in the several MDG indicators into a single objective measure. This objective measure must fulfil four main properties: (i) be comparable across countries; (ii) represent the aggregate information provided by the eight MDG goals; (iii) be invariant to the different units of measurement of the MDG indicators; and (iv) show the distance between each countrys achievements relative to the others.The score index we propose complies simultaneously with all four properties above. It is a transformation of the indicators into an intuitive measure between  and . Denoted Sindicator (Equation ), the score index represents the distance between two indicator levels  the distance of a given country that is close to achieving its target from the country that is further away from achieving the target. In other words, since our analysis refers to the allocation of aid to those countries in most need, our indicator must capture how far countries are from each other in their overall achievement of the mdg.Where Sindicator [,]; max is the maximum value of a given indicator across all countries in the sample; min is the minimum value of that indicator in the sample, and I is the actual achievement level of an individual country in the indicator. The extreme score value of zero indicates that a countrys indicator is at the minimum level of achievement in the sample. A score of one indicates that the countrys indicator is the closest to the maximum level of the MDG indicator achieved in the sample. An intermediary value, say ., indicates that the country is more than half way from the maximum level of the indicator achieved by other countries that are close to achieving the MDG target (see Figure ).Because some targets are evaluated by more than one indicator, it is appropriate to reserve the hierarchical structure of goals, targets and indicators. We build an aggregate MDG indicator score for each country from the aggregation of the single indicator scores, Sindicator, into a single value. This avoids giving larger weight to one or other targets just because there are more indicators under them.We, therefore, perform a -step aggregation process (see Figure ): First, we aggregate the indicator scores (Equation ) into target scores, Starget. Target scores are then aggregated into goal scores, Sgoal. Finally, for each country, the eight goal scores are aggregated into a single score value, SMDG, the MDG Score Index. The MDG score index is a unit-free indicator comparable across all countries and produces a distribution which helps us identify which countries need disproportionately more aid relative to other countries.Figure . MDG score index: Example of a three-step aggregation of indicatorswhere I = min where min < I < max where I = max further from the best close to the best indicator level indicator levelIn the example above, Goal  comprises two targets: (Ta) reduce maternal mortality ratio and (Tb) achieve universal access to reproductive health. Each of these targets is measured by specific indicators, the I(see Appendix A for details). The simple average indicator scores determine unique scores per target. The average of such target scores gives the goal score. A countrys MDG score is thus given by the mean of the eight goal scores (see Equation ).Where n is the number of scores.   Measuring aid allocationAid is measured as ODA disbursements, disaggregated by bilateral and multilateral flows. Our sample consists of  developing countries. Given that both population as well as economic size varies across countries, the ODA data is also measured in per capita terms and as a share of GNI. The data is from the OECD online statistics database and the World Development Indicators .For an MDG-sensitive distribution of foreign aid, one would expect that donors would allocate more resources and aid towards countries further away from achieving the targets. For analyzing such aid matching, we take a snapshot of the development status of countries in  measured by the MDG indicators at that time. Then we analyse annual ODA allocation in the following years. The reason for using single year MDG data against a moving year ODA performance is because  corresponds to the time the implementation of the MDG agenda was initiated. We expect ODA allocation decisions to be based on the level of development and MDG gaps for that period. Moreover, information on MDG indicators is not always available on time for donors to adjust their allocations frequently. National household surveys, in particular demographic and health surveys, are not always taken at frequent intervals. In addition, not all national statistics offices and bureaus have the capacity to process data and carry out useful analysis on time. It is reasonable to assume that donors decisions about aid disbursements are based on lagged information not only in response to data, but also depending on their own political and administrative processes.MethodologyWe use three methods to investigate good donor-recipient matches. First we perform a correlation analysis. Second, for intuitive understanding, we present a graphical analysis with scatter plots and linear prediction of ODA allocation. Finally, we use concentration curves to analyse inequality in aid distribution.Correlation analysisCorrelation analysis has been used in the literature for analysing donors progressivity in foreign aid allocation (Little and Clifford, ; Frank et al., ). We use the Pearson correlation coefficient to examine the relationship between ODA and the recipients MDG score index. The coefficient ranges between positive and negative one. The former indicates a perfect positive relationship (more ODA is given to countries close to achieving MDG targets) and the later shows a perfect negative relationship (more ODA flowing to countries far from achieving MDG targets). As the correlation coefficient approaches zero (either from positive or negative values), the relationship between the two variables becomes weaker, i.e., ODA allocation is independent of the MDG achievement status of countries.First, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient between annual ODA received since year  and the countrys development needs which was signalled in the starting period of the mdg, the year . We expect that aid has become more targeted toward the countries that were farther away from the MDG targets when the global community signed on to the mdg. Thus, the correlation coefficient should be strongly negative.Where cov (S, ODA) is the co-variance between the MDG score index and ODA received; S and ODA are the respective standard deviations in the sample.White and McGillivray (, p. ), however, argue that the correlation coefficient is unable to distinguish between a donor that almost (but not quite) gives the same amount of aid to all recipients, regardless of income, and that which gives a much higher multiple of aid to poorer countries than relatively better off ones. Since countries are quite different in economic and population size, the amount of aid flow is expected to vary according to the recipients size. Therefore, we use ODA as a share of GNI and ODA per capita as adjustment measures.Graphical analysisIn a second approach, we investigate graphically whether aid has followed a needs-driven targeting. We plot each countrys ODA as a share of GNI against the MDG score index. The literature has used scatter plots to analyse donors lending portfolio and classify their behaviour as progressive (i.e. more aid to countries with lower development outcomes) or regressive (i.e. larger amounts to better off countries) (see Mosley, ; White and McGillivray, ). In a good matching scenario, we would expect a downward sloping line where aid decreases as countries get more developed.We expand this graphical analysis to the identification of countries which are over-, underand reasonably-assisted, according to a linear prediction. Over-assisted are countries that received on average more ODA than it would be expected given their nearness to MDG targets by . Under-assisted countries receive on average less assistance than would be expected given their relative distance (further away) from the MDG targets. Countries that received close to the expected amount of ODA are reasonably-assisted. They are identified as lying within the  per cent confidence interval of the expected value of aid according to their MDG status.Concentration curvesFinally, we are interested in how the distribution of aid has evolved over time, especially after the mdg. We look at the behaviour in aid allocation by type (multilateral and bilateral) and over time (between  and ). We build aid concentration curves and compare whether aid has become more or less concentrated. Mosley () used distribution analysis to compare Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients of income worldwide. He calculated the world income distribution including and excluding foreign aid transfers and concluded that foreign aid in the s promoted modest but visible redistribution of world income. His finding sheds light on the importance of foreign aid as a tool for decreasing world income inequality when effectively targeted, assuming that aid flows do not have any Dutch disease adjustment effects, such as real exchange rate appreciation and wage inflation. Another frequent use of aid concentration curves is to measure progressivity of foreign aid allocation (White and McGillivray, ).We derive aid concentration curves by plotting the cumulative share of total ODA disbursed against the cumulative share of population, ranked by the countries MDG score index. If aid is distributed equally among all countries, proportional to their population size, i. e., the transfer per person in the world has exactly the same value then the concentration curve is a  degree line. But if a higher amount of aid is disbursed to countries with a lower MDG score index than the rest of the population, the concentration curve lies above the equality line. That means that aid is indeed disbursed to countries that are farther away from achieving the MDG target.Aid concentration curves resemble Lorenz curves used in income distribution analyses. The difference is that while the concentration in income distribution often has a negative connotation, concentration of aid towards countries with a relatively greater need is a desired outcome. Straightforward comparison of two aid concentration curves, as in Lorenz, is only possible if curves do not cross each other. Therefore we calculate a statistical counterpart, the aid concentration index, which allows us to compare the degree of concentration between two different curves.The aid concentration index ranges from to +. Since it is possible that a concentration curve lies above the equality line, the coefficient would take a negative value. In fact, in the case of ODA allocation, a negative value for the concentration index is a desired outcome. On the other hand, if the distribution of aid is regressive, or the better off countries receive more aid, then the concentration index assumes a positive value, as the Gini does. A concentration index around  reflects an equal distribution, with countries receiving the same amount of aid irrespective of their MDG status. That is not necessarily the desired outcome in development assistance, particularly when countries are unequal in their MDG achievement.Our methodology has caveats especially concerning the data. The method is sensitive to the sample for two reasons: (i) a correlation analysis is, by nature, highly dependent on the sample selection; and (ii) the transformation in scores depends on the minimum and maximum values of indicators, which are influenced by the extreme values in the sample. To minimize this problem we use the largest sample of developing countries.Another general issue on ODA analyses is the fact that small islands developing states (SIDS) have usually a skewed pattern of aid assistance. Claessens, et al. () and Alesina and Dollar () note that small countries tend to receive significantly more per capita aid than the average developing countries. This can be due to high vulnerability to external shocks. Where appropriate, we present the results excluding the SIDS.The ResultsThe MDG score index and ODA flowsThe results show that  per cent of the countries have MDG score indexes between . and .. These are the countries that had indicators close to MDG targets. About  per cent of the countries scored between . and . in the mdg score index. These are at the mid-range in relation to countries close to the best MDG outcome and those further away from them. The group furthest away from MDG achievements is composed of eight countries, all but one located in Sub-Saharan Africa. These are Afghanistan, Chad, Niger, Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Central African Republic, Mali and Burkina Faso. We would expect special attention would have been given to these countries in terms of aid allocation.Total ODA has increased by fivefold during the period. It rose from $. billion in  to about $ billion in  (see Figure ). After , the growth in total ODA was driven by a significant growth in bilateral aid. Bilateral ODA grew on average by  per cent per year, while multilateral aid grew at a constant average of  per cent per year. Bilateral aid, however, shows larger volatility than multilateral aid, which is evident from cuts in bilateral aid during the s, before the Millennium Declaration.Figure . Histogram of countries by MDG score index (Development needs measured by relative MDG achievements in )For a highly progressive aid allocation, however, we expect a large and negative correlation. Figure  shows that the correlation between nominal ODA and recipients MDG status has been historically weaker than that of the income adjusted ODA. In all years but , the correlation curve of nominal aid is above the income adjusted aid curve. If one assumes that donors do consider recipients needs then the curves suggest that donors also take into consideration other factors when allocating aid, mainly economic size and income level, which are proxies for the resource base of aid recipient countries. The important finding to retain is that all correlation coefficients are negative, meaning that the lesser the progress towards the MDG, the larger the amount of aid received.Figure : The correlation between aid allocation and MDG score indexWe use the scatter plots to further examine the relationship between ODA/GNI and the MDG score index. The scatter plot in Figure  and the fitted line with low dispersion across the confidence interval reflect a good donor-recipient matching.Among the group of least developed countries scoring below . on the MDG score index, two countries would be considered under-assisted. Chad (TCD) and Central African Republic (CAF) received lesser aid as share of GNI, and they are persistently receiving less aid (note that they were also under-assisted as observed in the nominal aid and MDG score index analysis above). Afghanistan (AFG) and Sierra Leone (SLE), on the other hand, received more ODA than expected given their MDG achivement level.Figure : Scatter plot and linear prediction of average adjusted ODA against mdg score indexAs a robustness check, we examine the relationship between ODA and MDG score index using population adjusted ODA (ODA per capita) instead of ODA as a share of GNI. ODA per capita produces misleading results. The upward sloping linear fit in Figure a indicates that higher ODA per capita is allocated to countries with the best MDG achievement levels. Since Claessens et al. () and Alesina and Dollar () warn that the small population of SIDS may distort the regression results, we exclude these countries. The flat line in Figure b suggests that ODA is distributed proportionally. Nevertheless, these results are at best tenuous and statistically insignificant.Another robustness check is to use GDP per capita instead of our development measure (the MDG score index). The results suggest that the correlation between the MDG score index and aid allocation is stronger than the correlation between GDP per capita and aid allocation (see Figure ). The relationship between the latter two variables is also non-linear, where a great portion of countries are clustered at GDP per capita around $, (PPP in ). Figure  is thus not conclusive about the relationship between ODA and the development need of countries as measured in income terms.Aid concentrationSince the advent of the mdg, aid allocation has become more concentrated towards the countries that are further away from achieving the MDG targets. The concentration index that captures progressivity became negatively strong (see Table ). As Figures , , and , show, the concentration curves lie above the equality line, meaning that countries that are farther away from the MDG targets receive larger share of aid than the least needy ones.The figures also show that, more than bilateral aid, multilateral ODA tends to be concentrated towards the countries that are further away from the MDG targets. Although multilateral ODA makes up a lower share of total ODA as shown in Figure , it is the most MDG-sensitive. As shown in Figure , the bilateral ODA concentration curve is much closer to the equality line than the multilateral one. The concentration index for multilateral aid in  was -. and increased to -. in .ODA by donor classificationConclusionThe motivation to test the MDG-sensitivity of ODA allocation comes from the debate on what determines donors decision to disburse aid. The official position of donors is that aid is given to ensure poverty reduction and the achievement of the mdg. Some observers, however, argue that aid allocation, particularly from bilateral sources, is determined by geopolitical interests, colonial relationships and commercial interests. Others argue that ODA should be disbursed to countries with good policy conditions, irrespective of development needs.This paper contributes to the debate by attempting to answer the question: is aid disproportionately allocated to countries that need to make the most progress on the mdg? To answer this question, we introduced the concept of MDG score index. The index ranks countries based on how far they are from achieving the best level of the MDG indicators. The farther a country is from the best level achieved in the sample, the index would suggest that the country needs disproportionately more aid, and vice-versa.Our methodology involved three approaches  correlation, graphical and concentration analyses. In all three approaches the results indicate that since the Millennium Declaration, ODA allocation has become MDG-sensitive. In other words, ODA is given to countries that need it most. We also find that multilateral aid is more MDG-sensitive than bilateral aid.While MDG sensitivity in aid allocation is a positive stride towards meeting the commitments under MDG, total aid disbursements still fall short of the promised levels. Aid volume globally has been well below the desired level. According to the MDG Gap Task Force Report (UN, ), ODA in  was: equivalent to . per cent of the gross national income (GNI) of members of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC). Only five countries provided assistance exceeding the united_nations target level of . per cent of GNI, and a large gap of $ billion remains in actual delivery. Moreover, owing to fiscal constraints in several donor countries, growth of ODA is expected to slow to about  per cent per year during -, compared to  per cent annually over the previous three years (p. xii).Overall, trends in aid disbursement are very positive, but scaling-up and fulfilling promises are a far cry from that of promises made under the Global Partnership for Development.