Should global goal setting continue, and how, in the postera?The st century began with an unprecedented commitment to a new consensus on ending poverty as the central purpose of international development. World leaders from  countries, including  Heads of State and Government, gathered at the united_nations General Assembly to define the central challenges for the new century. They adopted the Millennium Declaration (UN  (A/RES//)) which stated their determination to work towards development and poverty eradication, peace and security, environmental conservation, democracy and human rights. They pledged to spare no effort to free our fellow men, women and children from the abject and dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty (paragraph ). They further emphasized that the global reach of these commitments went beyond their own national borders to people worldwide, notwithstanding the primary responsibility that Governments have for their own citizens.The Declaration was a visionary document that reiterated the shared values of solidarity, equality, dignity and respect for nature as the basis for their consensus and was exceptional for its clear vision and articulation. It was also particularly powerful because it went beyond vision and values and included a concrete action plan by setting ambitious and measurable goals with a clearly defined deadline. One year later, the SecretaryGeneral published his implementation plan, the Road Map document (A//), which contained, in an annex, a list of goals derived from the Declaration. These were structured and elaborated as  goals,  targets and  indicators and packaged with a new catchy name, the mdgs (mdg). The purpose of this list was to harmonize reporting on the Millennium Declaration (p., paragraph ). I am grateful for comments from the workshop on Alternative Strategies for the PostEra held at the UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre in Florence, Italy on December , particularly those of Ana Luiza Cortez and Frances Stewart. The paper draws on collaborative work with Frances Stewart on the report of the UN Committee for Development Policy on its fourteenth plenary session to the Economic and Social Council and with Joshua Greenstein on MDG progress measurement. The usual caveats apply. In  the list was expanded to include  targets and  indicators.  The expiration of the mdg in  raises several questions: should they expire, be renewed with an extended deadline, or be replaced with a new set of global goals?The objective of this paper is to argue for the last option. The expiry is an opportunity to correct some of the deficiencies of the MDG approach, and to set new goals that more adequately reflect the equitable growth and human rights-based development strategy set out in the Millennium Declaration. The paper begins with a critical review of the MDG experience, highlights its importance in development debates and outcomes, and its flaws in composition and implementation. The subsequent section details the MDG experience by explaining their goals as a normative instrument rooted in human rights and their origins in the controversies of the s and s. The paper then proposes an approach to setting postgoals based on the ethical commitments of the Millennium Declaration. The final section concludes.The MDG Experience: -The importance of mdgPoverty as a global priorityAccording to Weiss, Jolly and Emmerij (), the mdg were among the most important UN ideas that changed the world. Like most UN resolutions, the mdg could have been forgotten within a few weeks or months of their introduction, but they continue to dominate international debates on development. As one of the architects of the mdg remarks, The conceivers of the mdg never expected the support to spread so wide and so deep (Vandemoortele, ). The mdg have become the standard reference point around which international debates on development revolve. They are used as a proxy to judge progress in tackling global poverty. The UN, the world_bank and numerous other international bodies monitor MDG implementation and issue annual reports with detailed data. The staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) systematically include data on MDG targets in their country reports, along with key macroeconomic performance indicators. UN meetings to review progress in achieving mdg have become both frequent and high-profile political events that are significant for a countrys prestige and international standing. Political leaders make speeches defending policy initiatives with the warning: without such and such action the mdg will not be achieved. Economists write research papers on macroeconomic policy choices and evaluate them against contributions to achieving mdg. Local NGOs advocate national budget reforms to achieve the mdg, however critical they may be of these goals, because the mdg are the accepted standard to evaluate policy. Media reports on poverty refer to failure to achieve mdg as a demonstration of pervasive abject poverty. In other words, mdg have become a convenient shorthand of development and poverty alleviation..The mdg have raised awareness of ending global poverty as an urgent challenge and a priority for global action. They have helped to maintain development as a priority, not only at the UN, but also in other fora such as meetings of the Gand G-. But their importance in shaping international development debates goes further. Since their introduction in , the mdg have become increasingly accepted and consolidated as the legitimized framework for debates on international development. Even those who initially opposed them or hesitated to embrace them now use them. In so doing, mdg have shaped the international development debates in several ways. For example, initially many NGOs were hesitant to espouse the mdg because they did not agree with the list of goals, targets and indicators or objected to the lack of adequate consultation in the way they were drawn up, or becauseFirst, the mdg institutionalized the consensus on ending poverty  their broad purpose as a whole or a package  as an international norm (Fukuda-Parr and Hulme ).Second, the mdg have come to reshape the concept of development to mean ending poverty. Poverty has not been the central issue in development, but has been more about transforming economic structures and creating capacity for sustainable growth. Yet, as I will explore later in this paper, this reconceptualization of development has also had perverse effects on development policy debates by over-simplifying the challenges involved.Third, the mdg have helped defining poverty as a multidimensional deprivation in the lives of people, including such dimensions as education, health, environment, food, employment, housing, and gender equality  or human poverty. Since the s, the question of how poverty should be defined and measured has been a subject of much controversy. Though it is now widely recognized that poverty is a multidimensional phenomenon and a human centred concern, the most frequently used definition has been consumption based, and its measurement defined as the money-centric headcount below a threshold level of income.mdg in national and international policyNational Governments and donor agencies have consistently adopted mdg as an important part of their policy frameworks. What this has meant, in practice, has ranged from rhetorical adoption, such as referring to them in general policy statements, to instrumental adoption, such as using the targets to drive resource allocation and policy shifts. For example, as part of the MDG implementation effort, the UN Millennium project made a major effort to assist Governments with the necessary cost and programme investments to achieve the  targets. In most cases, these estimates were controversial and were not incorporated into national planning, budgeting and resource mobilization processes such as the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, national development plans and budgets. In fact, in a  study (Fukuda-Parr ) I reviewed  Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs)under implementation and found that they consistently referred to the mdg as a major national development objective, but not all included timelines or action plans for achieving the targets. Moreover, those that did were selective about which of the  goals and  targets were incorporated in the papers. While many included income poverty, primary education, child mortality and water goals, other goals they replaced agendas that they were pursuing. But over time, they have become more broadly accepted and some of the initial critics have begun to use them as the consensus framework for development efforts. For example, the human rights community initially ignored or criticized them (Alston ) but changed course and adopted a more constructive approach to use the mdg to pursue a human rights and development agenda (OHCHR ). The MDG narrative meets the criteria of a norm that has become well established according to the trajectory of international norm dynamics elaborated by Finnemore and Sikkink (). Norms emerge, then cascade, and then reach the final stage of becoming institutionalized. At this stage, norms take on a taken-for-granted quality and are no longer a matter of broad public debate. (p. ). The mechanisms that keep the norm alive at this stage are habit and institutionalization. The main actors are the professions and bureaucracy who uphold and adhere to the norm in order to conform to a recognized standard. In contrast, it is the idealistically committed norm entrepreneurs who drive the emergence of a norm, and states and organizations that promote its cascade. See Fukuda-Parr and Hulme () Human poverty was introduced by the  UNDP Human Development Report and refers to multiple capability deprivations. (UNDP ) See Stewart and others () for a detailed review of alternative definitions and measures of poverty. PRSPs are prepared by Governments of low-income countries and serve as a framework for reaching agreement with the donors on development priorities and financing requirements. The study included all second generation (second PRSP prepared by the country) PRSPs existing at the time of the study. (e.g., decent work, food and nutrition, gender equality, environmental sustainability, and global partnerships) were consistently neglected. Additionally, many PRSPs adopted a strategy of economic growth and social sector investments without considering distributional challenges. Implicitly, PRSPs have assumed that aggregate national economic growth and social sector expansion would lead to the achievement of the goals through a process of trickle down without acknowledging the considerable evidence that macroeconomic policies may have distributional impacts that can undermine poverty reduction. Only one of the PRSPs reviewed mentioned inequality and gave attention to the most vulnerable.The same study reviewed policy frameworks of  bilateral donors and found all consistently mentioned mdg as overall objectives. Environmental sustainability, education, health and global diseases as well as income poverty were the goals mostly cited. Priority was also given to governance, including human rights and democracy, as well as peace and security that are chapters of the Millennium Declaration but were not included in the mdg. However, none of the donors have adopted mdg as a framework for allocation of resources and for programming purposes.Nonetheless, there has been a perceptible increase in funding for social sectors and within these sectors, for primary basic services (see tables  and  and figures  to ). ODA for other MDG priorities, notably food production and agriculture, which are important for reducing hunger and malnutrition and for reducing rural poverty, also increased but less markedly. Increased ODA allocation to primary basic services took place at the expense of other sectors. The proportion of aid allocated by member countries of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) to basic social services increased from . per cent in  to . per cent in  while the proportion of ODA for building trade capacity declined from . per cent in  to . per cent in .While the years following the introduction of the mdg were notable for the ambitious and high profile political commitments made by the Gcountries, such as the pledge to double development aid to Africa (or .% of their GNIs) made at the Gleneagles Summit in , they have largely not been implemented (united_nations , p., figure ), except for a few cases. Moreover, no significant international poverty initiatives were launched, and the rich countries have not shifted their positions on critical international economic policies including trade, finance, investment and technology transfer. As the title of the UN MDG Gap Task Force  report, The Global Partnership for Development: Time to Deliver, makes clear, donor countries have fallen far short of implementing their Goal  targets for aid, trade, debt and technology (united_nations a). So far, the only tangible progress in these areas has been the reduction of the debt burden of the poorest countries. Multilateral trade negotiationsthe Doha Round, labelled the development round  have become deadlocked, largely over differences between developing and developed country positions on agricultural subsidies in the developed countries. Aid commitments have increased in volume, but these trends started before  and have slowed since . Moreover ODA flows still remained at . per cent of donor GNI in , far short of the UN target of . per cent of GNI. There has been substantial reallocation to the Least Developed Countries (LDCs)from $ billion in  to $ billion by  ( prices and exchange rates). But this is still only . per cent of donors GNI compared with the UN target for ODA to LDCs of .-. per cent of GNI (united_nations a, p., table ).Beyond Governments, the mdg have spawned numerous responses on the part of local governments, civil_society and businesses across the world. For example, in Ecuador, local governments used mdg as a framework for establishing priority action plans. In Brazil, the mdg have mobilized the national petroleum company to initiate social projects. The numbers participating in the Stand Up Against Poverty campaign have mushroomed into millions. There are numerous other examples, though it is difficult to assess the impact of these diverse and disparate initiatives.Surprisingly, the consensus on poverty as a policy priority has not led to fundamental debates or new thinking about policy alternatives for faster poverty reduction. Over the last half-century, many ideas have marked the evolution of development thought and driven historical shifts in theory and strategies. Some examples that come to mind include Basic Needs in the s, structural adjustment and neoliberal reforms in the s, and Human Development in the s, all of which brought elements of theoretical ideas with practical policy strategies. Such shifts in policy strategies did not occur since the consensus on poverty as a priority emerged. While poverty reduction was identified as the overarching objective, development strategies continued to follow the approach of the s that emphasized macroeconomic stabilization as the priority objective through the application of Washington Consensus policies to promote aggregate economic growth through private investments. Greater focus has been placed on social sector investments to meet basic needs and on social protection, including conditional cash transfers.For sure, important studies have been published and there have been many departures from the structural adjustment programmes of the s. Social investments and protection, including initiatives such as conditional cash transfers, have emerged as important priorities. But the core macroeconomic strategies have remained unchallenged. The mdg did not propel new thinking about challenging the macroeconomic policy approaches of the Washington Consensus framework and their implications for poverty reduction have not emerged into mainstream international policy debates. In other words, the core Washington Consensus policies aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and liberalization have continued to dominate development strategies, only supplemented by emphasis on social investments. New development strategies and approaches have emerged not from mainstream thinking and advice from the international community, but from innovation within developing countries that have not been in IMF policy-based lending programmes. These approaches have included not only alternative growth strategies, but also poverty reduction strategies, particularly in Brazil and several other latin_american countries which have achieved not only stable economic growth and weathered the global financial crisis, but have also reduced inequality. These policy approaches are similar to those that have been raised by interventionists, in terms of promoting expansionary macroeconomic policies, expanding employment, and raising incomes of the poorest through targeted programs such as conditional cash transfers.OutcomesIt is difficult to assess whether the mdg have had an impact on the pace of poverty reduction and development outcomes, since it is impossible to attribute any recent trends to the mdg as opposed to the myriad of other factors that have driven national poverty outcomes. But the problem remains that while poverty reduction has continued globally, progress has been too slow and unevenly distributed (table ). Overall, the pace of progress has not accelerated, with Sub-Saharan Africa showing faster progress than other regions (table ). Progress has been uneven also among different social groups, thus reflecting persistent horizontal inequalities (table ).The UN and other international agencies assess progress made against the  targets, focussing on the level of achievement. According to the  UN MDG Progress Report (united_nations c), globally, the  targets for income poverty (goal ) and water (goal ) are on track to be met, while there is steady progress in the reduction of child mortality (goal ), malaria and other global diseases (goal ). Primary school enrollment has been advancing, but the pace has begun to slow down and the goal of universal enrollment may not be achieved. More alarmingly, there has been either stagnation or regress for some goals and targets. For instance, the proportion of people who are hungry (goal ) has plateaued at  per cent since /; the number of undernourished people grew from  million in / to  million in /; employment and decent work (goal ) have shown a setback in many countries; progress has been slow in gender equality and empowerment, other than in primary education (goal ), and in reducing maternal mortality (goal ).The impact of the mdg on changing policy behaviour and outcomes would be reflected not on the levels of achievement but rather on whether the pace of progress had improved. Countries have different starting points, and, for many countries, achieving the mdg may not be feasible even if they were to adopt improved efforts resulting in better performance (Clemens and others ). In another paper (Fukuda-Parr and others, forthcoming), my co-authors and I have argued that the criterion for success should be improvement in performance to be measured by the pace of progress. We proposed a methodology for this criterion and made estimates for  MDG indicators.Our findings were disappointing at the country level, but more encouraging for sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia as regions. We found improved performance by a majority of countries for just five of the  indicators studied. On the other hand, the majority of sub-Saharan African countries showed improved progress for  indicators (table ). At the global level, the pace of progress improved for undermortality rate, measles immunization and gender parity in primary schooling, but not for attended births or safe drinking water. For income poverty, the pace improved in all developing regions. South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa  the two regions with the highest concentrations of poverty  showed consistent improvement and performed better than the other regions. In sub-Saharan Africa, progress has been made at a faster rate for all but one indicator for which data are available since the mdg were introduced. In South Asia, improvements have accelerated for all indicators, except child mortality and child malnutrition. While it is not possible to attribute the improved progress to the MDG initiative, the record of improvement is encouraging.In brief, the impact of mdg on outcomes and policy is ambiguous, uneven and limited at best, while the initiative has been a significant factor in shaping international debates. The mdg did not introduce a new concept or policy strategy, but created a narrative that has raised global awareness of poverty as a compelling moral challenge requiring urgent action. The narrative has become a consensus framework for debate on international development. The mdg are widely accepted among the key development stakeholders, including national governments, donor agencies, NGOs, and local civil_society groups, regardless of their views about the MDG relevance as a development strategy. The importance of this new awareness and consensus should not be underestimated considering that the pursuit of development priorities in the globalized and democratically governed world requires the public at large to share commitments to these priorities as a matter of ethical imperatives of a common humanity. The mdg are associated with an increase in social sector investments, notably in aid allocations, but this is the continuation of a trend that started prior to the introduction of the mdg. If there is causation, we might ask if donor policies drove the mdg rather than the other way round.The controversiesThe mdg have generated critical debates among both development practitioners and researchers, particularly when they were initially introduced. The numerous points that have been raised can be categorized into two sets of issues: (i) those that concern the composition of the goals, targets and indicators, and (ii) those that relate to the development and implementation processes.With respect to the composition of the lists, critics have raised the following issues:(i) Poorly designed development goals: The methodology for setting the goals has been inconsistent and apparently arbitrary (Easterly ; Saith ), the levels set are unrealistic for many countries (Clemens and others ) and biased against countries with low starting points (Clemens and others ; Easterly ; Fukuda-Parr forthcoming).(ii) Composition is too narrow and excludes important dimensions of development: The publication of mdg led to strong reactions from many constituencies whose agendas were left outincluding: reproductive health rights particularly as the Development Assistance Committee (DAC)/International Development Goals (IDGs) included this agenda; gender inequality that was only reflected in the primary education goal; employment; governance; the macroeconomy and structural change; and in more recent years, climate_change. In , three new targets and  new indicators were added to the list in response to some of these criticisms. Concern for the narrow and unbalanced composition of the targets continues to be raised. While the mdg draw on chapter III of the Millennium Declaration, they leave out the objectives of chapters IV (environment), V (human rights, democracy and good governance), VI (protecting the vulnerable), and VII (meeting the special needs of Africa).Lack of attention to important norms and principles, in particular falling short of human rights standards: The human rights community has been highly critical of the mdg (Alston ). Although the mdg overlap with many economic and social human rights, they lack some of the key human rights principles including: concern for the most vulnerable and the marginalized; removing discrimination and respecting the equal rights of all; participation; accountability; and standards for rights that require universal access to services (Darrow forthcoming; OHCHR ).Lack of attention to equality: The mdg do not reflect important ethical concerns expressed in the Millennium Declaration for the poorest of the poor and the most vulnerable. Similarly, the principles of equality, empowerment and participation have not been adequately reflected (Nelson ; Fukuda-Parr ; Saith ).Unbalanced international political economy: Goal  is weak and lacks hard quantitative  targets. It is also narrow in scope. It is a poor reflection of the agendas advocated by developing countries, notably those related to the asymmetric rules of global trade, international investment and finance, the reduced policy space and quality of aid. From the onset, many developing countries were skeptical of the mdg for fear they would present another set of conditionalities, while imposing a stronger accountability framework for the developed countries.Distortion of national priorities: From the start, many civil_society groups in developing countries expressed dismay with the mdg for undermining their advocacy and policy dialogue with their Governments. For example, some of the goals such as universal primary education took the agenda backwards in countries where the challenge was to improve quality in primary schooling and advance access to secondary education. This led one activist to rename the mdg as the Most Distracting Gimmick (Atrobus ).Critics have raised a number of issues with respect to the process of formulation and implementation, as follows:(i) Lack of broad consultation in formulation: The mdg were introduced in the  report of the UN Secretary-General, derived from the Millennium Declaration. Both documents built on the outcome documents of the UN development conferences of the s, but the selection of these outcomes for these documents did not involve wide consultations. This led to criticism from civil_society organizations (Bissio ) and lukewarm responses from Governments of developing countries.(ii) Global or national goals?: An important debate exists on the applicability of the goals at the country level. Some have argued that the global goals should be adapted at the national level (Vandemoortele and Delamonica ), while others have held that they should be achieved in each and every country (Sachs ).The Millennium Declaration and subsequent UN official documents leave the question unanswered. In practice, the UN monitoring reports apply the goals to each country, though many countries have also adapted the goals to their national contexts. Applying them at the national level and holding Governments accountable is highly problematic, since they impose a one-size-fits-all set of  targets for countries with hugely divergent starting points, constraints, financial resources and capacity (Clemens ; Easterly ; Fukuda-Parr and others, forthcoming).(iii) Criteria for success and methodology of measuring progress: The methodology for assessing performance used by official national and international monitoring reports focuses on the level of achievement relative to the target. This method is biased against countries with low starting points. A more appropriate metric would be to focus on the pace of progress as discussed above (Fukuda-Parr and others ). Countries are committed to doing their best, and they should be held accountable for making faster progress towards ending poverty. It does not make sense to apply a set of one-size-fits-all targets to countries of enormously divergent conditions and means, and judge their success and failure.(iv) Aid-centric process: Development aid has been a major focus of much of the MDG debates and their use. They are applied to developing countries and not to developed countries, and the international monitoring efforts focus on the performance of developing countries, rather than the challenge of poverty worldwide.mdg in context: the political economy of development cooperationMuch of the MDG experience can be explained by a clearer understanding of the concept of global goals as a policy instrument. Global goals are international normative instruments that differ in important ways from national economic and social policies. They draw attention to neglected global priorities. They create incentives to national governments, donors and other development stakeholders, but are not used in a system of resource allocation and legislative enforcement. They are set through a process of political negotiations rather than through technocratic economic management. The strong impact of the mdg on narrative and their weak influence on development strategies reflect the political dynamics that drove the consensus. The criticisms about the list and its implementation as national planning instruments reflect an incorrect interpretation.Origins of the mdg: controversies over structural adjustmentIn an earlier article co-authored with David Hulme (), I have explained the motives that drove leaders of the international development community  heads of the world_bank and UN development agencies, the European development ministers and others to create the mdg and invest in promoting them. To summarize, their creation was motivated by the need to forge a united community to defend international development as a global project and to reverse the declining support for development aid. During the s and s, the development community was divided by sharp controversies over the structural adjustment lending programmes of the world_bank and IMF which were conditioned on the adoption of Washington Consensus policy reforms. These controversies not only pitted the NGOs and academics against the world_bank and IMF, but also UN agencies such as UNICEF, as well as some stakeholders within national governments, which advocated alternatives. Moreover, development agencies became internally divided as individuals took divergent positions. The mdg/poverty narrative could help unify this divided community, since no one could argue against ending poverty as a moral concern. It was particularly important for the UN leadership and the development ministers of major bilateral donor countries to put an end to these controversies, because they faced declining support for international development within their respective constituencies. With the end of the Cold War, the geo-political interests no longer sustained support for aid budgets.These motivations led bilateral donors to introduce the IDGs, a list of six quantitative goals with timeframes for achievement, in three areas: economic well-being, social development, and environmental sustainability and regeneration (OECD ). As Colin Bradford of the united_states delegation explained, it was important to tell a story of aid that spoke directly to conditions of peoples lives to win over the parliament and publics.The IDGs were effective in articulating the meaning of international cooperation for development and had gained traction in raising awareness in the donor countries. They were a concrete articulation of a consensus donor vision of development published in the  statement of the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD (OECD/DAC ) entitled Shaping the st Century: Contribution of Development Cooperation in the st Century. The statement gave three reasons why rich countries should support development: the humanitarian purpose of ending dire dehumanizing poverty; enlightened self-interest in a world free of threats of terrorism, global disease, political instability, and uncontrolled migration; and solidarity for joint action to solve common challenges such as environmental sustainability.The IDGs developed considerable traction and demonstrated the effectiveness of a simple list of concrete goals to communicate a compelling story of development. They had already begun to pay off as the secular decline in aid commitments began to be reversed. The world_bank and UN agencies began to support them and, in , published a joint document monitoring their progress using the IDG framework. They inspired the UN to include goals in the Millennium Declaration. But the IDGs could not be owned by all stakeholders since they were invented by the bilateral donors. The mdg built on the IDGs to forge a broader consensus, including the Bretton Woods institutions, UN agencies and national governments.The mdg could build a narrative behind which dissenting stakeholders could stand united and argue for development aid. For example, Lord Mark Malloch Brown, then UNDP Administrator, who played a central role in building the Millennium Declaration into the mdg and creating an implementation plan, recounts the view that the mdg could bridge the divide between the UN and the world_bank over structural adjustment.The consensus on the mdg can be attributed precisely to the fact that they allowed the protagonists in the s and s to exchange views over structural adjustment IMF, world_bank, united_states Treasury, UNICEF, NGO networks, and academics on both sides of the issue and to agree on the purpose of development while disagreeing on the means. It allowed bilateral development ministers, who needed to support and were supported by all of these dissenting stakeholders, to get out of the dilemma. Why did the developing countries buy into the Millennium Declaration that included the global goals? Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala, who was one of leading figures in coordinating the negotiations, explains that the priority for the developing countries was to keep the development issue a high priority on the UN agenda, on par with the political issues.The postaid architecture: new narrative, new instruments, old policiesThe divisions over structural adjustment programmes centred around the issues of conditionality as an aid modality, liberalization and privatisation as economic growth strategies, while the social dimensions of the process focussed primarily on the consequences of fiscal austerity and stabilization measures on the poor and the vulnerable and on social investments. While economic arguments over macroeconomic policy choices drove the controversies, the social dimensions commanded a moral high ground. In this context, the narrative of poverty as the overarching purpose of international development provided a way out for all sides of the controversies. Consensus could be reached on the ends without resolving differences over the means. It is therefore not surprising that the Millennium Declaration and mdg define the ends, but not the means. The Washington Consensus policies did not need to disappear, but continued as a part of a broader agenda, and behind the headline of the mdg. It is also not surprising that the last decade has seen little by way of new proposals by the world_bank and on new policy strategies to foster economic growth combined with social justice that addresses poverty, inequality and the fulfilment of human rights.mdg are thus a key feature of the new aid architecture that was put in place in the late s. The MDG narrative justifies aid on humanitarian grounds. The consensus defines the relationship between donors and recipients as a partnership, constructed in pursuit of a shared commitment to end poverty. For this purpose, donors would support national strategies that would integrate the mdg and be elaborated in the national PRSPs. The partnership is to be guided by principles of mutual accountability and respect for national ownership. Donor support would be provided to implement the PRSPs through the IMF new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) along with other multilateral and bilateral support and debt relief under the Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) debt reduction initiative.These elements, introduced towards the end of the s, retained the core policy elements of the instruments of the controversial structural adjustment lending programmes of the s and had also replaced them. The PRSPs and the Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF) replaced the Policy Framework Papers that spelled national policy agendas, including key economic policy reform measures. While these reform agendas are not found consistently in the PRSPs, they are included in the PRGF and HIPC agreements and condition the release of financing under these arrangements. The principles of ownership and mutual accountability expressed in the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness would guide partnership between donors and the Governments of developing countries. But the policy space for aid dependent countries remains limited under financing conditionalities. The underlying economic/development strategies continue to be driven by the Washington Consensus agenda aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and liberalization. To this end, the mdg added a basic needs agenda, emphasizing priorities for social investments and commitments for partnership.A normative instrument, not an economic and social policyMany of the criticisms of the mdg reflect an incorrect interpretation of mdg as economic planning instruments which is not their intended purpose. The mdg are derived from the Millennium Declaration, which is a normative document that defines how the world should look. Applied to development policy making, the Declaration offers a framework for evaluating progress and assessing priorities. The  goals,  targets and  indicators, are best interpreted as benchmarks for monitoring implementation, not as hard planning targets. According to UN officials involved in drafting the Millennium Declaration, the original idea behind including some quantitative targets in the Declaration was to give concreteness to the development agenda. And, as officials who were involved in formulating the mdg have pointed out, the mdg were not intended to apply to each and every country, but rather to monitor global progress and to encourage donors and national governments to make greater efforts to end poverty (Vandemoortele and Delamonica ). In this regard, it is not surprising that they are considered overambitious for many countries since they did not originate from a technocratic planning process based on consideration of economic variables necessary for achievement of social and economic outcomes. The same misinterpretation has led to confusion about whether the mdg should be applied at the country level.Understanding the MDG concept as a normative instrument also explains at least in part their success in influencing debates and their weakness on policy thinking. Norms define ends not the means. Accordingly, it is erroneous to interpret them as a new development paradigm or a policy strategy since that was not the purpose for which they were intended.Global goals after New directionsWith the expiration of the mdg in , the promises of the Millennium Declaration remain unrealized, and the extent of global poverty and the slow pace of progress remain unacceptable in todays world of prosperity. The benefits of global economic integration have been as unevenly distributed since  as in the previous decade  the gaps between the rich and poor within and between countries remain considerable.It may be argued that global goals would not be worth setting after , because the mdg did not have adequate impact on shifting policy. Nonetheless, the mdg have demonstrated the power of global goals and the value of comprehensive development goals in raising awareness, maintaining political support for development, and in coordinating policy debates. Without the mdg, it is likely that the Millennium Interviews with John Ruggie, former Assistant Secretary-General in the Office of the Secretary-General,  August, , Cambridge Massachusetts; with Andy Mack, former Director in the Office of the Secretary-General,  September,  by telephone. Ruggie and Mack were principal authors of the Secretary-Generals report, We the Peoples to the General Assembly. The last chapter of this report was transformed, with modifications, into the text of the Millennium Declaration.Declaration would have been shelved soon after its adoption along with numerous other decisions by the General Assembly. For these reasons, new global goals should be set to advance the implementation of the Millennium Declaration, but they need to be pursued with the institutional weight of the UN SecretaryGeneral and with the UN investing in efforts to promote and mobilize support for them. The UN has set many global goals since the s, but none has had the reach  or the investment  of the mdg.What should be in the new goals? The expiry of the mdg in  presents an opportunity to correct the deficiencies of the current list and emphasize new priorities, which are becoming clearer as the st century advances. It is also an opportunity to build goals consistent with their function as normative instruments to promote inclusive and equitable development, rooted in the ethical commitments of the Millennium Declaration.Ethical commitments of the Millennium Declaration: shared values, human rights and the UN development agendaIn setting out a vision for the st century, the Millennium Declaration expresses shared social objectives based on universal values. The first chapter of the Declaration states the fundamental values to be essential to international relations in the twenty-first century (UN , paragraph ): freedom; equality; solidarity; tolerance; respect for nature; and shared responsibility. The Declaration commits Governments to pursue a particular pattern of growth and development  one that is equitable and human rights-based. The core theme of equality is articulated throughout the document and reflects not only equality within countries, but also between countries. This includes gender equality (paragraph ), equitable and non-discriminatory trading and financial systems (paragraph ), with special attention to the poorest and vulnerable people (chapter ) and the needs of Africa that face multiple challenges (chapter ). And most importantly, it includes the ideal notion of inclusive globalization, the central theme which is articulated in paragraph  as follows: We believe that the central challenge we face today is to ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the worlds people. For, while globalization offers great opportunities, at present its benefits are very unevenly shared, while its costs are unevenly distributed.Human rights principlesThe ethical framework of the document derives from the consensus international norms set out in the UN Charter that have evolved over the decades and been codified in international law. The framework goes beyond the economic concept of development with equity and seeks a world that is not only more peaceful and prosperous but just (paragraph ). It draws explicitly on international human rights norms and principles, which are reflected throughout the document; to the core principle of human dignity and freedom, equality and equity (paragraph ), the respect for economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights (paragraph ). It reaffirms commitment to the UN Charter (paragraph ), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (paragraph ), to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (paragraph), and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (paragraph ). Interestingly, it also refers to the right to development (paragraph ), the only international human rights concept that addresses development as a process.  The  Declaration on the Right to Development affirms development as a fundamental human right, and is important for two reasons. First, it defines development as a constant improvement in the wellbeing of individuals (UN , Preamble). Second, it articulates responsibilities for development as involving not only individual, but collective actions of states. It not only states desirable development objectives, but also the obligations of states; as leaders we have a duty therefore to all the worlds people, especially the most vulnerable (paragraph ). The Declaration commits to strengthen international cooperation (paragraph ).For these reasons, the development strategy that the Declaration commits to is human rights based, characterized by the realization of all human rights (economic, social, cultural, civil and political) as its objective; the well-being of the individual as the focus and unit of assessment; and the application of core principles of equality and non-discrimination, empowerment and participation in the development process, and rooted in the norms of international human rights law. This contrasts with the concept of development that focuses more narrowly on economic growth and the improvement of living conditions, including meeting basic (material) needs. This conceptual framework for evaluating the development process is closely related to and overlaps significantly with the capability approach to development, or human development, which is based on the concept of development as expansion of the capability of individuals to lead lives they value developed by Amartya Sen.The UN development agendaThese ethical values, and the theme of human centered, equitable and sustainable_development, have been reflected in the origins of the Millennium Declaration and mdg in the UN conferences on topics ranging from environment to children to habitat held throughout the s. The Internationally Agreed Development Goals (IADGs) and the UN Development Agenda are comprised of the full set of goals emerging from the  summits and conferences held up to .Taking place in an era of active debates about structural adjustment and liberalization, these conferences were particularly concerned with the consequences of this policy shift on poor people and poor countries. These meetings raised the common concern that reflected a strong voice of the civil_society and the Governments of developing countries that the benefits of globalization were not broadly shared. The major commitments of these conferences were combined in a single package in the  Millennium Declaration, while the mdg are a select list from the broader list.As highlighted in the The united_nations Development Agenda: Development for All (UN DESA, , p.iii) which reviewed UN conferences in the s, the resulting UN development agenda is strongly embedded in the UN ethical values and fundamental purpose  namely, human freedom and dignity, solidarity and burden-sharing, equality, and tolerance, and can be seen as a concrete means to implement the UNBoth Sen (; ) and Nussbaum () have written about the close connection between capabilities and rights. See also UNDP () Human Development Report that explores the theoretical overlaps between capabilities and rights, and the policy implications for development. See Vizard and others ().These conferences were also noteworthy for their unusually open processes (UN DESA ). Unlike most UN debates that involve only Governments, these conferences opened up to broader involvement of civil_society groups. They were involved in the preparatory meetings organized by national Governments and UN agencies at country and regional levels. civil_society groups were often included in official national delegations and involved in intergovernmental negotiations.Charter. According to Jose Antonio Ocampo, Two elements have permeated the content and character of the Agenda since its inception. First, a fundamental concern for equity and for equality of all persons, as human beings and as citizens ... [And] the second essential element [is] partnership. The conference process has engaged all the key stakeholders: Governments, UN system organisations, other intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations, civil_society, and the private sector. (UN DESA , Preface, p. iii).Setting new goals, measuring progressLike the mdg, the purpose of the goals, targets and indicators beyond  would be to harmonize reporting and to facilitate monitoring of progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Declaration. But a new approach is needed to setting the goals, targets and indicators. To begin with, in order to redefine progress in alignment with the vision of the Declaration for development as inclusive, equitable and sustainable, there is need to expand beyond the current focus of the mdg on poverty and chapter  (development and poverty eradication) of the Declaration, to reflect chapter  (values and principles) and to acknowledge the important ways in which development and poverty eradication are intertwined with the challenges of peace and security (chapter ), environment (chapter ), human rights, democracy and good governance (chapter ). Moreover, goal setting needs to be framed with a methodological coherence. Finally, the new approach should include some critical means as well as ends considering the drawbacks of the mdg.Monitoring progress in human well-beingThe new approach to setting goals should also build on a coherent framework in development thinking about the nature of progress and what we have learned from development economics research in the s. The following essential considerations are worth highlighting here.First, the multidimensionality of human well-being needs to be fully acknowledged. The work of Amartya Sen is particularly helpful in defining progress as the expansion of capabilities and freedomsor human development approach  and in emphasizing the multidimensionality of essential instrumental freedoms to encompass economic facilities, social opportunities, political freedoms, transparency guarantees and security (Sen ). Sens capabilities approach to development is closely related to human rights-based development and essential capabilities overlap considerably with the core human rights, including economic, social, cultural, civil and political areas (Sen ; Vizard and others ).Second, there is need to promote security from downside risks. The work on human security (Ogata and Sen ; UNDP ) and on vulnerability and poverty (world_bank ) has highlighted the importance of protection from threats of sudden changes in core life conditions. The recent crises in the global financial, fuel and food markets have highlighted these threats as important challenges of the st century as global market integration proceeds and expose the risks of instability and their contagious effects across countries.Third, sustainability implications need to be considered and addressed. The threats to sustainability arising from environmental deterioration have become acute as global warming increases. Sustainability is an overriding challenge, where failure is likely to threaten all dimensions of human development, and requires major shifts in policy as well as in international cooperation.   Fourth, there is need to pursue equality of opportunities and rights. For all the reasons already elaborated, equality is a principle that is central to the normative framework of the Millennium Declaration. In practical terms, policy strategies that respect equality provide for equality of opportunity and non-discrimination in the fulfilment of human rights.Fifth, meansboth at the global and the national levelto ending poverty need to be identified. The mdg include one set of means to ending poverty in goal , but they need to be strengthened and set into clear quantitative targets. They should also be broadened to incorporate objectives of stable market environment necessary for human security, and agendas for systemic reform consistent with the principles of democracy and equity.Sixth, while goals should be set as global targets, countries should be encouraged to adapt the goals to their national contexts, through a process of democratic consultation. Without such adaptation, the goals are both biased against countries with low starting points and under-ambitious for those with high starting points. They would distort not only government priorities, but also the efforts of civil_society to hold authorities accountable for their development performance. Previous global goals set by the UN followed this approach, and the mdg were the first goals whose applicability to country levels was left ambiguous.Seventh, goal setting should involve a participatory process of consultations with national governments worldwide, and with civil_society organizations at national, regional and global levels. The mdg drew on the goals already adopted by the UN development conferences that in themselves involved widespread consultation among civil_society and government in the national and regional preparatory conferences. In the absence of such process, it is all the more important to set in place a process of broad consultations at national, regional and global levels. The implementation process will be as important as the composition of the goals; the new goals should build on the increasing use of the mdg by civil_society to demand more of Government. Furthermore, formal structures would strengthen accountability. At the national level, one approach would be to set up national commissions that would work out the implications of policy goals, and monitor implementation.Finally, the new goals should apply not only to developing countries, but to all countries, since human poverty, inequality and exclusion are challenges facing developed countries as well.Concluding remarksThe recent history of the mdg reveals much about the history of development thinking and policy in the first decade of the st century. It highlights the reconceptualization of development as reconceptualised as poverty reduction, opening up to a concept applicable regardless of the stage of industrialization and diversification, and levels of income and technological capacity. It further underscores the role of ideas in shaping political support for development locally and globally as well as in shifting economic and social policies.The mdg were the first comprehensive development goals and were effective in drawing attention to poverty eradication as a global norm and priority, and provided a common framework for debate and action. They encouraged and, no doubt, contributed to greater support for social investments in sub-Saharan Africa, but did not lead to changes in policy strategies or to addressing systemic issues that create unequal opportunities for people and countries.The corollary to these policy trends has been the failure to address the systemic problems of protecting developing countries from the consequences of global market integration. A leading example of these trends is the inadequate response of international cooperation to protect the poor against the consequences of climate_change, and the crises of the global financial, fuel and food markets. Seen in this light, the mdg could arguably have provided a convenient cover behind which the economic model of the s could be pursued. The mdg perhaps co-opted the language of human development, and the social impact of adjustment while defanging critical debates about the impact of the liberalization agendas on poverty and inequality. The need for alternative macroeconomic policies that would favour distribution, job creation for the unskilled, and reduce inequality no longer resonates with policy-makers as urgent issues.The impact of the mdg brings home the importance of narratives, and the power of quantitative indicators as a communications tool that can have far-reaching impacts on how to reshape the definition of terms with positive and perverse consequences. The staying power and the reach of the term mdg in framing international development policy debates can only be explained by the power of numbers to communicate complex ideas by simplification, and abstract ethical values by reification, and to convey (misplaced) scientific precision and certitude. The definition of development is ambiguous, fraught with controversies over definitions, measurement and strategies. The process is complex involving human creativity and effort, social cooperation and mobilization, economic investments and political commitments. The challenges are complex and location specific, requiring high-risk solutions. But the magic of quantification renders such a complex challenge into a single number, intangible factors into concrete goods and outcomes, and risk prone processes into a predictable technological solution. But sociologists who study indicators as technologies of governance point out that it goes further. Quantification is not merely a strategy for describing the social and natural worlds, but a means of reconfiguring them. It entails the imposition of new meanings and the disappearance of old ones (Porter , p. ).By articulating the complex challenges of development in  goals and concrete targets for , the mdg have had unprecedented success in drawing attention to poverty as an urgent global priority. But the simplification and quantification have reduced the development agenda to meeting basic material needs, stripped of the Millennium Declarations vision for development with social justice and human rights. It has left out any mention of equity, empowerment of people, sustainability, and building sustainable productive capacity for economic growth. The simplified narrative has no room for understanding poverty as related to the underlying power relations within and between countries and the asymmetries in the global economy. It leaves no room to draw attention to the issues that have long been and remain on the agenda of developing countries and in international economic negotiations, such as the lack of voice in the world_bank, WTO and other institutions of global governance. It similarly remains silent on the issues that have long been and remain on the agenda of critics of standard macroeconomic frameworks for their distributional consequences. The new global goals thus need to use the power of numbers to recapture the ethical principles and norms of the Millennium Declaration.The MDG experience also highlights the limited reach of ethical norms or normative ideas and technocratic knowledge or positive ideas in international policy making. The mdg were powerful and convincing to people  the parliament and publics around the world  because they conveyed a compelling case for ending poverty as an ethical priority. Yet, for the development policy professionals, ethical norms and principles are not convincing arguments to change policy behaviour. They mobilized and invested in implementing the Millennium Declaration by interpreting the mdg as economic policy tools as if they were technocratically constructed. Entrenched in the tradition of a positivist science driven by quantification and evidence, development economists incorporated only chapter  of the  chapters of the Declaration in the mdg, picking out only those objectives which were measurable and for which data were available. The ethical principles laid out in chapter  of the Declaration were forgotten in the spirit of only what can be counted counts.