Reason, Empathy, and Fair Play: The Climate Policy GapExecutive SummaryTo achieve the greatest possible human welfare, the Stockholm Environment Institutes Climate and Regional Economics of Development () model calls for a rapid reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, beginning in the next decade and keeping cumulative st century carbon dioxide emissions below , Gt. This report reveals why  recommends such stringent reductions when some other climate-economics models say that very slow emission reductions are the best policy.Beginning with a Weak Conventional policy  mimicking the basic assumptions used in the wellknown DICE model  we make three successive changes to arrive at a recommendation for immediate, steep emission reductions: Reason: The  Damages policy brings estimates of the economic damages from climate_change in line with the most up-to-date science. Empathy: The Strong Conventional policy adds greater concern about the well-being of future generations. Fair Play: The  Optimal policy adds a third change  rich countries are able and should be willing to invest in emissions and poverty reduction in poorer countries.   The Policy GapWithout a deliberate policy of greenhouse gas reduction, annual CO emissions are expected to more than quadruple over the course of this century. This would imply virtually no chance of keeping temperature increases below C, and a / chance  a coin toss  that temperatures will have grown by more than .C by the end of this century. For a good chance of staying below C of warming, a goal that is widely accepted as a threshold for avoiding dangerous climate impacts, cumulative st century emissions will need to be limited to no more than , Gt CO  of which more than  Gt,  percent of the allowable -year total, were emitted by .Business-As-Usual emissions, in the absence of new climate policies, would total , Gt for the century, with a less than -in-, chance of keeping temperatures below .C of warming. Thus there is a need for policies that can eliminate a staggering , Gt, three-fourths of Business-As-Usual emissions (see Figure ES). A Weak Conventional policy scenario, of the sort modeled in many existing economic analyses, finds that the optimal policy leads to , Gt of cumulative emissions, and has a less than -in-, chance of staying below .C (see Figure ES). Something stronger is needed to hold the -year emissions total far below the Weak Conventional policy scenario.The daunting challenge of reducing emissions rapidly enough to avoid dangerous climate_change is all the more complex because it is inescapably entwined with two other policy dilemmas: How much should we care about, and invest in, the well-being of future generations? And what should we be doing to promote equity and economic development in todays very unequal world economy? Established models of climate economics often seem to ignore both the needs of future generations and the needs of low-income nations today.This report re-examines the economics of climate policy using the  model.  is designed to find an optimal climate policy  one that maximizes human welfare  in a context that recognizes and incorporates the needs of future generations and todays developing nations. We identify the effects on cumulative emissions of a number of policy options and modeling assumptions, leading to construction of a policy scenario that stays below the , Gt ceiling.The optimal policy recommended by  calls for significant investment by high-income regions in developing countries, both to reduce emissions and to promote economic growth; this allows rapid reduction of global emissions and rising per capita incomes in all regions. Per capita incomes and consumption in rich countries continue to rise throughout, although at a slower rate than in the early stages of the no-policy Business-As-Usual scenario.While the Weak Conventional policy scenario is an improvement over Business-As-Usual, it falls far short of what is needed. The reduction from the Weak Conventional to the  Optimal emissions trajectory involves three major steps, drawing on three very different, but equally crucial, arguments (see Box ).Reason: Understanding the ScienceThe first step involves climate science. Greenhouse gas emissions are released into the Earths atmosphere, where, through complex interactions among many non-linear processes, global average temperatures grow warmer, sea levels rise, ocean waters become more acidic, and long-standing weather patterns are altered. These climatic changes are expected to have grave, and in some cases irreversible, effects on both natural ecosystems and human communities.Exactly how much damage would follow from a given level of emissions is a complicated and under-researched question; representations of climate dynamics in economic models often lag behind the latest scientific knowledge. In this regard, three areas of climate science research deserve special mention: uncertainty about climate sensitivity values; the prospect of non-declining temperatures; and the wealth of recent scientific findings regarding climate impacts.The effect of greenhouse gas emissions on global average temperatures is described in terms of climate sensitivity, or the long-term temperature increase resulting from a doubling of the atmospheric concentration of CO. The precise value of climate sensitivity is unknown, but there is an emerging scientific consensus about the probability of various climate sensitivity values. The median estimate of climate sensitivity is often said to be C, with a -inchance that it is greater than about C. In , an emissions scenario with an assumed climate sensitivity of C is said to have a / chance of staying under the maximum temperature that it reaches; an assumed climate sensitivity of about C has a -percent chance of staying under the scenarios maximum temperature, and so on.In the past, many emission-reduction scenarios have involved overshoot, where concentrations and temperatures temporarily exceed long-term goals before declining to the target levels. Recent research regrettably suggests that temperature overshoot scenarios are not possible; regardless of future CO reduction, temperatures will not decline from a past peak for centuries, if not millennia. In our analysis this is addressed by reporting expected temperatures only up to their peak levels.Many climate-economic models are badly out of date in their estimates of expected climate damages. It is unfortunately common to find models still relying on research from the early s, a time when the extent of likely climate damages and the risk of catastrophe were not yet understood, and unrealistically optimistic estimates of agricultural impacts, in particular, were common.  allows a choice of alternative estimates of the relationship between temperature and climate damages; alongside traditional, lower damage estimates, we analyze damage functions that assume a complete collapse of the world economy at aroundC of warming. Introducing this change alone into the Weak Conventional policy scenario inspires much more active policy in order to avoid extreme, high-temperature damages. With more realistic Damages, cumulative st century emissions are reduced to , Gt, with a little better than -in- chance of remaining under .C (see Figure ES).Empathy: Caring about Future GenerationsA second step in emission-reduction results from attitudes toward the future. An important ethical judgment embodied in climate-economics models determines how much weight is given to the interests of future generations. Because the effects of todays emissions will be felt for hundreds, if not thousands, of years, every model must make some assumption about the importance of expected future damages for current-day decision-making.In , as in many other models, this key judgment is represented by the pure rate of time preference, an important component of the discount rate. The pure rate of time preference is the discount rate that would apply if all generations were equally wealthy. (Under the common assumption that future generations will be richer, the discount rate is increased to reflect the expected differences in wealth.)The pure rate of time preference is not a scientific constant; rather, it is an answer to a crucial ethical question: How much should we, as a society, care about the impact of our actions on future generations?Yet the answer to this question has a profound effect on model results. The higher the discount rate, the less important future climate damages are assumed to be for todays decision-makers. At the extremes, a very high discount rate causes a model to ignore any climate damages that occur more than a few decades into the future, whereas at a very low discount rate, climate damages are almost equally important regardless of when they occur.The Weak Conventional and  Damages policy scenarios assume a . percent rate of pure time preference, a common value in economic models. Lowering that rate to . percent, the value adopted by the Stern Review, in combination with the higher damage estimate (economic collapse at C of warming) reduces cumulative st century emissions to , Gt, within sight of the , Gt target. This high damage/ low time preference, or Strong Conventional policy scenario has a somewhat better than / chance of keeping warming under .C (see Figure ES).This might look like a happy ending to this story, except for a lack of realism in the Strong Conventional policy scenario, which assumes that no cross-regional investments or transfers of resources implies that each region is on its own. Poor countries as well as rich ones are expected to look at ominous climate risks through the lens of a low discount rate, and to prioritize investment in emission reduction. Yet countries with limited resources and pressing needs for economic development are unlikely to finance the needed investments in abatement on their own.Fair Play: Prioritizing Equity in Todays WorldA final step toward emission reduction, and toward political feasibility, reflects a commitment to global equity. Climate policies can be judged in terms of their fairness, not only to future generations but also among different world regions and income groups today. How will we spend our , Gt CO  or more precisely, the ,-odd Gt that remain available for the rest of the century? Which countries will use up this remaining budget? And who will pay for the measures necessary to put an end to additional emissions? These questions are at the heart of current climate policy negotiations, but they are too often absent from climateeconomics analysis.Economic models that maximize global welfare, including many climate-economics models, contain a built-in bias toward equalization of incomes. The well-established principle of diminishing marginal utility implies that an additional dollar of income is worth more to a lower-income person or region. So redistribution from rich to poor should increase global welfare  assuming, of course, that the welfare of people everywhere is of comparable worth (a common assumption in applied modeling, although it has long been out of fashion in abstract economic theory).This bias toward equality is hidden in conventional models by a technical device that effectively blocks redistribution, and by the political or institutional assumption that there will be no substantial transfers of resources between regions. , in contrast, allows the extent of cross-regional transfers to vary; the model chooses not only the magnitude and location of the needed investments, but also the source of those investments.CREDs fully unconstrained solution involves massive transfers of resources from rich countries to the rest of the world, funding both emission reduction and economic development. These transfers are so larget high-income per capita consumption drops to the level of middle-income countries, remaining there for decades until an egalitarian rising tide lifts everyones level of consumption. This scenario has both the greatest global human welfare and the best climate outcomes of all the scenarios we have examined; nonetheless, it seems well outside the realm of political feasibility. Therefore, the scenarios discussed here include a constraint that per capita consumption rises, at least gradually, in all regions at all times.The  Optimal policy scenario, modifying the Strong Conventional scenario to allow substantial cross-regional transfers while guaranteeing rising per capita consumption to all, achieves the , Gt target for st century emissions, offering about a -out-ofchance of remaining below C of warming (see Figure ES). Moreover, it greatly reduces global income inequality at the same time. In , per capita consumption was  times higher in the united_states, the richest region, than in Africa or Developing Asia/ Pacific, the poorest regions. That ratio remains roughly unchanged in conventional policy scenarios, but drops to less than  by  in the  Optimal scenario.Assumptions like these  that the whole world shares one set of aspirations and policy priorities, or that climate policy is best examined against a backdrop that freezes the current income distribution, or that high-income regions cannot or will not invest in emissions and poverty reduction in low-income regions  do not represent universally held beliefs. When climate-economics models use these assumptions, it is imperative that their results be accompanied by an explanation of modeling choices, expressed in non-technical terms.  results (summarized in Table ES) demonstrate that modeling choices regarding cross-regional investment affect not only who pays for how much abatement, but also how quickly emission reductions occur, how quickly developing countries are able to raise living standards, and what chance global emission-reduction efforts have at keeping temperature increases below C. For climate-economics models to have policy relevance, a transparent analysis of international equity is essential.Closing the Gap: A Precautionary ResponseThere is no easy solution to the climate crisis. Many economic analyses fail to come to grips with the severity of the problem. For example, CREDs Weak Conventional scenario  based on the modeling choices made in the well-known DICE model  would allow st century emissions of , Gt, with only a -in-, chance of staying below .C of warming. Such scenarios are incompatible with the scientific warnings of widespread, serious damages if warming exceeds C. There are multiple factors that account for this disparity between climate science and climate economics, including: Failure of reason (not understanding or not believing the science)Focusing on the most likely climate sensitivity (that is, the impact of emissions on temperatures) can only tell us so much. The smart gambler never places a bet without first knowing the odds: To make good decisions about an uncertain future, we need to know not only the best guess (/), but also the long shots, such as the -inand the -inoutcomes. Similarly, prudent households and investors often seek to insure themselves against low-probability risks of disastrous losses.Also uncertain is the relationship between temperatures and economic losses. While we will never be able to predict these impacts too exactly, there is no reason to cling to outdated, unduly rosy estimates, rather than following the best, most recent findings of climate scientists. Failure of empathy (not caring about the fate of future generations)A society that cares deeply about the well-being of future generations will embrace a very different climate policy than a society that cant see past the current economic crisis. Which one are we? The longer we take in reducing emissions, the more likely we are to exceed C and bequeath serious economic damages from climate_change to future generations. Failure of fair play (not supporting a solution that is equitable to low-income countries and groups today)Rich countries tend to support plans for emission reductions that are based on the principle of grandfathering: Reductions are tied to historical emissions, so the more youve emitted in the past, the more you get to emit in the future. With a fixed C budget of , Gt CO for the st century, emission reductions are a zero sum game  if one country emits more, other countries must emit less.Developing countries should, and do, object to the logic of grandfathering. Unless rich countries are willing to pay for emission-reduction efforts outside of their borders, the high cost of maintaining or lowering per capita emissions will make it all but impossible for poorer countries to raise living standards. Developing countries are unlikely to direct all of their resources to emission reduction at the expense of poverty reduction; cross-regional transfers are essential to achieving a good chance of staying below C.In the  model, these scientific uncertainties and ethical dilemmas are addressed explicitly, making it possible to test out new values, alone and in combination. The  Optimal scenario, incorporating all of these concerns, produces a successful climate outcome (a less than -inchance of exceeding C) along with a dramatic reduction in global inequality; low-income regions experience rapid growth while high-income regions grow at a slower, gradual pace.Currently, the only existing global policy measure that addresses the climate crisis is voluntary and very small in scale; under the Cancun Agreement, a non-binding agreement adopted in , countries accounting for more than  percent of present-day emissions have submitted voluntary pledges amounting to a cumulative reduction relative to the Business-As-Usual scenario of  Gt by . Because many of these pledges promise reductions with respect to potentially growing business-as-usual emissions, and not with respect to todays emissions, even if all countries carry through with their Cancun pledges global emissions are expected to be higher in  than they are today. The Cancun Agreement, as an agenda for the next decade, does not preclude a / chance of staying below C, but achieving this goal would require deep and sustained postemission reductions.The question then for policy makers and for the public is: What is an acceptable level of risk? What percentage chance of exceeding C are we willing to take on? There is no single right answer, but rather a continuum of choices; a lower probability of dangerous climate_change requires greater and faster reduction in emissions.A precautionary response  limiting our risk of exceeding C to  in  or even lower  requires that global emissions begin to fall rapidly within the next  years. The climate policy gap is not insurmountable, but closing it will require reason, empathy, fair play, and a great deal of political will. The  model offers a framework designed to analyze the full range of relevant, interacting issues.The Policy GapWithout a deliberate policy of greenhouse gas reduction, carbon dioxide (CO) emissions are expected to more than quadruple during this century. Thats the Business-As-Usual scenario  annual CO emissions grow from  gigatons (a gigaton is a thousand million tons, abbreviated Gt) in  up to  Gt in . (Recent estimates suggest that annual CO emissions had already climbed to  Gt in .) If emissions continue to grow at this pace, there is less than a -percent chance of keeping temperature increases below C, a key threshold for dangerous climate_change, and a / chance  a coin toss  that temperatures will have grown by more than .C by the end of this century. At the same time, fundamental differences over who should pay for the costs of climate protection threaten to block any serious international agreement.In this report, results from the Climate and Regional Economics of Development () integrated assessment model are used to illustrate the impacts of high-emission business-as-usual scenarios and lowemission rapid emission-reduction scenarios, as well as other policy options that take a slower path to emission reduction.  was created by the Stockholm Environment Institute in  to bring the analysis of climate economics together with international equity.  allows examination of emission-reduction scenarios and, separately, of who pays for them. (For detailed descriptions of the  model see Ackerman, Stanton and Bueno (a; b).)The importance of limiting global average temperature increases to C to avoid the worst damages from climate_change is widely accepted. The Synthesis Report of the  Copenhagen Climate Congress, for example, states that, While there is not yet a global consensus on what levels of climate_change might be defined to be dangerous, considerable support has developed for containing the rise in global temperature to a maximum of C above pre-industrial levels. ...Beyond C, the possibilities for adaptation of society and ecosystems rapidly decline with an increasing risk of social disruption through health impacts, water shortages and food insecurity.In the climate science literature, projections of unacceptable damages and irreversible changes at C, and even at .C, abound. The  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changes (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report summarized these findings. Among the expected impacts of continued climate_change: The number of people exposed to water stress will triple by ;  to  percent of species will be at risk of extinction by ; human health will suffer; and communities living in coastal lowlands, river deltas, and low-lying islands will be exposed to storm-surge flooding in the short run and permanent inundation in the long run. The most up-to-date compilations of the climate science literature support these findings, highlighting more recent projections of a precipitous decline in agricultural productivity and much more rapid increases in sea level than reported in the IPCCs last assessment.This report approaches emission-reduction goals in terms of a cumulative emissions budget for the st century (with some discussion of the importance of the pace of emissions within that budget). CO persists in the atmosphere for centuries, so the warming that we will experience is roughly proportional to the total emissions over the century. As this report explains, for there to be a very good chance of limiting temperature increases to C and averting the worst climate damages, no more than a cumulative , Gt CO can be released into the atmosphere between  and . (To give this budget some context: More than  Gt had already been released from  to , so the remaining budget is less than , Gt for the next  years.)While the relatively safe level of emissions is , Gt for the century, Business-As-Usual emissions  in the absence of new climate policies  would add up to , Gt, leaving a very large policy gap: A reduction of , Gt below expected Business-As-Usual emissions will be needed to assure the best chance of keeping temperature increases under C (see Figure ).Pictured together with Business-As-Usual emissions in graphs throughout this report is the low-emission,  Optimal scenario, with about a -out-of(-percent) chance of keeping temperature increases below C and a / chance of staying below .C. In this scenario, atmospheric concentrations peak in  at  ppm CO, and cumulative st century emissions are kept within the , Gt budget (see Figure ). It is important to note that cross-regional investment  rich countries sharing their resources with poorer countries  is a critical component of the  Optimal scenario; without these investment flows, it is difficult to envision a successful rapid abatement scenario.With a -out-ofchance of keeping temperatures below C, the  Optimal scenario is the models recommendation of the best course of action given the following basic ground rules regarding reason, empathy, and fair play (see Box ).  Box : Ground Rules for Achieving the  Optimal ScenarioReason: Empathy:Fair Play:Scientists broad consensus on future climate conditions is accurate;Our impact on future generations should be an important consideration in current policymaking; andRich countries have a responsibility to support both economic development and emission reductions in poor countries.With these assumptions in place,  drives down global emissions rapidly and allows incomes to rise in developing countries, while preventing rich countries incomes from falling or stagnating.These two emission scenarios  Business-As-Usual with a less than -percent chance of avoiding the worst damage from climate_change, and  Optimal with an -percent chance  frame the discussion of potential climate policy responses in this report (see Figure ). Between them lies a gaping chasm.As a global society we jointly face the challenge of narrowing this , Gt CO gap. This report looks at existing and proposed climate policies in the context of this emission-reduction gap, and explores the factors that might cause us to choose one policy over another. Climate Economics and Climate PolicyDecision-makers have a difficult mission ahead of them: Not just finding a way to release, fewer gigatons of CO over the next century, but constructing a policy for those emission cuts that every country in the world can agree on. A successful climate action policy will have to be effective, efficient, and equitable  and these essential qualities have requirements that often pull in different directions. To help sort out competing demands, policy makers turn to economists to translate scientists projection of future climatic conditions into estimates of economic losses.Many climate economists use a welfare maximization framework  in effect, a global cost-benefit analysis  to identify a recommended course of action.  uses this approach, as do many other integrated assessment models, including the well-known DICE model., DICE and similar models offer policy advice by calculating what pace of both conventional and emission-reducing investments would result in the greatest global social welfare (measured in terms of consumption per capita) given a set of starting assumptions about: how greenhouse gas emissions relate to global annual average temperature; how temperatures relate to economic damages; the importance given to expected future damages in current-day decision-making; and the degree to which richer countries will share their resources to foster emission reductions in poorer countries.Based on specific values for each of these four assumptions, welfare-maximizing models try out investment and emission-reduction pathways to find the one that results in the greatest social welfare. Any change to these assumptions  all of which involve either deep uncertainty or ethical judgment  means a different optimal result and, therefore, a different policy recommendation. The bottom line: Advice given by climate economists to policy makers is extremely sensitive to some very ad hoc modeling decisions.According to the DICE model, the best climate policy would allow increases in emissions throughout this century, with a / chance that temperatures will exceed .C by . The DICE Optimal scenario recommends an emission pathway that would result in a cumulative , Gt CO emitted during the st century, leaving a policy gap of , Gt above the allowable C budget (see Figure ).  DICE, however, may be unduly optimistic. When the same assumptions used by DICE are modeled in   which includes a more up-to-date representation of the climates physical processes, as well as a more detailed understanding of the costs of emission-reduction technologies  the optimal policy (recommended by  given these starting assumptions) allows even more greenhouse gas emissions.CREDs Weak Conventional scenario  with DICEs high discount rate and relatively mild climate damages, along with no transfers of resources between regions  recommends , Gt in cumulative st century CO emissions, leaving a policy gap of , Gt. The result is a less than -percent chance of keeping temperature increases below C, and a / chance that temperatures will exceed .C by  (see Figures  and ).The Weak Conventional policy prevents , Gt CO from entering the atmosphere, as compared to Business-As-Usual emissions. Thats an important contribution to global emission reductions, but not enough for even a -percent chance of preventing dangerous climate_change. (The Business-As-Usual scenario has a less than -in-, chance of keeping temperature increases below C; the Weak Conventional scenario brings this probability up to a little less than -inchance.)Why would climate-economics models recommend that emissions continue to increase throughout the century? The advice given by these models depends both on choices modelers make about how to represent uncertain future outcomes, and on some sticky ethical dilemmas. Throughout this report we examine how changing these modeling choices affects the policy recommendations taken from climate-economics analysis. Reason, Empathy, Fair PlayThree key modeling choices regarding emissions effect on temperature and temperatures effect on damages are discussed in the next section, Reason: Understanding the Science. Traditionally, most climate models have treated emissions effect on temperature as certain; that is, the most likely effect  that doubling the amount of CO in the atmosphere will increase long-term temperatures by C  is assumed to be the only case worth considering. The relationship between emissions and temperature, however, is not at all certain, but there is a pattern to its uncertainty that  at least in broad strokes  is well understood by climate scientists. In this report, we incorporate the best current understanding of the pattern of emissions-totemperature uncertainty by presenting, for each scenario, the likelihood of varying degrees of warming.Another key finding from climate science is also commonly misrepresented in the models that guide policy makers. Some policy analyses rely on overshoot scenarios that show greenhouse gas concentrations and temperatures first becoming too high and then being brought back down to target levels. Overshoot scenarios cannot work because global average temperatures grow much more easily than they decline. Once a peak temperature is reached, new research suggests that it will not fall for several centuries, even if CO concentrations are lowered substantially.The final disconnect between climate science and climate economics has to do with the relationship between global average temperatures and economic damages, often represented by a damage function. When the DICE damage function is replaced with an estimate that is more in line with recent research, CREDs recommended emission pathway declines sharply. With a more accurate picture of the economic consequences of rising temperatures, climate-economics models recommend faster, deeper cuts in emissions.The next key modeling choice, the importance of future impacts to current decisions, is addressed in the following section, Empathy: Caring about Future Generations. The policy recommendations given by climate-economics models depend strongly on the discount rate, a number that contains a hidden ethical judgment. A component of the discount rate, called the pure rate of time preference, represents modelers best guess about how much our current generation cares about their emissions impacts on future generations. The more we are assumed to care, the more quickly emissions are reduced in the optimal scenario. If we care little about future damages, then  from the perspective of todays decision makers  there is little urgency to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.The final modeling choice, how the burden of paying for emission reductions will be shared, is the topic of the fourth section, Fair Play: Prioritizing Equity in Todays World. While many climate-economics models contain a hidden assumption, implying that todays huge gap between high-income and low-income countries is here to stay,  makes cross-regional transfers an explicit modeling choice. When rich countries invest in emission reduction and economic development abroad, the optimal abatement policy starts out a little slower because more resources are being devoted to raise incomes in the poorest countries. Within a few decades, however, emissions fall sharply enough to meet the cumulative st century budget, and the likelihood of keeping temperatures below C is greater than in scenarios without cross-regional investment. The competing priorities of poor and rich nations are the centerpiece of current international climate negotiations; a good representation of these dynamics is essential to the policy relevance of climate-economics models.The report concludes with the final section, Closing the Gap: A Precautionary Response. The  optimal scenario offers a precautionary  or standards-based  approach to preventing dangerous climate_change that would limit our risk of exceeding C to less than  in , keeping cumulative emissions below , Gt CO. To date, voluntary pledges will result in cumulative global emissions just  Gt lower than in the Business-As-Usual scenario. The remaining policy gap is enormous: , Gt above the C budget. To close this gap well need to take climate science seriously and take a good look at how our actions affect both future generations and near-term poverty reduction efforts.Reason: Understanding the ScienceGreenhouse gas emissions are released into the Earths atmosphere, where, through a complex interaction of many non-linear processes, global average temperatures grow warmer, sea levels rise, ocean waters become more acidic, and long-standing weather patterns are altered. These climatic changes are expected to have grave, and in some cases irreversible, effects on both natural ecosystems and human communities. Even if significant investment were to take place in adapting to new temperatures, sea levels and weather patterns, serious economic damage is the very likely consequence of continued growth in emissions.Exactly how much economic damage would follow from a given level of emissions is a complicated and under-researched question. Both the effect of emissions on temperatures and the effect of temperatures on economic damages are uncertain, and the best scientific knowledge about these uncertainties is often left out of climate-economics models.In this regard, three areas of climate science research deserve special mention for their key importance in estimating economic damages from climate_change, and their poor representation in current climate-economics modeling: The probability distribution of climate sensitivity values; the prospect of nondeclining temperatures; and the wealth of recent scientific findings regarding climate impacts.Climate policy debate, in the united_states and elsewhere, involves a noisy confrontation with the so-called skeptics, whose position is more accurately described as science denial. Conventional economic analysis, in contrast, could be called risk denial  accepting a (very optimistic) picture of the most likely climate outcomes, but paying little or no attention to worst-case risks. When climate economists  and the policy makers they advise  fail to understand the well-established findings of climate science, the result is likely to be too little emission reduction, too late.Climate SensitivityThe effect that greenhouse gas emissions have on the global average temperatures is estimated in terms of climate sensitivity, or the impact that a doubling of the atmospheric concentration of CO has on longterm temperatures. Climate sensitivity is uncertain (its exact value is unknown and perhaps unknowable) but there is an emerging consensus among scientists about the probability of various climate sensitivity values. Put another way, the true value of climate sensitivity is not known, but scientists estimates are converging about the likelihood of any potential value. In broad strokes: The median estimate of climate sensitivity is often said to be C (that is, there is an equal likelihood of the true value being above or below that point), with a -inchance that it is less than C, and a -inchance that it is greater than about C. Recent literature on climate sensitivity has produced a variety of probability distributions that share this same basic shape, but differ in smaller details.Many climate-economics models ignore this uncertainty, and only produce results based on the median, best guess, C climate sensitivity value. The relevance of these climate policy recommendations to realworld decision making is dubious. There is a -percent chance that future emissions will have a stronger effect on temperatures  that is, cause a greater than C increase in temperatures  and a -percent chance that emissions will have a weaker effect. Modeling based on the median climate sensitivity provides a central estimate that may be the best single guess  but, in the absence of information about less likely but far more catastrophic outcomes, how useful is the best guess in making weighty policy decisions? If all decisions were made on the best-guess method, no one would ever buy insurance against any potential loss.In reporting results from the  model, and in scenarios produced by the British governments AVOID program discussed later in this report, climate sensitivity is approached in terms of its probability distribution. Using this method, emission scenarios are referred to as having a / chance of keeping temperatures below the level they reach when using the median C climate sensitivity (and a / chance of exceeding that level). The same emissions scenarios can also be run with other values for climate sensitivity. By varying this key parameter in , climate sensitivity values are identified that keep temperatures below given thresholds (such as C) in . These threshold climate sensitivities are then matched to their probabilities in a well-known climate sensitivity distribution. For example, at the C climate sensitivity, CREDs Business-As-Usual scenario reaches a temperature increase of .C in   so, based on the uncertainty about climate sensitivity, there is a / chance of the Business-As-Usual scenario either exceeding or remaining below this level. In this same scenario, a .C climate sensitivity keeps  temperatures just below C. The probability that the climate sensitivity is .C or lower is . percent (/,th of per cent, or about a -in-, chance), which is the basis for the statement that the Business-As-Usual scenario has less than -percent chance of staying below C.This manner of presenting results puts them in the context of the likelihood of their occurrence: The Business-As-Usual scenario has a less than -percent chance of staying below C and a / chance of staying below .C through . Similarly, if a particular level of risk is deemed acceptable  a / chance of exceeding C, or a -inchance, or a -inchance  then a  model scenario can be tailored to show the pattern of investments that will result in the greatest social welfare while keeping below that threshold of risk. The more difficult question of what level of risk is acceptable is returned to in the final section of this report, which addresses a precautionary approach to forming climate policy.Non-Declining TemperaturesOf the many new and important findings of climate science, one in particular stands out as a game changer. Most current physical and economic models of emission scenarios allow for a process known as overshoot: Atmospheric concentrations of CO rise in this century but then begin to decline again, and global average temperatures fall with them with a lag of, at most, a few decades. In overshoot scenarios, immediate abatement is less urgent because it is assumed to be possible to reverse high concentration levels and bring down temperatures.Regrettably, new research indicates that, while it may be possible to overshoot a concentration target and then bring atmospheric levels back down, temperatures will decline only very slightly as CO concentrations fall. Studies based on several climate models show that temperatures will climb towards a peak determined by the highest CO concentration levels reached and then decline by less than .C  regardless of declining concentrations  for centuries or millennia. In short, global average temperatures will become stuck at roughly the highest level that they reach. A leading cause of this phenomenon is the process of heat exchange with the oceans: as atmospheric concentrations rise and the world warms, the oceans absorb a significant fraction of the increased heat; as concentrations decline, decreases in radiative forcing from greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are offset almost exactly by decreases in the oceans absorption of heat.The importance of this new understanding of the climate system cannot be overstated. There is no wiggle room in climate policy. If greenhouse gas concentrations become too high, extreme emission reductions in later years cannot reverse the process of climate_change  at least not for several centuries. The , Gt budget for st century cumulative CO emissions is all that we have to spend, and in the first decade of the century more than  Gt have already left our wallets. To keep temperature increases below C, global emissions must begin to fall precipitously in the next decade. And climate-economics models must redefine rosy overshoot scenarios as policy failures.Climate DamagesThere is a third important way in which climate-economics models have fallen behind the best understanding of climate scientists. In DICE, and in other prominent models like PAGE and FUND, assumptions made about the relationship between temperature and economic damages are significantly out of date.In DICE the share of global economic output lost at various levels of temperature increase is as follows: If global average temperatures increase by .C, climate damages are modeled as equaling just under  percent of world output; this is extrapolated to higher temperatures using a simple, arbitrarily chosen algebraic function, which implies that damages do not reach half of world output until a C increase.DICE damages do a poor job of representing the current projections made by climate scientists. An example may help illustrate just how big this disconnect is. If temperatures were to increase by C some regions of the world would become uninhabitable without air conditioning. At C increase, all of the most populous regions of the world would be uninhabitable without air conditioning. Today, . billion people, nearly two-fifth of the worlds population, subsist on less than $ a year. For this enormous swath of the population, most of whom live in hot, tropical countries, purchasing an air conditioner is simply out of the question; indeed, one-fifth of the world population still does not have access to electricity. A C increase in temperatures would mean that human beings could no longer live in most developing countries; the economic consequences of such a future would be nothing short of devastating. In the more severe damage estimates used in , we have taken this to mean that C would cause the near-complete destruction of the world economy.The  model allows a range of temperature-to-damage relationships to be represented.  can be run using the DICE formulation of climate damages. The Weak Conventional policy, using DICE modeling choices including its damage parameters, results in , Gt CO in cumulative st century emissions and a , Gt policy gap (see Figure  in the first section). The Weak Conventional policy is based on the assumption of a high discount rate, the modest DICE estimate of damages, and no transfer of resources between regions. can also use parameter combinations that result in damages that are much more consistent with current scientific findings. Less severe DICE damages can be replaced by more severe  damages while maintaining all other DICE modeling choices.  damages reach . percent of global output at .C,  percent at C, and  percent at C.Where the Weak Conventional scenario allows a cumulative , Gt CO, this one change in modeling assumptions brings that recommendation down to , Gt in the  Damages scenario. Instead of a little less than -in-, chance of staying below C with the DICE damage function, the  damage function returns a better than -inchance (. percent) of staying below C and a / chance of keeping temperature increases below .C in  (see Figures  and ).As a result, CREDs annual emission pathway increases much more slowly and begins to decline around . While, following this policy advice, the pace of emission reductions would still be far too slow for the best chance of staying below C, the scenarios compared here demonstrate the importance of modeling choices that are fully at the discretion of the economists who design these models. The difference between the recommendations based on the most commonly used damage function in the literature and a damage function reflecting catastrophic risks, implied by the latest climate science, is , Gt CO during the st century.   Empathy: Caring about Future GenerationsRepresenting the best scientific knowledge is not the only way in which climate-economics models are falling short: An important ethical judgment call embodied in these models is frequently made in a way that effectively dismisses the interests of future generations. Because the effects of todays emissions will be felt for hundreds, if not thousands, of years, every model must make some assumption about the importance that expected future damages are given in current-day decision-making.In , as in many other models, this key judgment is represented by the pure rate of time preference, an important component of the discount rate. The pure rate of time preference is the discount rate that would apply if all generations were equally wealthy. Under the common assumption that future generations will be richer, the discount rate is increased to reflect the expected differences in wealth. (For reference, under both  and DICE default assumptions the discount rate is equal to the pure rate of time preference plus double the long-term rate of economic growth; in both models, that long-term growth rate is about . percent.)The higher the discount rate, the less importance far-future climate damages are assumed to have to todays decision-makers. At the extremes, a very high discount rate causes the model to ignore any climate damages that occur more than a few decades into the future, whereas at a very low discount rate, climate damages are almost equally important to decision-making regardless of when they occur. The  policy scenarios in this report explore pure rates of time preference from . percent  the value used in the influential, and controversial, Stern Report  to . percent  the value used in the ubiquitous DICE model. As a quick rule of thumb: The higher the pure rate of time preference, the slower the emission reductions in the optimal policy scenario recommended by the model as leading to the greatest social welfare.There is no scientific standard for the pure rate of time preference. Its uncertain value is better thought of as the answer to a crucial ethical question:How much should we, as a society, care about the impact of our actions on future generations?High discount rate: When the pure rate of time preference is set to the DICE default of. percent (with the more severe  damage function described in the previous section), there is a somewhat better than -inchance (. percent) that temperature increases will stay below C. Cumulative emissions for the st century reach , Gt CO, greatly exceeding the , Gt budget (see the  Damages scenario in Figures  and  in the second section).Low discount rate: When the pure rate of time preference is lowered to . percent, CREDs Strong Conventional policy calls for still more rapid emissions cuts. With this scenario, there is a better than / chance (-percent) of success in keeping temperature increases below C (see Figures  and ). With a low discount rate, more severe damages, and no transfer of resources between countries, this Strong Conventional scenario is the most that the  model can do to reduce the risk of exceeding C without addressing issues of emissions abatement equity: , Gt CO in cumulative st century emissions  a  Gt policy gap.In making decisions about how to respond to climate_change, we have no choice but to look ahead towards future impacts. But how far ahead do we care to look? Hundreds of years? A few generations? The next election cycle, or the next news cycle? Our climate policy actions will be very different depending on our answer to this question. Using a low . percent pure rate of time preference in modeling does not mean that we treat the concerns of future generations as equally important to our own (recall that the discount rate includes an additional term for economic growth, implying that the richer that future generations become, the less we need to worry about them today), but it does extend our horizon, allowing us to see and react to future damages that are greatly obscured by a relatively high .-percent rate.The final Strong Conventional scenario presented in this section might appear to be the solution: With high estimates of future damages and low time preference, the optimal global policy closely approaches the , Gt budget for the century and has a strong probability of staying below oC. But a closer look reveals the lack of realism in that scenario. If future damages are high and the importance of the future is also high (due to a low rate of time preference), then the optimal policy is for every country to prioritize emission reduction over immediate economic growth. This is economically feasible (which is not to say that it is politically easy, or guaranteed to succeed) in high-income countries. For low-income countries, the greater urgency of immediate consumption and economic growth makes it essentially impossible for domestic savings alone to fund the level of investment needed to protect future generations. This brings into question the feasibility of rapid abatement scenarios in which cross-regional investment is banned or otherwise assumed impossible.The underlying problem is that climate solutions must be created in the context of an extremely unequal world, requiring coordination across countries with widely differing resources and national interests. This crucial issue is the subject of the next section.Fair Play: Prioritizing Equity in Todays WorldA final important modeling choice affects the recommendations given by climate-economics models. Keeping st century CO emissions down to , Gt means both that rich countries must lower their high emissions intensity  or CO emissions per dollar of economic output  and poorer countries must find a way to maintain, or ratchet down, their already low emissions per dollar.Two problems emerge. First, developing and installing low-carbon technologies requires upfront investments. In low-income countries, purchases of these technologies  especially where the present-day physical and knowledge-based infrastructure is not consistent with local production of products like solar panels, wind turbines, or electric cars  may come at the expense of slowing down economic development and derailing poverty reduction measures.Second, there is no roadmap for transforming a resource-dependent low-income economy into a low-carbon technology and services-dependent high-income economy. Its simply never been done. All countries that have achieved high living standards (measured in terms of GDP per capita, life expectancy, and literacy rates) owe their success to fossil fuels, and have far higher emissions per dollar than todays developing countries could possibly obtain under the st century emissions budget of , Gt CO.Climate policies can be judged in terms of their fairness, not only to future generations (discussed in the previous section) but also among todays different world regions and income groups. How will we spend our , Gt CO  or more precisely, the ,-odd Gt that remain available for the rest of the century? Which countries will use up this remaining budget? And who will pay for the measures necessary to put an end to additional emissions? These questions are at the heart of current climate policy negotiations, but they are too often absent from climate-economics analysis.Some models look at the world as a single actor; there is no push and pull regarding the interests of different countries or income groups because there is only one country: the world as a whole. These singleworld-region models can provide little assistance in addressing issues of global compromise among groups with disparate priorities.Other climate-economics models divide the world into multiple regions, usually by geography and development status; in these models, the optimal policy is the investment and emissions pathway that brings about the greatest global social welfare, totaled across all regions. Working with this multi-region structure leads to a surprising discovery that echoes the findings of early th century economists: Unless constrained to do otherwise, these models will reduce investment in rich regions in order to give as much standard and low-carbon investment as possible to poorer countries. The result: The optimal policy includes a rapid redistribution of income, taken from the rich and invested in the poor.The reason behind this massive redistribution of resources is simple and well understood. With remarkably few exceptions, economic models include the assumption that a new dollar of income will do more to increase the well-being of a poor person than of a rich person. In welfare-maximizing climate-economics models, the one and only goal is to raise social welfare. And since transferring income from rich to poor regions increases welfare, that  together with emission reductions  is what an unconstrained model would offer as a policy recommendation. Yet almost all multi-regional welfare-maximizing climate-economics models contain a hidden constraint that keeps the ratio of rich-to-poor country per capita income roughly constant over time, preventing any redistribution of resources. To put this in the context of climate policy negotiations, these models assume that high-income countries cannot (or will not) contribute a portion of their resources to invest in greenhouse gas abatement in poorer countries. is unusual in that it does not prevent income redistribution, and, if run without any constraints at all, its optimal policy is always for rich countries to invest a large share of their savings in poorer countries, both for economic development and for emission reductions. In fact, CREDs imperative to increase social welfare by equalizing income levels around the world is so strong that it calls for policy measures that seem politically unfeasible. For that reason, all of the  scenarios discussed in this report include the constraint that no regions consumption per capita may decrease over time  an assumption that still allows for income redistribution and poverty reduction, but at a much slower pace.With all regions per capita consumption prevented from decreasing,  also allows for a choice of the maximum fraction of output (net of damages) that rich regions will provide for investment in poorer countries. In all of the  scenarios reviewed so far, this value has been set to zero  in essence, every region is on its own when it comes to paying for emission reductions. With no cross-regional investment and using the more severe  damage function and low .-percent pure rate of time preference discussed in the previous sections, CREDs Strong Conventional policy recommends an emissions pathway with , Gt CO in st century cumulative emissions and a more than / chance ( percent) of staying below C (see Figures  and  in the previous section).When this restriction is lifted, allowing regions to invest up to  percent of their net output in their poorer neighbors, the  Optimal policy amounts to just , Gt in st century cumulative emissions, keeping within the budget for avoiding dangerous climate_change (Figures  and  in the first section). This small, but important, decrease in cumulative emissions  as compared to the Strong Conventional policy masks some of the larger differences between these two scenarios: global damages from climate_change are smaller under the  Optimal policy, and there is a far better chance ( percent compared to  percent) of staying below C. Moreover, as noted above, the  Optimal policy models a process that could actually fund the needed emission reductions; in contrast, the Strong Conventional policy requires an unrealistic level of investment in abatement by low-income countries.There are two key differences between the Strong Conventional (-percent-chance) scenario with no cross-regional investment and the  Optimal (-percent-chance) scenario with up to  percent of rich regions net output invested in poorer regions: the pace of emission reductions, and the pace of poverty reduction.The Pace of Emission ReductionThe first important difference that sets the  Optimal policy apart from the Strong Conventional policy is the pace of global emission reduction. When cross-regional investment is permitted, emissions fall more slowly in the next twenty years. In selecting the investment and emission-reductions pathway that maximizes social welfare, the  model prioritizes early standard (not related to abatement) investment in developing countries, increasing these regions income per capita, and then after a few decades shifts more of the investment funds received from richer countries towards emission abatement (see annual emissions in Figure ).The Pace of Poverty ReductionIn addition to the pace of global emission reductions, there is a second critical difference between the scenarios that allow cross-regional investments and those that do not. Todays high-income countries per capita consumption (on average, $,) is about  times higher than that of low-income countries (on average, $,). In the Strong Conventional scenario, with a -percent chance of staying below C, this ratio creeps up to  over the next century (see Figure ; regions are defined in Table ). At the end of the century, average consumption (in todays dollars) is $, per person in rich regions and $, in poorer regions. When the cap on cross-regional investment is increased from zero in the Strong Conventional policy to -percent of rich countries output in the  Optimal policy, the ratio of incomes falls steadily, approaching  by  ($, versus $,).Table  compares consumption per capita in the nine  regions. In , average consumption per capita in the richest region, the united_states, was  times higher than in the poorest regions  Africa and Developing Asia/Pacific.In the Strong Conventional scenario, with no cross-regional investment, consumption per capita grows in all regions but the ratio of the U.S. to the poorest regions stays about constant. In contrast, in the  Optimal scenario, where cross-regional transfers are assumed possible, U.S. consumption per capita in  drops to only about  times higher than that of Africa or Developing Asia/Pacific.  Deciding how investment resources will be shared among world regions is critical to the progress of global climate negotiations, and just as critical to climate economists policy recommendations. While there is no correct answer to how much each country should pay towards global emission reductions, both at home and abroad, the assumption that no cross-regional transfers will take place (endemic in climateeconomics models) is neither transparent nor particularly helpful.Assumptions like these  that the whole world shares one set of aspirations and policy priorities, or that climate policy is best examined against a backdrop that freezes the current income distribution, or that high-income regions cannot or will not invest in emissions and poverty reduction in low-income regions  do not represent universally held beliefs. When climate-economics models use these assumptions, it is imperative that their results be accompanied by an explanation of modeling choices, expressed in nontechnical terms.  results demonstrate that modeling choices regarding cross-regional investment affect not only who pays for how much abatement, but also how quickly emission reductions occur, how quickly developing countries are able to raise living standards, and what chance global emission-reduction efforts have at keeping temperature increases below C. For climate-economics models to have policy relevance, a transparent analysis of international equity is essential.Closing the Gap: A Precautionary ResponseThere is no easy solution to the climate problem. Cut emissions, yes, but who will cut them how much by when? And who will pay for those reductions? Where multiple interest groups have competing demands, policy makers often turn to economists to provide guidance on these complicated decisions. Many prominent climate-economics models use a form of cost-benefit analysis called welfare maximization to map out the future investments and emission reductions that are expected to result in the greatest social welfare. According to the well-known DICE model, the best climate policy would allow for emissions to continue to increase throughout the st century, adding an additional , Gt CO to the atmosphere in that period and resulting in a / chance that temperatures will grow more than .C by . (And our re-analysis of the DICE default assumptions in  resulted in an even less ambitious emission-reduction policy.)While their model structures are not strictly comparable, the well-known PAGE and FUND models make similar modeling choices and come to similar conclusions. A recent U.S. government study assigns a common discount rate to all three models and then compares them in terms of their estimated social cost of carbon (that is, the long-term damage consequences associated with a one-ton increase in CO emissions; for the  social costs of carbon implied by the  scenarios presented in this report, see Appendix B). The higher the social cost of carbon, the deeper and faster the recommended emission reductions. The DICE model reports a  social cost of carbon of $; PAGE, $; and FUND, $. The three-model average of $ has been adopted for use as a price for carbon in U.S. federal environmental regulation. With a carbon price this low, emission reductions will be slow, small and insufficient to stay below the C threshold.In a reanalysis of the U.S. governments social cost of carbon using the DICE model we found that introducing some of the factors discussed here, such as the more severe damage function, resulted in social cost of carbon values up to $ for . At carbon prices this high, any feasible emission-reduction strategy becomes cost effective. The policy recommendations taken from these commonly used models are difficult to reconcile with the projections of climate scientists, who call for immediate emission reductions to prevent global average temperatures from growing any more than C above preindustrial levels. The difference is stark: Climate economists who recommend a policy with a -percent chance that temperature increases will exceed .C by  and then keep on rising, versus climate scientists who predict widespread, serious damages  including many irreversible losses  if temperature increases exceed C. Recent climate science also reveals that if emission reductions do not move quickly enough and the C threshold is crossed, it will not be possible to bring temperatures back down for at least several centuries, even if atmospheric concentrations are later reduced.Box : Important Dynamics in Current Climate PolicyFailure of reason (not understanding or not believing the science):Focusing on the most likely climate sensitivity (that is, the impact of emissions on temperatures) can only tell us so much. The smart gambler never places a bet without first knowing the odds: To make good decisions about an uncertain future, we need to know not only the best guess (/), but also the long shots, such as the -inand the -inoutcomes. Similarly, prudent households and investors often seek to insure themselves against low-probability risks of disastrous losses.Also uncertain is the relationship between temperatures and economic losses. While we will never be able to predict these impacts too exactly, there is no reason to cling to outdated, unduly rosy estimates, rather than following the best, most recent findings of climate scientists.Failure of empathy (not caring about the fate of future generations):A society that cares deeply about the well-being of future generations will embrace a very different climate policy than a society that cant see past the current economic crisis. Which one are we? The longer we take in reducing emissions, the more likely we are to exceed C and bequeath serious economic damages from climate_change to future generations.Failure of fair play (not supporting a solution that is equitable to low-income countries and groups today):Rich countries tend to support plans for emission reductions that are based on the principle of grandfathering: Reductions are tied to historical emissions, so the more youve emitted in the past, the more you get to emit in the future. With a fixed C budget of , Gt CO for the st century, emission reductions are a zero sum game  if one country emits more, other countries must emit less.Developing countries should, and do, object to the logic of grandfathering. Unless rich countries are willing to pay for emission-reduction efforts outside of their borders, the high cost of maintaining or lowering per capita emissions will make it all but impossible for poorer countries to raise living standards. Developing countries are unlikely to direct all of their resources to emission reduction at the expense of poverty reduction; cross-regional transfers are essential to achieving a good chance of staying below C.  This report examines the factors that cause climate-economics models to recommend policies that do not reflect climate scientists urgent call for action. These are important elements in the dynamics of current climate policy negotiations, and at the same time key modeling parameters used in climate-economics analysis: a failure of reason, a failure of empathy, and a failure of fair play (see Box ).In the  model, these scientific uncertainties and ethical dilemmas are expressed explicitly, making it possible to test out new values, alone and in combination. Taken together, these adjustments result in climate policy recommendations that have a / chance of staying below C. When, in addition, rich countries are assumed to share resources with their poorer neighbors, the result is poverty alleviation, emission reduction, and an even better chance   out of   of keeping temperature increases below the critical C level.Cancun AgreementThere is a , Gt CO policy gap between Business-As-Usual st century cumulative emissions and the maximum emissions consistent with keeping the chance of exceeding C down to  in . The only existing global policy measure that addresses that gap is voluntary and very small in scale. The second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol will come to a close in  or . Beyond that date there is only the  Cancun Agreement, a non-binding agreement of the delegates to the th session of the united_nations Framework Convention on Climate Changes Conference of Parties. (The  Durban Agreement does not include any additional emission reductions.) Under this Agreement, countries accounting for more than  percent of present-day emissions have submitted voluntary pledges to reduce emissions through .Many of these pledges, however, promise reductions not with respect to todays emissions, but instead with respect to potential business-as-usual emissions. As a result, even if all countries carry through with their Cancun pledges, global emissions are expected to be higher in  than they are today. A / chance of staying below C would require deep and sustained postemission reductions. The cumulative reduction relative to Business-AsUsual is  Gt by  (see Figure ).In the post-Cancun Agreement scenario depicted here, emissions are permitted to rise through to levels consistent with pledges. After , global emissions are modeled as falling by  percent every year. Cumulative st century CO emissions stay under the , Gt limit, and research from the British governments AVOID program projects that this scenario has a -percent chance of keeping temperature increases below C. This is a much lower chance than for our , Gt  Optimal scenario described in the first section (see Figures  and ), with an -percent chance of keeping temperature increases below C; a likely explanation is that the Cancun-AVOID scenario emissions are front-loaded. With more of the , Gt of emissions released into the atmosphere earlier, the Cancun-AVOID scenario allows somewhat more warming to occur over the course of the century.Unfortunately, the AVOID research  and that of other research groups that have come to similar conclusions, including the united_nations Environment Program and the European Climate Foundation  can tell us little about the chances for success of the Cancun Agreement itself. The best that can be said about the Agreement is that the global emissions increase that it permits through  does not render the goal of staying below C impossible.No global accord exists, voluntary or otherwise, to restrict emissions after , much less to organize the ambitious annual -percent decrease required in AVOIDs postCancun scenario. Indeed, that studys authors state: The  pledges alone and no further cuts after  are very unlikely to limit the global temperature rises to C in  let alone beyond . ...The current  target is a significant first step. It is still feasible to limit warming to C, with a -percent probability, but it would be extremely challenging and depend on substantial cuts in global emissions after .In the short period covered by the Agreement, the Cancun pledges result in cumulative emissions  Gt CO lower than the Business-As-usual Scenario. The remaining policy action required to avoid the worst climate damages  , Gt in emission cuts  is not addressed by any global policy measure (see Figure  where the solid red line shows the emissions expected to result from the Cancun Agreement and the dotted red line shows the subsequent emissions necessary for a / chance of keeping temperatures under C).Closing the Policy GapCost-benefit, or welfare maximization, models are not the only way that climate economists can contribute their expertise to the climate policy debate. Other modelers follow a standards-based or precautionary approach using cost-effectiveness analysis. Using a standards-based approach a threshold is set, such as a C maximum temperature increase, and then the model identifies the least-expensive investment and emissions pathway consistent with that threshold. (The  model can be used either as a cost-benefit or a standards-based model.) The pace of emission reduction depends on the level of risk considered acceptable: A -inchance of exceeding C would require quicker and deeper emissions cuts than would a -in(or /) chance.The question then for policy makers and for the public is: What is an acceptable level of risk? What percentage chance of exceeding C are we willing to take on?According to the  model, limiting the chance of exceeding C to  in  would require that emissions be kept under a cumulative , Gt CO during the st century. Policies that are still more risk-averse, accepting only a -inchance of exceeding C, for example, would require still lower emissions. An equitable climate policy  one that allows both for adequate emission reduction and for economic development in poor countries  would require rich countries to accept a slower pace of economic growth at home in order to invest in development and emission-reduction measures in the developing world. Without these cross-regional transfers poor countries are unlikely to both keep their emissions low and increase standards of living.The Cancun Agreement, which addresses climate policy only through , will reduce cumulative emissions by about  Gt CO compared to a business-as-usual scenario; even if those emission reductions continued for the rest of century (which is not guaranteed by the Agreement), most of the policy gap would remain to be addressed by other measures. If we take climate science seriously, care about the well-being of future generations, and want to make sure that developing countries have the opportunity to reduce poverty, then well close that gap. Too often, climate-economics models implicitly assume that we dont believe the science, care only about the most immediate impacts, and think that every country must pay for its own emission-reduction measures. As a result, these models recommend an optimal policy that allows emissions to keep growing throughout this century.A precautionary response  limiting our risk of exceeding C to  in  or even lower  requires that global emissions begin to fall rapidly within the next  years. The climate policy gap is not insurmountable, but closing it will require reason, empathy, fair play, and a great deal of political will.Appendix B:  ScenariosEach  scenario shown in this report employs the model structure and data described in Appendix A; scenarios differ in only a few key parameters: the damage parameters; the pure rate of time preference (PRTP), and the maximum share of each regions output that can be transferred to investment in other regions.Table B-:  scenarios used in this reportBusiness-As-Usual Scenario: Business-as-usual scenarios have an additional difference from standard  runs: green investment (emissions abatement) is set to zero. Damages occur, reducing output, but the only tool that  can employ in maximizing utility is to increase or decrease standard investment in each region. In this report, the Business-As-Usual scenario is modeled with an NN damage function (the most optimistic  damage function, which is identical to the DICE  damage function; see Appendix A) and a PRTP of . percent. In this scenario, there is a less than -percent chance of keeping year  temperature increases below C, and only a / chance of keeping temperatures below .C. At the median climate sensitivity value  .C  the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide reaches  ppm by the end of the century; temperatures and concentrations continue to increase throughout the modeling period. In CREDs Business-as-Usual scenario, the social cost of carbon (SCC)  or the additional damages that occur as the result of adding one more ton of CO emissions in   is $.Weak Conventional Scenario:  can be used to approximate DICE  global modeling choices by using the optimistic NN damage function, a PRTP of . percent, and no transfer of funds for cross-region investments. Unlike the Business-As-Usual scenario, this Weak Conventional run  and all other  policy runs  allows for investment in abatement measures. Nonetheless, with these parameter choices there is still less than a -percent chance of keeping temperature increase below C; temperatures and concentrations continue to increase throughout the modeling period, with a / change of staying below .C. The  SCC for the Weak Conventional scenario is $, quite close to the Business-as-Usual value. Because the Business-as-Usual and Weak Conventional scenarios share the same damage function and PRTP, their SCCs are directly comparable. One might expect the Weak Conventional scenario to have a much lower SCC due to its lower future emissions (and therefore lower damages); reasons why the SCC might be relatively insensitive to changes in emissions and damages are discussed in (Hope ). Damages Scenario: By our reading, the HW damage function is  among the four sets of damage function parameters discussed in Appendix A  the most consistent with climate impacts projected in the current climate science literature (Ackerman and Stanton b). In the  Damages scenario  using HW damages, disallowing cross-regional investment, and employing a .-percent PRTP  there is a . percent chance of staying below C and a / chance of staying below .C. The  SCC for the  Damages scenario is $. Due to the substantial change in damage functions, the SCC for this and the following scenarios are not directly comparable to the values for the Business-As-Usual and Weak Conventional scenarios.Strong Conventional Scenario: At a PRTP of . percent  the value used in the Stern Report ()  full abatement in the Strong Conventional scenario occurs in  and the chance of staying below C increases to -percent. This is the first of the scenarios presented in which full abatement of emissions occurs; global emissions fall to zero by . The  SCC for the Strong Conventional scenario is $. Note that the  Damages and Strong Conventional Scenarios differ only in their discount rates: the smaller the PRTP, the larger the SCC. Optimal Scenario: Introducing the option of cross-region investment allows richer regions to invest in abatement at a lower cost than they would face if restricted to domestic measures. In the  Optimal scenario high as  percent  full abatement takes place in . There is an -percent chance of keeping temperature increases below C and a / chance of staying below .C. The  SCC for the  Optimal scenario is $. The Strong Conventional and  Optimal scenarios differ only in the level of cross-regional investment; the greater transfer of resources between regions permitted in the  Optimal scenario has the effect of significantly reducing the SCC (as a result of lower future emissions and damages). In both of these scenarios, temperatures peak and then fall  a result that is not relevant to cumulative emissions and the percentage change of keeping temperatures below C, but has an important impact on SCC values. If the climate module were redesigned to prevent temperatures from declining as a result of falling CO concentrations, SCC values for both the Strong Conventional and  Optimal scenarios would be higher.  Appendix C: Climate Sensitivity in  scenariosThroughout this analysis, .C is taken to be the best guess, or th percentile value, for the climate sensitivity parameter; that estimate means that a doubling of pre-industrial CO is expected to cause a long-term equilibrium increase of .C in global average temperature.  v.. employs the Murphy, et al. () climate sensitivity distribution shown below.Figure C-: Murphy, et al. climate sensitivity distributionFor each scenario, we calculate the temperature it reaches by  using the median (C) climate sensitivity, and report that the scenario has a / chance of staying below that temperature.Scenarios are then run repeatedly, varying the climate sensitivity parameter. Climate sensitivity is changed in .C increments to find the lowest climate sensitivity for which year  temperature increases exceed .C. The percentile position of that climate sensitivity, in the probability distribution shown above, is recorded as the probability of staying below .C. Analogous calculations can be done for the probability of staying below other temperature limits. For example, in the Business-As-Usual scenario  temperatures exceed .C at climate sensitivity .C. This climate sensitivity corresponds to the th percentile on the Murphy, et al. probability distribution.   Appendix D: Other Key ScenariosThis report includes discussion of two nonscenarios, described here.Table : Nonscenarios. CopenhagenUNEP () estimated that global emissions in   given the Cancun pledges  will fall between . and . Gt CO-e. The UK governments AVOID program narrowed this range to between . and . Gt CO-e (Lowe, et al. ), and introduced two emission trajectories that are consistent with a / chance of keeping  temperature increases under C; these scenarios have cumulative emissions of , and , Gt CO-e from  to .In this report we approximate the Lowe, et al. emissions trajectories as follows: Excluding non-CO emissions, Cancun pledge-compliant global emissions are given a central estimate of  Gt CO in , with  percent reductions in each subsequent year. The result is a twenty-first century cumulative emissions total of , Gt CO.. DICE OptimalEmissions for the DICE  Optimal scenario are taken from Table in Nordhaus (). In this scenario, temperature increases reach .C by  at a climate sensitivity of .C and continue to rise thereafter (Nordhaus , Table -). In , the DICE parameters (NN damage function, .-percent PRTP) result in still worse increases in temperature, as seen in CREDs Weak Conventional scenario (in Appendix B, Table , above): .C by , at a climate sensitivity of .C, and much less than one percent chance of keeping temperature increases below .C.