I IntroductionThis paper contributes towards the conversation on the postglobal development brought together by the Development Policy and Analysis Division (DPAD) of the desa (DESA), by discussing recent trends of the Brazilian economy and the policy agenda for a sustainable_development strategy. In the last two decades, the country was able to circumvent secular obstacles to economic development and social welfare, but macroeconomic performance has been somewhat frustrating, particularly in what concerns investment and growth.The paper reviews the achievements and pitfalls of Brazilian development in the last decades. Major achievements are related to the inclusive growth process reflected in the eradication of poverty, redistribution of income, and the exceptional performance of the labor market. Pitfalls include persistent fiscal weaknesses and exorbitant interest rates which lie at the root of low investment rates and sluggish growth.The first section describes the Brazilian macroeconomic performance in the last decade. Export growth and terms of trade improvements were the engines of growth of Brazilian economy during the period. The terms of trade improvements made income grow much faster than output, thus raising questions regarding sustainability in case of their deterioration.The second section reviews the social achievements since , and pays special attention to the policies used to combat poverty and the factors behind the improvements in the labor market.The third section analyzes the impacts of the ongoing global economic crisis on the Brazilian economy and the ensuing policy reactions that managed to recover consumption but failed to sustain investment and growth in the medium run. Big mistakes included industrial policies implemented through Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) and the government dubieties in what concerns concessions in infrastructure.The fourth and the last section of the paper discusses the main challenges for a sustainable_development strategy. The consensual policy advice is to increase productivity growth through investment in education and infrastructure, with particular emphasis on transportation and energy. However, there are disagreements and controversies with regards to industrial policies, financing strategies and the role to be played by the public sector.II The Brazilian macroeconomic performance in the last decadeBrazil has had major macroeconomic and social achievements in the last two decades. Price stabilization and liberal reforms in the late-nineties followed by adjustment of fiscal and external imbalances during the s paved the way for growth recovery after decades of stagnation.The main sources of growth in the last decade came from the favorable winds of the international economy and China, in particular. The combination of commodity exports and government policies sustained an inclusive growth process with remarkable reductions in both concentration of income and poverty incidence. The emerging middle class enlarged the domestic market. Brazils future challenges will be how to sustain growth in a less auspicious international scenario and with the growing costs of redistribution.Figure  summarizes Brazils macroeconomic performance since  when the growth was unstable. The low growth rates at the beginning of the period are associated with the energy crisis in  and with the high interest rates required to curb exchange rate speculation triggered by the rise of the Workers Party to government in . After financial markets calmed down, the economy experienced five bright years of investment led growth. Recovery was aborted by the global economic crisis in  and since then the economy experienced wild fluctuations with fading growth prospects. The deceleration of the world economy, and particularly of China, more recently, were decisive for the slowdown of the Brazilian economy, but misguided policy reactions also played an important role.Figure  shows the inflation performance of the last decade. In  hyperinflation was tamed but stabilization lacked fiscal foundations. Inflation rates were only kept under control by the exchange rate anchor leading to the overvaluation that culminated in the Brazilian debt crisis by the end of . An inflation target framework with flexible exchange ratesFigure was put in place but inflation rates in the next three years escalated to the two-digit level. The justifications for the failure to control inflation are exchange rate devaluation in , the energy crisis in , and the exchange rate speculation preceding Presidential election in .After , tight monetary and fiscal policies brought down inflation rates to more moderate levels of around % p.a. where they still linger (Aragon and Medeiros ). Real interest rates were raised to % in  and gradually declined to % in . Fiscal policies maintained the primary surplus of the Public Sector Borrowing Requirements (PSBR) above % of GDP in the first three years and above % of GDP in the next three. High interest rates, however, precluded the reduction in the nominal deficit of the PSBR as interest payments remained close to % of GDP.Growth possibilities during most of the last decade were jeopardized by the high real interest rates and the vacillations in the fiscal adjustment process (Werneck ). High real interest rates are a puzzling aspect of the Brazilian economy with no convincing explanation yet. The popular hypotheses among analysts are (a) the high levels of public sector borrowing requirements (PSBR)pointing to the nominal concept (and the public debt) to emphasise the financial disequilibrium, or to the primary concept to emphasize the real disequilibrium; (b) the excessive segmentation, regulation and taxation of financial activities including foreign exchange transactions; (c) the lasting memory of the hyperinflation years and its consequences on price indexation which undermine the efficacy of interest rates and introduces uncertainties associated with high inter-temporal elasticity of substitution in consumption; and (d) the juridical uncertainties associated with an institutional context where property rights are weakly enforced thus impairing the recovery of unpaid loans (Arida, Bacha et al. , Bacha , Goldfajn and Bicalho , Lopes ).The major drawback of fiscal expansion in the last decades was probably the steady growth of current expenditures in detriment of the badly needed public investment in infrastructure. From  to , primary expenditure of the federal government (excluding state owned enterprises) as a percentage of GDP went up from .% to .% while investments showed a meager increase from .% to .% of GDP (Giambiagi and Muinhos )..To be fair, in recent years, the growth of current expenditure is largely explained by expenditures in education (Almeida ). The main problems, however, are hidden in the off-budget transfers to public banks (Werneck ).The aggravating factor was the steady growth of taxation which during the same period went up from % to % of GDP. A large part of the increased burden has to do with social security and other transfers to the private sector. Indeed, the net burden of taxation showed a relatively small increase going up from % of GDP in  to % of GDP in . Despite that, high taxation and deficient infrastructure are the fundamental constraints to higher rates of private investment in Brazil (Bicalho and Issler ).Growth in the last decade was propelled by the favorable conditions of international trade and financial markets (Teles and Mendonca ). Iron, ore, and soybean made the Brazilian economy one of the major beneficiaries of Chinese growth in the last decade. Figure  shows that from  to  the terms of trade improved . times while the dollar value of exports grew  times (.% p.a.). In the same period, export to China increased  times (% p.a.) and her share of Brazilian exports went up from .% to %.The bright export performance was carried to the current account surplus, reserve accumulation and debt reduction. The correction of trade imbalances in the context of growing international liquidity triggered a virtuous cycle with huge inflows of foreign direct investments, dollar devaluation and a vast accumulation of foreign reserve, which is now close to  billion dollars. As a consequence, the net foreign debt went down from  billion dollars in  to a negative value of  billion dollar in , and the dollar devaluated from R$ ., in , to less than R$ ., from  to .With dollar devaluation and reserve accumulation, the public sector became a net external creditor of an amount equivalent to % of GDP and net public sector debt declined from % of GDP in  to % GDP in . Moreover, the substantial improvements in the public sector debt profile show up in a much longer maturity-the buying out of dollar indexed bonds and a significant decrease in the share of indexed bonds in general. Last but not least, the central_banks took a few important steps towards foreign exchange convertibility.The importance of reduced vulnerability on both foreign and domestic debt for the Brazilian economy can hardly be exaggerated given her original stigma of recurrent episodes of hyperinflation, exchange rate crisis and debt moratoria (Bicalho and Issler , Tourinho, Merces et al. ).III SocialachievementsThe social achievements in the last two decades have been remarkable from both historical and international perspectives. Historically, Brazil has been one of the most unequal societies in contemporary world. From  to  (period for which Census micro data are available), the Gini coefficients of household income per capita remained practically constant at ., one of the highest levels recorded at national level in modern times.In the last decade, however, inclusive growth policies made possible to bring down Gini figures to below .. The inclusive growth process of last decade benefited all classes but income gains were systematically larger for lower income classes. Taking the extreme deciles, from  to , annual average growth rates of income per capita went from .% for the bottom .% compared to .% p.a. for the top .%. In international terms, the  million Brazilians in the bottom % had income per capita growth close to those of China and India, while per capita growth rates of the  million Brazilians in the top % were close to those of Sweden. Thus, the speed of income per capita convergence between poor and rich citizens of Brazil was similar to the one between Chinese and Swedish (Ellery, Barros et al. , pp. -).Cash transfer programs were the main tool used to combat poverty. Since the mid-seventies they were implemented as security assistance to old aged and disabled persons. In the mid-nineties, multiple programs targeting minimum income, health, and education were created. Their unification under the Bolsa-Familia program in  brought fundamental changes in terms of scale, organization, and performance. Moreover, political organizations at municipal level were crucial for its implementation (Campello and Neri , Rocha ).With increasing concentration on childhood protection, Bolsa-Familia now reaches out to . A counterpoint is China where the Gini coefficient went up from . in  to . in .million households making average cash transfers of  dollar per month, which on average represents approximately % of the beneficiarys income. In macroeconomic terms, the cost amounts to .% of Brazilian GDP to which another .% of GDP of the social security assistance programs should be added.Figure  shows the evolution poverty and extreme poverty ratios in the last two decades. The coincidence of poverty reduction with the launching of Bolsa-Familia is impressive but part of the drastic decline since its inception depends, naturally, on the behavior of other factors like demographic changes and economic opportunities generated by growth recovery. More rigorous evaluations, however, estimate that Bolsa-Familia brought close to  million persons out of poverty; and close to . million out of extreme poverty. Last but not the least, Bolsa-Familia was responsible for the enrollment of approximately  million children and adolescents in school (Campello and Neri ). As a consequence, the poverty ratio target for Brazil in the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) for  was achieved one decade in advance.In what concerns income distribution, however, the crucial role in the recent process of upward mobility in Brazil was played not by income transfer programs but by the productive inclusion of the labor force, resulting mainly from the access to formal employment and better self-employment and/or entrepreneurial positions.Indeed, according to recent decomposition exercises (Hoffmann ), at least % of the reduction of the Gini coefficient of household income per capita from  to  is explained by the changes taking place in the distribution of wages and profits; .% by the social security benefits (mainly pushed by the.Analogous evidence comes from the decomposition of the sources of income of the  million people, which today constitute the so-called Brazilian emerging middle class. From  and , labor income explains % of their income growth, while government transfer represent % of it; and the increased proportion of adults in the labor force is responsible for the remaining % (Ellery, Barros et al. : ).Additional evidence regarding productive inclusion is provided by the startling developments in the labor market during the last decade (Ulyssea and Barbosa ). Chiefly, the unemployment rate, as shown in Figure , which after a long time above % of the labor force started to decline steadily in  and reached a historical low of .% in . For the metropolitan areas, the decline was also steep,coming down from over % in  to less than % of the labor force in .Figure  also shows that the decline in unemployment was paired with substantial improvement in the quality of jobs. Evidence is provided by the decline in the share of informal occupations, which means jobs with no labor contract, in non-rural (metropolitan and non-metropolitan) occupations. The corresponding figures remained above %, during the nineties, and declined steadily after , reaching .% in .A parallel development was the decline in the returns to schooling, defined by the ratio of wages between the educated and the uneducated workersthose with more than  years of schooling and those with elementary education or less than  years of education. This change was probably related to the increase in demand for unskilled labor, as well as to the significant increase in the relative supply of educated labor force, notwithstanding the low educational levels still prevailing in the Brazil. Anyway, the evidence regarding wages largely dismisses the debate on shortage of skilled/educated labor as a bottleneck to growth, at least in the short run (Schwartzman and Moura Castro , Ulyssea and Barbosa ).The improvements in the labor market are puzzling developments still in want for a rigorous and comprehensive analysis. Various factors have played role in associattion with the recovery of activity levels and income per capita after . Concerning unemployment-the decline of participation rates was the main factor. Reasons being, first, the educational life of the adolescents is increasing, therefore postponing their entrance age in the labor market and second, the increase in minimum wage, pension and social benefits, which led to a retraction of the supply of labor of less educated and older people (Paula ).Concerning the decline in informality and the associated improvement in the quality of jobs, the main factors were: First, the labor force became more educated and as such more demanding in terms of job quality. Second, since the mid-nineties federal and the state governments have launched several programs to bring firms and works out of informality. The incentive measures to formalization include direct and indirect tax rebates, and simplification and deregulation of bureaucratic requirements for hiring workers as well as for the creation of small firms. Additionally, since , as a reaction to the crisis, the federal government started shifting the incidence of some taxes from wage payroll to turnover sales for selected industrial sectors. Third, the substantial improvement in the monitoring and taxing capabilities of governments brought by information and telecommunication technologies.Last, but not least, the labor union imprint of the federal government has had a significant impact on the implementation of all kinds of labor legislation with particular emphasis on the combat of job precariousness in rural areas. Apart form the direct impact, one should consider the demonstration effects of this kind of policy initiatives (Coslovsky ). The developments in the labor market were combined with a steady rise of real minimum wages, which increased % since , on top of a % increase from  to . Through indexation mechanisms, the growth of minimum wages was transmitted not only to the labor market but to pensions and other kind of social security benefits and transfers as well.As a consequence there was significant convergence in the real wage distribution. From  to Gini indices of the real wage distribution declined systematically from . to .. Thus, after , poverty eradication was coupled with a strong decrease in the concentration of wage incomes.As it should be expected, declining unemployment increased real wages as displayed in Figure . After declining % from  to , real wages showed a steady % increase from  to .A major cause of policy concern is that real wage growth was not supported by labor productivity (measured by the ratio between real GDP and employed labor force in PNAD), which grew only % from  to  (SAE ). The picture gets a little better when we look at a longer period with labor productivity measured by hours of work. Thus, from  to , productivity grew % and real wage % (Barbosa Filho and Pessoa ).Though the measures of labor productivity are sensitive to choices of concepts and time periods, evidence point towards a widening gap between real wage and labor productivity in recent years, which can potentially put a break on future growth of real wage.Finally, it should be mentioned that the remarkable performance of the labor market was practically unaffected by the global economic crisis of . The expanding domestic market and the growth of the agricultural exports intermingled in a virtuous cycle to give resilience to the labor market. Countercyclical policies implemented by the government sustained the domestic market while quick recovery in China propelled both volumes and prices of commodity exports.Figure  gives a broad idea about just how inclusive the real wage recovery was in the last decade. Disaggregation of real wage growth, according to major social categories, show that female, young, uneducated, self employed, and informal workers in the least developed regions of the country had larger real wage growth from  to . The only notable exception is the smaller growth of real wage for black workers compared to non-black workers. Though average comparisons hide intervenient factors like education, occupations and region, the race/color figures are still dissonant as far as equity achievements are concerned.The performance of the labor market was, to some extent, the result of the primary export-led growth mainly propelled by China since the early s. Primary exports implied a growth pattern of employment that was spatially dispersed in rural areas and in the service sector of small towns, far from big industrialized centers, intensive in unskilled and uneducated labor. More important, perhaps, agricultural growth gave rise to an emerging middle class of self-employed workers/entrepreneurs in the urban services related to agribusiness (Barros , Reis ).IV Financial crisis and the recent slowdown in the economyThe Brazilian financial sector was not exposed to subprime equities. Major financial reforms and safeguards were implanted since the Plano Real stabilization program in the mid-nineties. Thus, before the crisis, the Brazilian banking system was in a quite strong financial position compared to the other economies, displaying one of the lowest leverage ratios in terms of both assets and credit ratios. Furthermore, it was relatively insulated from the international financial system, with a relative small share of foreign-owned banks in the value assets, and foreign exchange denominated liabilities represented only % of the total value of liabilities.The Brazilian corporate sector, however, was heavily exposed in dollars and was badly hurt. The trigger mechanism was the drastic contraction of foreign credit lines which dropped more than % in the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers collapse. The credit crunch resulted in a significant exchange rate devaluation and the late attempt to hedge themselves was self defeating, making the dollar skyrocket from . to . Brazilian reals in the first half of October . The vicious cycle was completed by the massive outflows of foreign capital and the huge drop in prices of primary commodity exports which combined to give the final blow to the stock market. In the aftermath of the crisis, countercyclical policiesa big novelty in Brazilian crisis management historywere promptly implemented. The Central Bank reduced required reserves and made massive injection of liquidity to the banks and the corporate sector. With some delay, the Monetary Policy Committee slashed interest rates by  basis points to historical record lows.To cover up for the drastic reduction in external credit lines, special credit line to agriculture, housing and machinery investments were sustained by stateowned banks. Thus, in  the National Development Bank (BNDES) responded for % of total credit disbursement for industry and infrastructure in the country, compared to % in .Fiscal stimuli came through tax rebates on domestic sales of investment goods and durable consumer automobiles, in particularand credit subsidies to investment on machinery and housing. From  to , special credit lines from BNDES went from .% to .% of GDP, while mortgages, mainly from the Federal Saving Bank (CEF) went up from .% to .% of GDP. Most of the funding of BNDES came form federal government loans which went up from  to  billion Brazilian reais, in the same period (Appy ).On the expenditure side, the government granted generous increases to civil servants payroll and to the social program (Bolsa Familia) benefits. To a large extent that resulted from the indexation rule for the minimum wage introduced in  which is based upon lagged inflation rate plus the two years lagged growth rate of GDP. From  to , the minimum wage increase was %, in real terms, and was directly transmitted to the payroll of states and municipal governments, as well as of the social security benefits, which, since , were linked to it by a legislation approved by the Congress. Indirectly, they affected the private sector wage payroll. By a law approved by the Congress in , the rule is in principle valid up to , but its extension to  is already considered. The de-indexation of wages was an essential part of the stabilization program, Plano Real, in . Since then, annual adjustments of the minimum wage were made by discretionary decisions of the President.Indexation of minimum wages produced a substantial increase in the permanent income of lower wage echelons and pension beneficiaries, which combined with the tax rebates and credit incentives to boost the demand of consumer durables and investment expenditure, particularly in housing.Fiscal stimuli caused some deterioration of public accounts but regrettably they took the form of current expenditure instead of badly needed government investments in economic and social infrastructure. The long run costs will be less flexibility in the government budget and smaller growth rates in the future (Giambiagi and Muinhos ). A cause of much concern, because of this, are the implications of minimum wage indexation for the deterioration and stiffness of fiscal accounts, particularly in the social security items (Giambiagi , Sinigaglia and Teixeira ).The growth rebound in  was short lived and already in midthe central_banks started a new cycle of monetary easing to stimulate the economy. Results, however, were unsatisfactory as GDP growth rates were mediocre and inflation rates quickly reached the upper limits of the inflation target. A new round of monetary tightening started at the beginning of . Thus, since  the economy went though stop and go cycles with mounting growth frustration.Evidence show that during the easing cycle, private bank lending was impaired by the deteriorating conditions of consumer and business confidence, expectations and indebtedness, as well as by the strong expansion of public bank lending (Garcia-Escribano ). Counterfactual simulations suggest that the short run trade-offs between inflation and output would have been more favorable if the central_banks had implemented the inflation target regime in a more orthodox way (Berriel, Carvalho et al. , Sinigaglia and Teixeira ). In other words, if he had not curbed the exchange rate valuation pressures coming from the expansionary monetary policies of advanced economies. The exchange rate impacts on inflation, however, were not convincingly analyzed.After , the hesitations of the central_banks were compounded by the deterioration of the international economy. In the last two years, both the value of exports and the terms of trade reversed and the trade surplus have now practically vanished. The current account balance has already reverted and, at the end of , reached unsafe levels of close to .% of GDP. As a consequence, during , there was a flight to the dollar with a % devaluation of the real, notwithstanding exchange rate swaps amounting to  billion dollars which represents close to % of the stock of foreign exchange reserves.Surprisingly, however, the deceleration of the economy did not show up in the labor market. As already shown, from  to , rates of unemployment declined from % to .% of the labor force while real wages increased approximately %.Summing up the five years period since the inception of the crisis, the picture one gets is one of moderate growth with GDP rates (on a four quarter basis)close to .% per annum. On the demand side, consumptions and investment grew close to % per annum, exports practically stagnated, growing at .% per annum, while imports boomed, growing at more than .% per annum.On the supply side, credit incentives to housing and government investments sustained the construction and infrastructure sectors with growth rates a little below .% per annum. Sustained by income growth, the service sector grew close to . per annum, with information and financial intermediation as star performers growing above .% per annum.Manufacturing industries, however, contracted at -.% per annum showing a strong susceptibility to both high interest rates and overvalued exchange rate. With flexible exchange rates, the increases of tariff rates for selected sectors (in particular textiles, garments, footwear, and automobiles) since  proved to be a self-defeating instrument of protection. On top of that, tax rebates and credit incentives to consumer durables and capital goods introduced after the crisis were unable to compensate the increases of unit labor costs and the consequent loss in international competitiveness (IBRE/ FGV ).Concluding, moderate growth rates were sustained by a virtuous cycle of consumption growth, increasing wages and declining unemployment. At least up to , terms of trade were crucial to keep income growing faster than output. The reversal of the terms of trade after  raises doubts about the sustainability of this process (Teles and Mendonca ). The reason being that increased labor costs were not compensated by improvements in the terms of trade, thus giving rise to the worrying current account deficit. In this way, there are policy lessons to be drawn from the similarity of the developments in the wage-productivity ratio (Figure ), the terms of trade, and the current account figures (Figure ) during the s and s.V Prospect and challenges for sustainable_developmentGrowth prospects for the next few years are lukewarm. GDP is projected to grow .% this year and to stay around .% for the coming years. Approaching full employment, the labor market is under stress and it is no wonder that there were wage strikes along with political protests all over the country, last year.Overheated labor market and exchange rate devaluation put pressure on inflation. Despite repressed public tariffs and regulated prices of energy and transportation, consumer inflation rate was just below % p.a. in . To bring inflation down, at the beginning of , the central_banks started to raise interest rates bringing it to levels above per annum by the end of the year, hence, restricting investment and growth prospects for .Growing fiscal imbalances raise credibility problems among analysts and investors. During, the stock market dropped by .% while the dollar went up by %. Fingers are pointed to the fiscal situation (Tourinho, Merces et al. ). The PSBR primary surplus was close to .% of GDP, coming down from .% in . The net debt of the public sector is kept well under control at less than % of GDP but debt figures are under suspicion. Accounting makeups attempt to conceal huge offbudget transfers to state and municipal governments as well as to back up National Development Bank (BNDES) loans of dubious quality.Some hope for investment recovery coming from the government concessions in infrastructurepre-salt oil and transportationwhich started last November with the successful auctions of the Libra oil fields; followed by the auction for the construction and operation of paved roads in the agricultural frontier of the Northwest region; and for the expansion and modernization of the airports of Confins and Galeao.Though concessions are still hampered by regulatory and incentive problems, the National Development Bank (BNDES) with mandatory optimismprojects US$ . trillion of investments for the period -. Petrobras alone is expected to invest some US$  billion during this period. Government concessions in infrastructure are expected to add .% of GDP to investment rates that are projected to reach .% of GDP in  compared to .% in . The largest recipients will be the oil and gas sectors, and transportation infrastructure with respective shares of .% and .% approximately (S.A. ).In the long run, there are plenty of reasons for optimism in relation to the Brazilian economy. The country is particularly well endowed with natural resources in mining, energy and agriculture and thus prospects of international trade are encouraging. The emerging middle class provides a promising basis for expansion of the domestic market, human capital accumulation, and for the consolidation of both social and political democracy.The challenges are how to assure the investments required for viable exploration of natural resources and how to sustain the increases of productivity levels, thus reducing vulnerability of the emerging middle class and increasing welfare levels for society as a whole. In addition, the country will have to confront the environmental problems that afflict large segments of her population, particularly those living in the urban congested areas.Education is recognized as the top priority to increase productivity, to reduce income vulnerability of emerging middle classes, and to sustain growth in the long run. There is an increasing awareness of the importance of education in Brazilian society, particularly among the emerging middle class. Therefore, there is hope for a virtuous cycle finally taking off to reduce the historical educational gap of Brazilian society. Results, however, will take some time to materialize.Brazilian backlog in education is well documented (UNDP ). Average years of schooling of the Brazilian population is close to . years, with a vexing second to the last position among latin_american countries. This is supposedly one of the main factors behind the slow growth of total factor productivity (TFP) which in the last twenty years was below .% per annum (Barbosa Filho and Pessoa ).The Brazilian figures for government expenditures in education are reasonable. In , they were close to .% of GDP compared to the .% in OECD countries. Quality of spending is the main problem (Lisboa and Latif ). The ambitious policy target is to bring expenditures to .% of GDP in the near future. Financing sources will be the pre-salt oil receipts, which according to legislation are .% earmarked to education and .% to health.At present, access to elementary education is practically universal in Brazil. The crucial problems are in the secondary level and more specifically in the low quality of education. Thus, only .% of children with  to  years of age were enrolled in the concluding years of fundamental school and when concluding the secondary grade, only one-third of the students have compatible knowledge levels, a figure that drops to one-thenth in the case of mathematical knowledge (Weber ).Professional and technical education is a related aspect of the educational challenges. The number of technical schools and the share of students enrolled in them is relatively small in Brazil% compared to % in Chile, and % in Colombia. Recently, however, the government launched the National Program of Technical Education (PRONATEC), a bold initiative to create an integrated and parallel system of technical education going from high school to graduate level. The program promises to overcome the elitist educational system in Brazil, but it is still too early for a technical assessment of its performance (Schwartzman and Moura Castro ).The immediate obstacles to growth are the low levels of savings and investment. Figure  shows that the investment rates remained below % during the last decade. Compared to the other emerging economies this is a frustrating performance: analogous figures for China, India, and Russia were %, %, and % of GDP respectively (Foure, Benassy-Quere et al. ). Surprisingly, however, after the crisis in  Brazilian investment rates were kept above % of GDP, reaching their highest levels in almost two decades. A bit disturbing, though, is the declining trend that insinuates after .Even more alarming is the declining trend of the saving rate that goes from % of GDP in  to % in . There is a clear cyclical component in the behavior of saving rates. But the strong decline in recent years was, to a large extent, the outcome of the countercyclical policies based upon consumption, credit injections and real wage increases.The implication is increased reliance on foreign sources of finance, now coming to uneasy levels of close to % of the GDP. The trade off between higher investment rates and the contribution of foreign savings is tough. Simple simulation exercises show that to raise investment rates to % of GDP would require foreign savings of at least .% of the GDP (Barbosa ). Therefore, the countrys credibility among foreign investors becomes a crucial issue, bringing mounting pressures and anxieties on the management of macroeconomic policies. This is a particular case in the general election year of .High interest rates, high taxation and the lack of infrastructure are the main culprits for the low investment and saving rates in Brazil. From a macroeconomic perspective, the main requirement is to balance the fiscal trajectory to make a non-inflationary reduction of interest rates feasible; an increase of public investment; or a reduction of taxation in order to stimulate private investment. Once again, trade-offs are hard and supplementary initiatives will have to be pursued (Hausmann ). The reduction of interest rates to international levels will require profound reforms in the Brazilian financial markets improving their role in the allocation of savings and investments as well as increasing the efficacy of Brazilian monetary policy.Financial markets in Brazil are exceptionally segmented and pervaded by all kinds of cross subsidies. Required reserves are close to % of demand deposits thus creating a captive market for government bonds. Additionally, a large part of the loans are earmarked, charging interest rates much below the market (Lisboa and Latif ).The policy suggestion would be the gradual dismantling of quantitative restrictions on banking operations. That would increase the supply of private credit to the private sector thus bringing down the spreads and rates practiced. In addition, competition in the banking system should be enhanced by liberal measures, and pari pasu, financial taxation reduced.Long run credit lines are practically restricted to BNDES and foreign institutions. Thus, in  BNDES accounted for approximately % and foreign loans responded for % of credit disbursements for investment in industry and infrastructure. With highly subsidized credit linescharging interest rates of % per annumBNDES attracts the best borrowers paying little attention to the performance criteria. In that sense, BNDES credit lines act as source of biased selection in credit concession, creating distortions and increasing the loan costs of private banks. Here, the gradual reduction of subsidies, recently started, is a healthy initiative. Another initiative would be joint credit concession programs with private banking where the share of BNDES would depend on the activities or sectors in case, as well as declining in time (Fraga Neto , Appy ).Even more distortionary, however, was BNDES policy of picking the winners to create national champions to compete in international markets. The failure of this mistaken industrial policy is exemplified by several cases in the industrial sectors like food, beer, meatpacking, and oil drilling. The suggestion here is twofold: First, to move towards more competition-friendly and softer industrial policies making use of more technical criteria instead of discretionary decisions (Harrison , Aghion, Dewatripont et al. , Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare ); Second, to give more priority to infrastructure investments where growth bottlenecks are clear.Concerning investments in public infrastructure the alternative has been to rely on private concessions. Foreign investment is particularly welcome as source of both finance and technology. However, ideological bias and interest group pressures hampered major initiatives of private concessions, which were delayed until last year when they were finally undertaken in the oil and transportation infrastructure.Analogous problems affected Petrobras ambitious investment programs in deep sea and pre-salt oil prospection and exploration. Despite the huge potential of reserves and the undeniable technological capability of Petrobras, the investment program is pervaded with protectionist objectives that significantly impact investment costs. Furthermore, Petrobras decisions on price policies are constrained by anti-inflationary objectives, thus reducing profitability and increasing financial costs of investments, as reflected in its stock market value which dropped from US$  billion in  to US$  billion in .Taxation reduction is another priority in order to stimulate investment and competitiveness. The tax burden is reaching its feasible limits and the complexity of the Brazilian tax system is daunting (Hausmann ). The implementation of value added taxes in a federation with a history of hyperinflation has generated all kinds of distortions andinefficiencieschiefly, the fiscal wars among the units of the federation leading to significant disparities in tax incidence and creation of several sale and transaction taxes earmarked to a plethora fiscal purposes. Broad and difficult political negotiations will have to be made in order to solve these problems (Afonso, Morais Soares et al. , Maciel ).In trade policy the priority should be to dismantle the trade barriers in the industrial sector. Dollar devaluation brought by commodity exports and terms of trade gains were ineffectively fought with tariffs. Confronted with a flexible exchange rate regime they were undermined by the consequent exchange rate changes and thus proved to be a self-defeating instrument to sustain industrial output and employment.In tandem with the dismantling of protectionism, regional integration policies should give up the objective of Mercosur as a custom area, transforming it into a free trade area. In addition to the benefits of tariff liberalization, such an initiative would loosen many of the obstacles for extending free trade agreements to other countries and regions like the united_states and the european_union (Frischtak and Mesquita ).From the Brazilian perspective, the economic benefits of a custom area are restricted to a few industrial sectors, specially the auto industry. The common tariffs, however, impose heavy costs to the rest of the economy (Lee ). Summing up, Mercosur imposes significant costs to nourish the political and diplomatic projects aiming at regional leadership in South America.Closely related, innovation policies implemented by BNDES and FINEP were obsessed with the industrial sectors and high technologies, paying little attention to the unexplored possibilities of introducing technological innovations, as well as increasing domestic value added in the productive chains related to agriculture (soybean, coffee, cocoa, etc.), mining, and forestry (Coslovsky , Coslovsky , Frischtak and Mesquita ).The counterpoint is the Brazilian agency for agricultural research (EMBRAPA) success story in the adaptation of cultivars (soybean, cotton, eucalyptus, etc.) to the poor soils and high temperatures prevailing in tropical areas (Arantes and Souza , Helfand and Rezende , Homma n.d.). Most of the productivity gains, however, are transferred to international markets due to the lack of processing and marketing capabilities in Brazil. This is clearly an area where government coordination and investments will probably show high rates of return.Environmental sustainability poses a big challenge. Notwithstanding the assigned preeminence of Amazon deforestation and the global warming in the Brazilian government agenda, the main challenge to environmental policies comes from the interaction between poverty and urban congestion. The lack of transport and sanitary infrastructure in the urban areas has led to excruciating problems of urban mobility, water pollution, as well as to risky and unhealthy encroachments. Naturally, regulations and policies will have to be implemented by municipal and state governments, but the federal government will have to play a pivotal role with regards to coordination and financing.In what concerns Amazon, recent Brazilian policies have been particularly successful in bringing down deforestation. Annual rate of deforestation, which reached closed to  thousand km in , declined steadily to less than  thousand km in . Environmental monitoring and penalties coupled with credit conditionality on deforestation imposed by the central_banks have played significant roles (Assuncao, Gandur et al. , Assuncao, Gandur et al. ).The major challenge now is to reconcile the preservation of the Amazon and other ecosystems with the exploration of Brazilian comparative advantages in agriculture, cattle raising, and forestry. Land abundance shaped an extensive pattern of land use in Brazil. Thus, there are plenty of opportunities to intensify cattle raising and to promote planted forests but global warming will certainly impose heavy losses tothe productivity of agriculture in the tropical areas bordering Amazon. Technological innovation, technical assistance, education and financing are the key policy tools, aimed particularly at the small farmers (Assuncao, Braganca et al. ). Once again, EMBRAPA should play the leading role.Finally, the country should retract from attempts to champion climate agreements. As a small contributor to global emission of greenhouse gases, with a rather clean energy infrastructure (hydroelectricity, biofuels, wind, and solar radiation), the country should collaborate with mitigation agreements, provided that the most advanced economiesUnited States, european_union, and Japan, in particular make concrete proposals for their own mitigation initiatives as well as for international compensations. The environmental priorities should be adaptation policies with regards to global warmingwhere there is plenty of space for international collaboration,particularly with other tropical countriesand environmental policies to deal with the problems that directly afflict the Brazilian population.