I IntroductionThe united_nations (UN), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the world_bank (WB) all make annual forecasts for the world economy in their publications of the wesp (WESP) (UN, ), the World Economic Outlook (WEO) (IMF, a), and the Global Economic Prospects (GEP) (world_bank, a), respectively. While each of these publications would fulfill a specific institutional mandate within these organizations individually, together these forecasts also provide critical information for the general public, significantly influencing decision-making of the governments and businesses worldwide. This paper is intended to study the forecasting performance of these organizations.A common feature among these international organizations is that they all make forecasts for the world economy based on the forecasts for individual countries, although they differ considerably in their approaches to making these forecasts.Since the early s, the UN forecasts for the world economy have been based on the cooperation with Project LINK, which is an international consortium for economic forecasting and policy analysis. Project LINK was initiated under the leadership of Lawrence Klein, consisting of about  experts worldwide. The LINK modelling system for the world economy has evolved over the past decades. The original LINK country models were quite diverse, but since , the models have been streamlined through a new system of the World Economic Forecasting Modelling (WEFM) (Altshuler et al., ).The WEFM has maintained the bottom-up modelling approach and the international linkage mechanism of the original LINK system, but it has also made significant improvement on the original LINK system in several aspects. For example, in the WEFM, individual country models are developed by prototype models. Models for most developed countries and major developing countries follow a prototype model of full scale, with some  variables, and models for other developing countries follow a prototype model of much smaller size, with some  variables, of which there are nonoil and oil variants.In the WEFM country models, behavioural equations are specified in a cointegration/error-correction framework, with the long-run relationship specified to follow a neo-classic theoretical framework while the short-run relationship constructed to follow a Keynesian framework and fit the data. The error correction mechanism ensures that the system moves towards the long-run path in the absence of shocks. Policy variables are modelled to follow rules according to country-specific situations, with flexible options for discretionary policy actions whenever necessary. As such, the same modelling system can be used for both policy analysis and forecasting.The IMF forecasts draw primarily on the information the staff gathers through their consultations with member countries (IMF, b). The forecasts are prepared by the country desk economists on the basis of internationally consistent assumptions about world economic activity, exchange rates, conditions in international financial and commodity markets, as well as the evolving situation in member countries. The methodology for individual country forecasts varies from country to country and series to series depending on many factors.For approximately  of the largest economies, which account for  percent of world output, the IMF projections are updated for each WEO exercise. For other countries, the forecasts are updated and revised both during the WEO exercise and at the time of the IMFs regular Article IV consultations with member countries or in connection with the use of Fund resources, unless world economic developments necessitate more frequent updates. Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either sums or weighted averages of data for individual countries. All historical and projected data are recalculated toreflect changes in country group composition in order to ensure that the economic indicators reflect changes in economic conditions and not changes in the country group composition.The WB forecasts in the GEP are prepared by staff of the Development Prospects Group of the world_bank (world_bank, b). The principal objective of the forecasting process is to illuminate the key forces acting in the global economy and its implications for developing countries, at present and over the medium term. Reflecting this objective, the main focus of attention is upon regional developments and impacts on groups of economically similar lowand middle-income countries.In the WB, a large volume of high-frequency data, concentrating upon industrial output, inflation, trade, and international finance data for some  developing countries is used to help evaluate the international economic climate. Regional forecasts are constructed on the basis of  separate country-specific forecasts, prepared by the staff in conjunction with WB country experts. The country forecasts are aggregated and revised in a coherent model of the global economy.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II defines a few technical terms to be used in evaluating the forecasting performance through the rest of the paper. Section III evaluates the forecasting performance of the UN during the periods of -. Section IV compares the forecasting performance of the UN, IMF and WB at different aggregate and individual country levels. Section V provides some discussions of forecasting errors particularly for the period of the global financial crisis and the Great Recession, before the concluding section.II Technical setting for evaluating and comparing forecastsA number of papers have in the past made assessments of the forecasting performance of international organizations. For example, Artis () analysed the IMF short-term forecasts for developed and developing countries, showing that the IMF has overor under-predicted the growth of advanced countries by about  percentage point, with the forecasting errors even larger for developing countries. In the same paper, an analysis of preand postperiod shows that there is no significant difference in the accuracy between IMF forecasts and forecasts based on random walk models. The paper concluded that predicting the turning points for business cycles is the main weakness of the IMF forecasts.Kreinin () also finds that neither the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) nor the IMF succeeds in forecasting cyclical turning points; however, their projections appear fairly robust and certainly superior to those of a naive model. Pons () investigates the size and nature of the IMFs forecasting errors in GDP for G countries from  to , pointing out that the IMF forecasting accuracy has not improved over time.Musso and Phillips () are positive about the IMF forecasts, as they did not find a statistically significant biasness or inefficiency in the forecasting errors of the IMF. Also in contrast with Artis () and Pons (), Zamborsky (), based on his evaluation of the forecasting performance of the IMF and the OECD during the period of -, finds that the IMF forecast accuracy has improved since , and the accuracy is better than the forecasts of naive models by about  percent.Our paper differs from those earlier studies, as we focus on comparing the forecasting performance among the UN, IMF and WB. We compare the forecasts of these organizations not only at the global and regional aggregate levels, but also at the individual country level. We also give a special attention to the forecasting performance in the period of the global financial crisis.The forecasts of these three organizations cover a large number of macroeconomic variables, but in our evaluation and comparison, we focus only on economy in the IMF forecasts is usually higher than the UN and the WB, because the PPP approach gives more weight to emerging economies, such as China and India, which have much higher growth than developed countries. The country grouping definition also varies: for example, although the memberships in the UN definition of developed countries, the IMF definition of advanced countries, and the WB definition of high-income countries are very close to each other, they are not identical. In order to avoid the difference in the forecasting errors among the three organizations caused by the differences in aggregating and country-grouping, when comparing the forecasting errors of these organizations, the errors are calculated according to their own respective aggregating and grouping definitions.III Evaluation of the UN forecasts for the period of -As shown in figure , the forecasting errors of the UN annual projection of the global economic growth rate are less than  percentage point for most years in the period of  to . However, the forecasting errors for the years of , , , and are egregiously large, as these years are all associated with the financial crises, namely, the latin_american debt crisis of the early s, the burst of the high-tech bubble of the early s, and the global financial crisis of , as well as the Great Recession of .Table  provides the summary statistics of forecasting errors for the UN annual forecasts of the growth rate for the world economy, developed countries and developing countries respectively. The table shows that the mean value and the standard deviations of the forecasting errors are larger for the group of developing countries than for developed countries. The same is true as measured by other indicators of forecasting performances, such as the RMSE, MAE and MAPE, as well as the maximum and minimum values of the errors. One interesting point is that, by all these measures, the forecasting errors for the t.Another technical note is that the three international organizations have different approaches to calculating the aggregate GDP at the global and regional levels. For example, the IMF uses purchasing power parity (PPP) to calculate the aggregate GDP for the world, while the UN and the WB use official exchange rates, and as a result, the growth for the world world economy are smaller than the forecasting errors for either the group of developed countries or the group of developing countries, because the forecasting errors at the lower levels are offset each other when they are aggregated to the global level.The statistics also indicate that the mean and median values of the forecasting errors are not significantly different from zero, suggesting that there is no systematical bias in the forecasts. Moreover, no significant serial correlation is found among the forecasting errors either, attesting that available information has been fully utilized and the forecasting is efficient.Additionally, in comparing the UN forecasts with the forecasts produced by a naive random-walk model, no significant difference is found in the mean and median values of the forecasting errors between the UN forecasts and the random-walk forecasts, but the standard deviation of the forecasting errors of the UN is significantly smaller than that of the random-walk model, suggesting that the UN forecasting is superior to the random-walk forecasting.A few outliers, namely, the years when the forecasting errors are exceptionally large, can be identified, using two standard deviations as the benchmark. At the global level, the forecasting errors in  and  are exceptionally large, over-predicting the growth of the world economy by . and . percentage points respectively. For the group of developed countries, exceptionally large forecasting errors are also found in  and , over-predicting the growth of developed countries by . and . percentage points respectively. For the group of developing countries, outliers are found in  and , when the growth of this group was over-predicted by . and . percentage points respectively, but the forecasting errors are also large for , over-predicted by . percentage points; , over-predicted by . percentage points; , over-predicted by . percentage points; and , under-predicted by . percentage points.Obviously, without exceptions, all the egregiously large forecasting errors have occurred for the years when a virulent financial crisis wreaked havoc on the world economy, or a large number of economies.IV Comparing the forecasting performance of these organizationsAfter evaluating the forecasting performance of the UN, we can adopt the same measures to evaluate the forecasts made by the IMF and WB, and compare the forecasting performance among these three organizations. We focus on the period of -.We start with comparing the forecasting errors of these three organizations at the global level. As shown in figure , the forecasting errors of these three organizations for the growth of the world economy are very similar in terms of magnitude and patterns. In fact, these forecasting errors are highly correlated, with the correlation coefficient of . for UN and IMF, . for UN and WB, and . for IFM and WB, respectively.One exception is for the year of , when the UN forecast deviated from the other two. The UN under-predicted the global growth in  while the other two over-predicted. Meanwhile, they all made significantly large forecasting errors in  and .As shown in table , the mean and median values of forecasting errors for these three organizations are all insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that their forecasts are unbiased, although the mean values of forecasting errors for the WB are relatively larger than that of the UN and the IMF. No serial correlations are found for the forecasting errors of these organizations, meaning that their forecasts are efficient. By the measures of RMSE, MAE and MAPE, the forecasts of these organizations are superior to the forecasts generated by a simple random-walk model. Also by the measures of RMSE, MAE and MAPE, the forecasts of the UN are marginally better than the other two.We can also apply the same approach to comparing the forecasting errors for these three organizations in their forecasts for the group of developed countries and the group of developing countries respectively. Given the limited space, we cannot present the figures and statistic tables here, but they can be requested by the readers who are interested in them. The findings for the forecasting errors for these two country-groups are similar to those for the global economy as discussed above. In general, the forecasts are unbiased, efficient, and superior to random-walk models. Again, by the measures of RMSE, MAE and MAPE, the forecasts of the UN are marginally better than the other two organizations.As the forecasts for the global economic growth and the growth of the country groups are the aggregate of the forecasts for the growth of individual countries, it is more interesting to compare the forecasting performance of these organizations in their forecasts for individual countries.For simplicity, we only present in this paper the comparative statistics for the UN and the IMF in their forecasts for ten major individual countries, including five developed countries, namely, France, Germany, Japan, the united_kingdom and the united_states, and five emerging economies, namely, Brazil, China, India, Russia and South Africa.As shown in figure , which presents the forecasting errors of the UN and the IMF respectively for ten selected countries, among emerging economies, for example, for Brazil, both the UN and the IMF significantly (with errors larger than  percentage points) over-predicted the GDP growth for  and , while under-projected for ,  and . The forecasting errors of the IMF are larger than that of the UN for  and , but smaller for , ,  and . For China, both the UN and the IMF under-predicted its GDP growth for a few years before the global financial crisis of , but over-predicted for , with the overall forecasting errors of the UN marginally smaller relatively smaller than those of the IMF. No significant differences are found in the forecasting errors for other four developed economies between the UN and the IMF.As shown in table , which summarizes the statistics of the forecasting errors for both the UN and the IMF in their forecasts of GDP growth for ten selected individual countries, among emerging economies, the measures of RMSE, MAE and MAPE for the forecasting errors in both the UN and the IMF forecasts for China and India are actually larger than those of random-walk models, indicating a significant room for improvement in the forecasting methods for these two organizations.Among developed countries, the standard deviations, RMSE, MAE and MAPE of the IMF are the smallest for France. For the ten selected countries, the maximum forecasting errors of the IMF are relatively larger than those of the UN, except for India and the united_states. The IMF forecasts tend to over-predict the GDP growth for these ten countries more than the UN forecasts.The average mean values of the forecasting errors for the five emerging economies are -. for the UN and -. for the IMF, compared with the same terms for the five developed countries of . and .. The average values of standard deviations in the forecasting errors for the five developing countries are . for the UN and . for the IMF, compared with that for the five developed countries of . and ..As shown in table , which compares the statistics for the forecasting errors of the UN and IMF in their forecasts for the ten selected countries as a pool, the RMSE for the UN is . and for IMF is .. By other measures, such as the standard deviations, MAE, and maximum and minimum forecasting errors, the UN forecasting performance is also moderately better than the IMF. Moreover, the null hypothesis about a normal distribution of forecasting errors cannot be rejected for the UN, but can be rejected for the IMF at the . significance level. In short, the UN forecasts for the selected individual countries are marginally better than the IMF forecasts, but the differences in the values of mean, median and variance for the forecasting errors of these two organizations are not statistically significant.V Discussions on the large forecasting errors for the Great RecessionAs mentioned above, one common egregiously large forecasting error shared by all the three international organizations is the failure to predict the Great Recession of . By late , all these organizations predicted a positive global growth for , but as it turned out the world economy fell into the Great Recession in , contracting  percent if measured by the aggregating approach of exchange rates, or . percent if measured by PPP.In the hindsight, we may explain this failure by a number of factors: the increased complexity in the financial system, and the pervasive chicaneries and malodorous operations in high finance in the run up to the financial crisis; the unprecedentedly acute degree of the damages to financial intermediation when the crisis erupted; the extraordinarily large impact on the real economy; and the unparalleled international contagion and transmission of the financial shocks across the world economies.To be fair, since  and until  when the financial crisis erupted, these international organizations had indeed increasingly issued warnings of the possible financial instability associated with such indictors as the rising house prices in developed countries and the widening global imbalances, for example, in the UN WESP  (UN, ), and the IMF WEO  (IMF, ).However, the forecasters in these organizations could not grasp the whole picture of the ever growing complexity developed in the global financial system, featured by the rapid increases in the sub-prime loans, securitization of the mortgages, the credit default swaps and many other complicated financial derivatives and toxic assets. For example, securitization of mortgage-backed securities in the united_states surged by  times in five years before collapsed in  (Greenspan, ). It is also impossible for these forecasters to gather the information about many malodorous practices and chicaneries in high finance places worldwide, which were only revealed after the eruption of the financial crisis. Therefore, it is infeasible for the forecasters to build these factors in their models and take these factors into full account when they made their forecasts before the advent of the global financial crisis.When the financial crisis erupted in , as marked by the collapse of the Lehman Brothers, the damages to financial markets, particularly to the function of financial intermediation were unprecedented. As commented by Greenspan (), the evaporation of the global supply of short-term credits within hours or days of the Lehman failure is without historical precedent. A run on money market mutual funds was under way within hours of the announcement of Lehmans default. Even the fully collateralized repurchase agreement market encountered severe and unprecedented difficulties. In late  and early , the spreads on interbank leading and the credit default swaps all surged to historical highs. The forecasters were unable to assess the extreme severity of the damages the crisis brought to the financial system.Moreover, even after observing the eruption of the financial crisis in late , these forecasters still failed to fully ascertain the extraordinary impact of the financial shock on the real economy, particularly on business investment and trade. For example, business investment in the united_states dropped by more than  percent in . Such a magnitude of decline in real investment can hardly be simulated through any investment functions that are estimated on the data in the period before this financial crisis.Furthermore, the forecasters have also underestimated the magnitude of international contagion and international transmission of the financial crisis from the united_states to the rest of the world through trade and financial channels. In the late  and early , exports of many countries plummeted more than  percent, partly caused by the withdrawal of trade credit. For  as a whole, the world total exports dropped by  percent (world_trade_organization, ), but by late , the international organizations still forecast a positive growth of world exports. Capital inflows to emerging economies dropped by  percent from the peak of  to the trough of  (International Institute of Finance, ).It was the accumulation of all these factors that have attributed to the large forecasting errors of these international organizations.In addition to the baseline forecasts, these organizations also produce alternative scenarios, or give the interval of possible outcomes. For example, when the UN made the forecast in  for global growth of , its baseline forecast was  percent, but its pessimistic scenario was -. percent (UN, ). The IMF baseline forecast was  percent for , but its forecasting interval as indicated by a fan chart showed the possibility of the lower bound at  percent (IMF, ). The baseline forecasts of both the UN and IMF missed the actual growth by a large margin, by  percentage points, but their lower bound forecasts were much closer, missing the actual growth by about . percentage points.VI ConclusionThe annual economic forecasts made by the united_nations in the period of are found to be fairly robust in general, in terms of systematical bias and efficiency. The mean and median of forecasting errors are not significantly different from zero for the world economy, the groups of developed countries and developing countries, and individual countries. The forecasting performance of the UN is superior to random-walk forecasting models.In comparison, the forecasting performance of the UN is found to be marginally better than that of the IMF and the WB at the global and country-group levels, and also than the IMF for ten selected large individual countries during the period of . Unfortunately, the forecasts made by these three organizations are all found to be poor for the years of financial crises, with particularly significant errors for the Great Recession of .In the hindsight, the failure to predict the Great Recession was due to a number of factors, including the increased complexity in the financial system, and the pervasive chicaneries and malodorous operations in high finance in the run up to the financial crisis; the underestimate of the unprecedentedly acute degree of the damages to financial intermediation when the crisis erupted; the extraordinarily large impact on the real economy; and the unparalleled international contagion and transmission of the financial shocks across the world economies. Improvement can be made in the forecasting performance for the future if efforts are taken to incorporate these issues into the forecasting models.