Nontechnical summaryThe objective of this paper is to examine the impact of unconventional monetary policies adopted in developed countries  US, UK, euro_area and Japan  on developing countries  Brazil, China, India and Russia. We adopt a two stage methodology. First we analyse the financial market impact of FEDs, ECBs, BoEs and BoJs announcements concerning unconventional monetary policy. We conduct a series of event studies and statistical analyses and look at the impacts of quantitative easing on long term yields, equity prices and exchange rates. Next, using the National Institutes global macroeconomic model NIGEM we simulate the macroeconomic effects of lower yields, higher equity prices, and lower investment premia (attributable to unconventional monetary policy) on the real economy in developed and developing countries.Our key findings suggest that:The scale of unconventional monetary policy measures adopted by the four major central_banks, the FED, ECB, BoE and BoJ has been unprecedented. The size of central_banks balance sheet has increased fivefold in the UK, fourfold in the US and it has doubled in the euro_area and Japan.The US and the UK have implemented very large quantitative easing programmes conducted in three rounds in the US and two rounds in the UK. The scale of private and public asset purchases in the euro_area has been somewhat smaller in relative terms. In Japan, the central_banks had been pursuing quantitative easing policy for some time before the crisis, and after the demise of the Lehman Brothers, the pace of asset purchases has increased, however, as compared to the other major central_banks it has remained relatively moderate.The FEDs and BoEs QE programmes differed from those of the BoJ and the ECB in that they concentrated on bond purchases rather than on direct lending to banks. The different tools reflected different structures of these economies, with bond markets playing a relatively more important role in the US and the UK, and banks playing a relatively more important role in continental Europe and Japan.The unconventional monetary policy has had a significant impact on the economies of the US, the UK, the euro_area and Japan. Through channels such as global trade, global liquidity and global portfolio rebalancing, it has also had consequences for developing economies such as Brazil, China, India and Russia.The impact of quantitative easing on the developing economies has varied across countries, reflecting the scale of their exposure to the developed countries (both in terms of trade and financial linkages), their individual cyclical positions, and the type and scale of response of monetary authorities to capital inflows.While the central_banks unconventional interventions have mitigated dysfunctions in targeted markets in the developed countries, they could have had spillover effects associated with inflows of capital and higher volatility in currency and financial markets in the developing countries.Our event study analysis suggests that the quantitative easing policy resulted in a decrease in long term yields by around  basis points in the US,  basis points in the UK and  basis points in the euro_area and Japan. It may have also led to decreases in long term yields in the developing economies  by about  basis points in Brazil, and about  basis points in China, India and Russia.The quantitative easing policy has probably also contributed to increases in equity prices in the US, UK, the euro_area, Brazil, China and India. The impact on equities in Japan and Russia may not have been that strong.The event study analysis suggests that the quantitative easing has not been accompanied by a major depreciation of the developed countries currencies (actually, the US dollar, the British pound and the Japanese yen have strengthened following major quantitative policy announcements). The quantitative easing has probably led to a relatively significant appreciation of the Brazilian real. The impact on other developing countries currencies has not been that strong (actually, the Indian rupee and the Russian ruble have depreciated).While the impact of quantitative easing on the developing countries financial markets can be described as relatively significant, the impact on the real economy has been much smaller. This results from the smaller degree of financial development of these economies, and policy measures adopted by the domestic authorities to mitigate the effects of increased capital inflows.Our macroeconomic scenario analysis shows that the impact of decreases in long term yields (coordinated scenario), among the developed economies, has had the biggest effect on the US, and the UK; among the developing countries on Brazil (mainly through responsiveness of the Brazilian financial markets to FEDs QE announcements) and Russia (mainly through trade linkages with Europe).Allowing for additional effects coming from equity prices and investment premia, the macroeconomic effects of quantitative easing are even bigger, with the biggest effects among the developed economies materialising in the UK (mainly due to a stronger response of equity markets to QE announcements as compared to other countries), and among the developing economies in Brazil.In terms of an exit from unconventional monetary policy, the impacts on the developing economies will depend on several factors: the scale of their exposure to the developed economies (both through trade and financial linkages); their cyclical position; the depth of their financial markets, the scale of their external imbalances and the size of corporate and household debt; market sentiment; and policy actions in the developing countries aimed at mitigating the impact of increased capital outflowsThe real effects of an exit can be limited for the developing economies, however, this is conditional on the behaviour of investors in bond markets, and, more generally, whether financial markets turbulence is avoided.To recap, quantitative easing policies adopted in major developed countries have had a relatively significant impact on financial markets and the real economy locally. They have also had spillovers for developing countries financial markets, the impact on the real economy in the developing countries has probably been more muted. IntroductionSince the global financial crisis, central_banks have significantly expanded the set of their tools deployed to ensure financial stability and stimulate growth. These measures include: large scale purchases of government bonds and private securities (quantitative easing), various lending programmes, and guidance over the future path of policy rates (Bean, ).The objective of this paper is to examine the impact of unconventional monetary policy adopted in developed countries on developing economies. The primary focus is on central_banks balance sheet policies, and in particular quantitative easing measures. The unconventional monetary policies introduced in major developed countries have had an impact not only on the domestic economies, but they have also had international spillovers. Through global trade, global liquidity and global portfolio rebalancing, policy measures adopted in the developed countries have had an impact on the developing countries (Chen et al., ).This paper adopts a two stage methodology to study the impact of unconventional monetary policies in developed countries on developing countries. We firstanalyse the domestic and cross-border financial market impact of central_banks announcements concerning unconventional monetary policy. We conduct a series of event studies and statistical analyses and look at the impact of quantitative easing by the FED, the BoE, the ECB and the BoJ on long term yields, equity prices, and exchange rates both in the US, UK, euro_area and Japan, as well as in Brazil, China, India and Russia. Then, using the National Institutes global macroeconomic model NIGEM, we conduct a series of macroeconomic simulations that allow us to assess the impact of lower yields, higher equity prices, and lower investment premia (attributable to quantitative easing policy measures) on the real economy both in developed and developing countries.The paper is organised as follows. First, we discuss unconventional monetary policy measures adopted by the major central_banks  the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the European central_banks and the Bank of Japan, and their potential spillover effects to the major developing economies: Brazil, China, India and Russia. Then, we study the impact of quantitative easing policy announcements by individual central_banks on financial markets in the developed and developing countries. We look at long term yields, equity prices, and exchange rates. Next, we simulate the effects of unconventional monetary policies (approximated by shocks to term premium, equity premium and investment premium) on the real economy in the developed and developing countries  the US, the UK, the euro_area, Japan, Brazil, China, India, Russia. Finally, we discuss possible consequences of an exit from the unconventional monetary policy. Unconventional monetary policy in the US, UK, euro_area, and Japan central_banks usually conduct monetary policy through managing short term interest rates. In the face of near-zero short term interest rates, following the global financial crisis, central_banks in largest developed economies have turned to unconventional monetary policies. The FED, the Bank of England, the ECB and the Bank of Japan began to pursue policies of quantitative easing and asset purchases on a very large scale. The consequence of these policies was a large increase in central_banks balance sheets. Figure  shows the evolution of short term interest rates in the US, the UK, the euro_area and Japan, and the size of individual banks balance sheets (normalised to  at the beginning of August ) which reflects the scale of unconventional monetary policy actions.Unconventional monetary policy measures adopted by the largest central_banks included both direct asset purchases and various lending programmes. Initially, the quantitative easing (QE) programmes enacted by the largest central_banks were to restore functioning of the dysfunctional financial markets; later the concern shifted to stimulating the economy. The details of balance sheet policies and quantitative easing plans varied across central_banks and depended on their specific motivations and different structures of the economy in individual countries. For example, the FEDs and BoEs QE programmes differed from those of the BoJ and the ECB in that they concentrated on bond purchases rather than on direct lending to banks. The different tools reflected different structures of these economies, with bond markets playing a relatively more important role in the US and the UK, and banks playing a relatively more important role in continental Europe and Japan (Fawley, Neely, ).Below we briefly discuss unconventional monetary policy measures adopted by the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the European central_banks and the Bank of Japan. The discussion is based on Fawley and Neely, .Federal ReserveThe US quantitative easing policy was conducted in three rounds. The first round, QE, was announced from November  to March , and the targeted amount of assets to purchase oscillated around . trillion USD. In March , the FED announced a second round of QE, QE, worth about  billion USD. It was followed by the Operation Twist, worth  billion USD, announced in September , and extended in February . The QE programme was announced in September . Unlike in the previous QE programmes, this time the FED committed to a pace of purchases rather than a total amount ( billion USD per month; from December , the programme was extended to  billion USD per month). On  June , the FED announced a tapering of the QE policy, contingent upon continued positive economic data.Table  presents key announcements by the FED concerning unconventional monetary policy measures, and figure  below illustrates the size of the FEDs balance sheet.The BoE asset purchases can be separated into two distinct periods. In the first period, between January and November , the BoE gradually increased the value of asset purchases, from  billion GBP in January, to  billion GBP in March, and then billion GBP,  billion GBP and  million GBP in May, August, and November, respectively. The second stage of the British QE began in October  with the BoE raising the asset purchase ceiling to  billion GBP. The Bank expanded the programme further, in February and July , setting the ceiling at  billion GBP, and  billion GBP, respectively.Table  lists key announcements by the BoE concerning QE measures.Table BoE announcements concerning unconventional monetary policy measures bank (Fawley, Neely, ). The ECB announced the purchase of  billion EUR in euro denominated covered bonds in  and  billion EUR in , for a total of  billion EUR. The ECB never announced a target for sovereign debt purchases under the securities markets programme. On the basis of bank balance sheet data Fawley and Neely calculate that these purchases cumulatively sum to around  billion EUR at their peak. Most of these assets were purchased during two episodes: spring-summer  (with a focus on Greek, Irish, and Portuguese debt), and summer-fall  (with a focus on Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Irish debt). The ECB asset purchases totalled around  billion EUR. Most of them have been sterilised. The path of the ECBs monetary base reflects extensions of the LTRO programme.Table  presents key announcements by the ECB concerning unconventional monetary policy measures.Countries that apply to the ESM will potentially have their debt purchased in unlimited amounts on the secondary market by the ECB .The ECB responded to the crisis with an increased supply of loans at low rates, long term refinancing operations and bond purchase programmes. The two covered bond purchase programmes have been relatively moderate in size, though they represent larger purchases of private assets than any other central bank.Bank of JapanThe BoJ has purchased almost  trillion JPY in total assets over the period January -December . However, around  per cent of this quantity should be attributed to the BoJ QE policy of the early s. The BoJ began purchasing government bonds in the  and in  these purchases reached . trillion JPY. In  BoJ exited from QE, and reduced its balance sheet by letting short term assets mature without replacement. However, it kept purchasing government bonds at . trillion JPY per month.In  the BoJ made plans to purchase  trillion JPY in assets, in excess of what would have been purchased, if the pace of asset purchases was kept at . trillion JPY per month. In  an asset purchase programme was announced. Subsequently, it was expanded on nine occasions and the composition of assets purchased varied. In total, the BoJ bought around  trillion JPY in assets, of which  trillion JPY were government bonds, . trillion JPY  Treasury discount bills, . trillion JPY  corporate bonds, . trillion JPY  commercial papers, . trillion JPY  exchange traded funds, and . trillion JPY  real estate investment trusts.Table  lists key announcements concerning BoJs QE measures.To sum up, all four central_banks announced outright asset purchases from autumn  to spring . The FED and BoE targeted large amounts of assets to purchase, while the ECB and BoJ focused on providing loans, and their outright asset purchases were relatively smaller. Figure  illustrates the size of the FEDs, BoEs, ECBs and BoJs balance sheets and the timing of major policy announcements. The size of the BoEs balance sheet has increased fivefold and that of the FED  fourfold. The size of central_banks assets in the euro_area and Japan has doubled. Spillover effects to Brazil, China, India and RussiaThe global financial crisis and the ensuing unconventional monetary policy response adopted by the developed economies have also had an impact on the developing economies. The IMF () suggest that unconventional monetary policy measures have bigger financial spillovers when policies restore stability or change the monetary framework. The impacts depend also on the cyclical position of individual countries and the stability of their financial systems (or the lack of thereof (that is the scale of market imperfections)). In particular, lower bond yields (resulting from unconventional monetary policies implemented in the developed countries) can boost growth in the developing countries, if these economies are operating below capacities. However, they can result in an overheating, if the economy is already operating at or above capacity. They can also lead to instabilities on currency and financial markets. In particular, in the case of shallow markets in the developing countries, the unconventional monetary policy measures deployed in the developed countries can have a destabilising effect. The limited ability to absorb capital and potential short term speculation activities may lead to increased volatility in the financial markets, excessive credit growth, house price bubbles, and in effect, major financial turmoil.Figure  depicts the cyclical position of Brazil, China, India and Russia since the beginning of the crisis. We plot the scale of output gap in these countries (in per cent of potential output), along with domestic interest rates. Following a severe drop in global economic activity in , in , the major developing countries, with the exception of Russia, started recovering. The return to growth was a consequence of both macroeconomic stimuli adopted by these economies in response to the global crisis (interest rates decreases and large fiscal packages), as well as spillovers from the major developed economies.The expansion of the economy driven by the domestic factors was accompanied by large inflows of capital. The QE policies functioned thus in a procyclical manner for capital flows to emerging markets (compare Fratzscher et al., ). The inflow of capital intensified in  and most likely resulted in an increased volatility in the financial markets  compare figure . The equity markets seem to have been most sensitive to capital inflows. The volatility of exchange rates and long term government bond yields was particularly high at the turn of  and .While the surge in global liquidity and the inflows of capital contributed to an increased volatility in the financial markets, the impact on the real economy has probably been more muted. This has resulted from a smaller relative importance of the financial sector for the real economy in the developing countries as compared to the developed economies (lower degree of financial development), and from various policy actions in the developing countries. As the economies of the developing countries started growing  and, especially in Brazil and India, potentially exhibiting signs of overheating in  and  central_banks raised interest rates. The policymakers in all developing countries  Brazil, China, India and Russia have also employed a mix of policy responses  both macroprudential policy measures and capital management tools targeted at: (i) mitigating the effects of short capital inflows for central_banks market operations (especially those aimed at shortterm instruments), (ii) limiting inflows to local bond markets, (iii) reducing risks in the banking system in the real economy, (iv) limiting vulnerabilities stemming for the large private sector borrowing, and (v) reducing currency speculation.It seems that so far, capital inflows to the developing countries have been relatively sizeable, but manageable (IMF, ). While a number of factors suggest that these capital flows could be structural (for example related to commodity prices), the risks of a sudden reversal of the market sentiment remain. The policymakers in the developing countries continue to emphasize that the tapering of quantitative easing policies in the developed economies needs to be conducted in an orderly manner to avoid excessive turbulence on financial markets. Methodology central_banks balance sheet policies can be expected to have several effects on domestic financial markets and the real economy (compare Chen et al., , Kimura, Small, , Bean, ). First, quantitative easing through the traditional interest rates channel reduces longer term interest rates. Lower long term yields and subsequently lower real interest rates encourage borrowing and spending by firms and households. Second, as financial assets are imperfect substitutes with distinct liquidity and risk characteristics, central_banks asset purchases change the relative supplies of assets held by the public. The relative demand and prices of different securities change, influencing investors portfolio decisions though the portfolio rebalancing channel. Third, through the asset price channel, abundant provision of liquidity may encourage investors to move to riskier assets. Forth, through the signalling channel, a central_banks commitment to a specific future policy path, shapes market expectations, keeps longer term yields down, inspires confidence, and supports asset prices. Fifth, through the bank lending channel, quantitative easing helps to ease financial conditions and supports bank lending to the private sector.First, boosting activity in the originating country, through the external demand and trade channel, quantitative easing generates aggregate demand spillovers onto other countries. Second, the portfolio rebalancing channel also applies to the global economy since quantitative easing lowers long term bond yields in the developed countries, investors can turn to emerging markets assets for higher riskadjusted returns, which would lower yields and boost asset prices in the developing countries. Third, in a world of well-integrated financial markets, quantitative easing boosts global liquidity. Quantitative easing can initiate carry trades and capital flows into developing countries with higher rates of return, which would push up consumer and asset prices. Fourth, through the exchange rate channel, quantitative easing especially in the countries, whose currencies are fully convertible, are international reserve currencies, and constitute the pillars of the global financial system can impact developing countries exchange rates. By increasing the size and volatility of capital flows, currency speculation may also play a role.This paper adopts a two stage methodology to analyse the impact of quantitative easing in developed countries on developing countries. First, we study the domestic and international financial market impacts of central_banks quantitative easing announcements. We identify the most important quantitative easing announcements by four major central_banks: the Federal Reserve, the European central_banks, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan, and conduct a series of event studies and statistical analyses that allow us to quantify the response of long term yields, equity prices and exchange rates. We look at weekly, monthly and quarterly changes to long term yields, equity prices, and exchange rates following major policy announcements. We also look at changes in these variables between major policy announcements that is between consecutive quantitative easing rounds. This approach allows us to approximate the impact of quantitative easing on long term yields, equity prices, and exchange rates both in the US, UK, euro_area, and Japan, as well as in the major developing countries: Brazil, China, India and Russia.Then, we use the National Institutes global macroeconomic model NIGEM to conduct a series of simulations that enable us to assess the impact of lower yields, higher equity prices and lower investment premia (attributable to unconventional monetary policy measures) on the real economy in developed and developing countries.NIGEM is a global quarterly model with about  countries (both developed and developing) modelled separately and the rest of the world modelled through regional blocks. The economies are linked thorough trade, competitiveness and financial markets. Incorporating the individual models into the global context allows us to study the international impacts of the unconventional monetary policy adopted in the developed countries on the developing countries. For a brief description of NIGEM  please see appendix A.The scenario analysis using NIGEM is designed around the following major channels of unconventional monetary policy transmission (compare descriptions of QE channels above):The unconventional monetary policy reduces long term interest rates in the developed economies.Since central_banks assets purchases ease financial conditions and influence investors portfolio decisions (including moving to riskier assets), the quantitative easing influences domestic equity prices.Quantitative easing eases financial conditions and supports bank lending to the private sector by improving the availability of funds.The above transmission mechanism channels focus on the channels within the domestic economy. In the model, this is approximated by a shock to term spread risk premium which causes the market price of government bonds to fall (technically, the term premium puts a wedge between the forward convolution of short rates and the long rate). In the model, this is approximated by a shock to equity risk premium (which operates through the present discounted value of future profits, the discount factor includes the equity risk premium). In the model, this is captured by a shock to investment premium. The investment premium would reflect the degree of credit rationing in the business sector.They allow us to study the impact of real effects of quantitative easing in the developed countries on the developing countries, which spread throughThetraditionalexternaldemandandtradechannels. These channels are complemented by the following international channels:The global portfolio rebalancing channel  investors turn to emerging markets assets, which lowers yields and boosts asset prices.The global liquidity channel  an increase in global liquidity spurs capital inflows; it also eases financial conditions in the developing countries.To some extent, the international channels are similar in nature to the domestic channels. The impact of unconventional monetary policy on financial marketsTo assess the impact of unconventional monetary policy tools applied by the four largest central_banks, In the model this is approximated by a shock to long term yields in the developing countries In the model this approximated by a shock to investment premium in the developing countries on long term yields, equity prices and exchange rates in both developed and developing countries, we conduct a series of event studies combined with a statistical examination of the data.First, we study the impact of QE measures implemented by individual central_banks on long term yields by looking at their weekly, monthly and quarterly cumulative changes following important policy announcements. Next, we look at changes in long term yields that materialised between consecutive rounds of quantitative easing. For example, in the case of the US, we compute average yields for the periods Aug   Nov  (before QE); Nov   Nov  (QE), Nov -Sep  (QE), and from Sep  onwards (QE), and calculate differences between them. We also estimate the relationship between long term yields and individual central_banks assets, and on the basis of this simple model calculate estimated yields, and look at changes in the estimated yields between consecutive QE rounds (for further details please see Appendix ). Figure  provides a graphical illustration for the US case.All changes in yields weekly, monthly and quarterly changes following QE policy announcements, as well as average changes between consecutive QE rounds, both actual and estimated, are shown in columns a-e in table . Columns f and g show algebraic combinations of the numbers reported in columns a-e, on the basis of which we calculate the size of possible shocks attributable to individual QE episodes. We round the numbers obtained in columns f and g to the quarter of percentage point  they are presented in column h. For comparison, in columns i and j, we show estimates found in the literature.The event study analysis suggests that quantitative easing could be accompanied by a reduction in long term yields  by about  basis points in the US,  basis points in the UK,  basis points in the euro_area and  basis points in Japan. The estimates are consistent with those found in the literature (see inter alia IMF, , Chen et al., , DAmico, King, ,Bauer, Neely, , Chinn, , Fratzscher et al., , Gagnon et al., , Hamilton, Wu, , Hancock, Passmore, , Joyce et al., , Kishnamurty, Vissing-Jorgensen, , Neely, , Moore et al., ).We conduct a similar exercise for long term yields in Brazil, China, India and Russia. We calculate changes in yields following QE announcements by individual central_banks (all four, the methodology is exactly as above  for detailed calculations please see Appendix ), and then add them up. These estimates provide an upper bound for changes in yields in developing countries following unconventional monetary policy actions in developed countries (this is an upper bound since changes in, for example, Brazilian yields following a QE in the UK, canalsobearesponsetoaQEintheUS(orany other central_banks QE) occurring in similar (the same) periods).Therefore, we also calculate an index of global quantitative easing. In the case of Brazil, we convert the value of FEDs, BoEs, ECBs and BoJs assets into Brazilian reals, add them together, and construct a measure of global quantitative easing from Brazils perspective. Analogous measures are constructed for China, India and Russia. Figure  shows the constructed indices.Inspecting the data visually we assume the main global QE events materialised in November  and in October . The first global QE moment coincides with first QE announcements by the FED ( of November , and then the message was reinforced on  December ), shortly followed by announcements by the BoE (February ). The second global QE moment coincides with QE announcements by the ECB and BoE (both on the th of October), and announcements of the Bank of Japan and the FED concerning an expansion of their QE operations (in September and October ). On the basis of these two global QE moments, we conduct a similar event study analysis as above. We calibrate shocks to long term yields in individual developing countries and treat them as a lower bound of the response of developing countries yields to QE in major developed economies (for details please see Appendix , tables A-A).The event study analysis suggests that central_banks balance sheet policies probably led to a reduction in long term yields in the developing countries. The effects seem to be strongest in the case of Brazil, where long term interest rates dropped by  basis points (and possibly more). The reaction of long term yields in China, India and Russia was softer  it is likely that the yields decreased by not more than  basis points.Next, we conduct a similar analysis for developed and developing countries equity prices and exchange rates  detailed calculations are shown in Appendix  (tables A-A). Table  shows final results for equity prices for the US, the UK, the euro_area, and Japan, and table  for Brazil, China, India, and Russia (we report both upper and lower bounds; as the upper bound should be treated with more caution, the discussion below is centred around the lower bound).The event study analysis suggests that central_banks balance sheet policies could have a positive impact on equity prices in the US, the UK and the euro_area. No impact in the case of Japanese equity prices was found. It is possible, that equity markets in the UK were somewhat more responsive to QE than equity markets in the US, and the euro_area.In the case of the developing countries, the most significant effects seem to have materialised in Brazil, China and India. The Russian equity markets probably remained less responsive to QE in the major developed economies.Table  and  shows results for developed and developing countries exchange rates. We look at exchange rate indices averages of individual developed countries currencies vs all other countries currencies (eight pairs in the case of each developed country), and averages of individual developing Kimura and Small () provide an interesting analysis of the nature of the Japanese equity markets countries currencies versus all developed countries currencies (four pairs in the case of each developing country).The event study analysis suggests that expansionary central_banks balance sheet policies in the developed countries did not result in major depreciations of their currencies. On the contrary, the US dollar, the Japanese yen, and possibly the UK pound gained strength following QE announcements, in line with the safe heavens hypothesis. The quantitative easing policies probably led to an appreciation of the Brazilian real. The impact of unconventional monetary policy on the real economyOn the basis of calibrated shocks to long term yields and equity prices, and to investment premium, all of which can be attributed to unconventional monetary policy, we conduct a series of macroeconomic simulations, and try to assess the impact of unconventional monetary policy on the real economy in developed and developing countries.We analyse the following scenarios:Uncoordinated scenarios: we look at the effects of unconventional monetary policies in the US, the UK, the euro_area and Japan separately, that is in isolation from each other.Coordinated scenario: we analyse the impacts of a joint scenario, where all major central_banks FED, ECB, BoJ, and BoE adopt QE simultaneously; moreover, we assume, that there is an immediate reaction of financial markets in developing countries  Brazil, China, India and Russia.Uncoordinated scenariosWe simulate the macroeconomic impacts of central_banks balance sheet policies adopted in the US, the UK, the euro_area and Japan. We assume that the While QE and QE were accompanied by an appreciation of the US currency, QE could led to a minor depreciation.four countries implement QE measures in isolation from each other. Table  shows the size of shocks applied to long term yields, equity prices and investment premia in the US, the UK, the euro_area and Japan. The shocks were calibrated on the basis of tables -.We examine counterfactual scenarios of what would have happened if the major advanced economies did not apply any QE policy measures. For example, in the US case, we analyse a scenario of what would happened if:Term premium on long term yields in the US was higher by  basis points (compare table )Equity premium was lower by  percentage pointInvestment premium was higher by about  percentage point  this reflects a higher degree of credit rationing in the economy, faced both by households and businessesWe assume that all shocks are temporary and last for  years. The conventional monetary policy is switched off during the first five years. The monetary policy is deactivated both in the originating country, and all major developing economies  Brazil, China, India, Russia. Figure  provides an illustration of the impact of QE on the US, the UK, the An increase in equity premium by  percentage point results in a decrease in equity prices by about per cent (compare table ).Japan euro_area and Japan. The QE has probably had the biggest impact on GDP in the US, while somewhat milder effects materialised in the euro_area and the UK. In terms of inflation, the US economy has been most responsive  if not for QE, the US would have probably experienced deflation. The smallest inflation effects materialised in the euro_area and Japan. Further details of the response of the domestic economy to QE under uncoordinated scenarios are shown in Appendix  (table A).We also look at the impact of QE adopted in individual advanced economies on developing countries. It is important to note, that this simulation captures the effects of the trade channel only. We do not allow for any additional reactions coming from financial markets (changes in long term yields or equity prices in the developing countries), which will be analysed in the next section. Figure  compares the effects of QE for Brazil, China, India and Russia. We look at  year average deviations from baseline (detailed results (year by year) are shown in table A in Appendix ).The results suggest that QE policies in the US and the euro_area had a relatively bigger impact on developing economies as compared to QE policies implemented in Japan and the UK. The FED policy had the biggest impact on GDP in China and India, while the ECB policy to a larger extent affected economic activity in Russia (and Brazil). This is related to the size of the US and euro_area economies, and the strength of trade linkages between the US and the euro_area and the developing countries, with China and India more responsive to developments in the US, and Russia  to shocks emanating from the euro_area. If not for QE measures, inflation would have been lower in all major developing countries. The biggest impact on inflation can be attributed to the FEDs unconventional monetary policy. This applies to all developing countries and can be explained by the strong international monetary position of the US.To recap  if QE policies were conducted in isolation, the US QE would have had the biggest impact both locally, and on the developing countries. This results from the scale of unconventional monetary policy adopted by the FED and the importance of the US economy globally. The ECBs policy would have had the second largest impact on the developing countries. Close trade linkages with Russia, as well as China and India determine the impact of the euro_area QE on these economies. The effects of the BoJ and the BoE QE would have been smaller.If QE policies were conducted in isolation, through the trade channel China and Russia would have been affected most in real terms. The real impact on the Indian economy would have been more moderate, while the real response of the Brazilian economy would have been smallest. On the nominal side, Brazil and China would have reacted strongest.The scale of global interdependences and the response of financial markets in the developing countries change the distribution of QE impacts somewhat. In the next section we look at a coordinated scenario, in which all major central_banks introduce QE simultaneously. We also allow for an immediate response of financial markets in the developing countries which allows us to study the effects of global liquidity and global portfolio rebalancing.Coordinated scenarioThe coordinated scenario assumes that all major central_banks, the FED, ECB, BoJ and BoE implement unconventional monetary policy tools in a coordinated fashion, that is at the same time (for the set of QE shocks for major developed economies  see table ). Moreover, we assume that there exist international spillovers of unconventional monetary policy which affect financial markets in developing countries, and in particular through term and investment premia. Thus, in terms of the impacts on the developing countries, while the uncoordinated scenarios focused predominantly of trade spillovers of QE (trade channel), the coordinated scenario allows us to consider the impacts of changes to global liquidity and the global portfolio rebalancing.Table  shows the size of shocks applied to term premia and investment premia in Brazil, China, India and Russia (calibrated on the basis of the event study analysis presented above).First, we look at the impact of higher long term yields in the US, UK, euro_area, Japan, Brazil, China, India and Russia. Next, we look at the impact of all shocks shocks to long term yields, as well as shocks to equity prices, and investment premia.Figure  shows the QE effects for individual countries decomposed into those coming from shocks to long term yields and those coming from shocks to equity prices and investment premia. Detailed results are shown in tables  and . Up to about  per cent of the impact can be attributed to changes in term premium. In the case of the UK, the equity market impact of QE seems to be slightly stronger.In terms of the real impacts, the developed countries that react strongest to global changes to long term yields are the US and the UK, and among the developing countries Brazil is the most sensitive one. The response of the euro_area, Chinese and Indian economies is more muted. The Brazilian and the UK cases are particularly interesting. Brazil is least impacted under the uncoordinated scenario, while it is much more affected under the coordinated scenario. This results from the fact that trade spillovers in the case of Brazil are relatively small as compared to the other developing countries. Spillovers through the financial markets (and especially those affecting long term yields) are, however, biggest in Brazil. In the case of the UK, which is a relatively smallIn other words, for example, in the case of Brazil we analyse the scenario of what would have happened if:Term premium in Brazil was higher by  basis points (compare table )Investment premium was higher by  percentage point. This also captures effects of global liquidity and changes to equity prices (compare table )As in the previous section we assume that all shocks last for  years and conventional monetary policy is deactivated for five years in all major developed and developing economies. In the reality, as discussed earlier, the developing countries applied various instruments to mitigate the impacts of QE adopted by the developed countries, especially in the area of capital flow management. Exit strategyThe results of the previous section can be used to try to assess the impacts of an exit from quantitative easing policies. Since the FEDs announcement inJune  concerning FEDs withdrawal from the bond buying programme, the policymakers in the developing countries have been calling for an orderly exit from quantitative easing. With markets anticipating a reversal of quantitative easing, the developing economies may experience an outflow of capital and a period of an increased volatility in financial markets. The developing countries currencies may depreciate, and as a result of international portfolio rebalancing equity prices may fall, and government bond yields may go up.The main financial stability risks of an exit are associated with several factors (IMF, ): (i) shifts in market sentiment  shifts in market sentiment resulting from a massive sale of assets by major central_banks (or an expectation thereof) may lead to sharp increases in yields; (ii) financial markets turbulence large sales of assets by central_banks may lead to a global portfolio rebalancing putting pressure on equity and exchange rate markets, (iii) funding challenges faced by banks if the private interbank market is not fully restored, this can have implications for the ability of banks to provide credit to households and businesses. In response to an announcement by the FED about a withdrawal from QE, yields in both developed and developing countries went up.The degree to which the developing countries will be affected by a QE exit will probably depend on several factors: (i) the scale of their exposure to the developed economies, both through trade and financial linkages; (ii) their cyclical position  the effects of a QE exit would be more painful for the economies that are slowing down more rapidly, since capital outflows would deepen the size of their output gap, (iii) the depth of their financial markets  the deeper their financial markets, the more sensitive they are to the international movements of assets, (iv) the scale of their external imbalances and the size of the corporate and household debt  countries with large current account deficits or higher debt levels, can be more vulnerable, (v) policy actions in the developing countries aimed at mitigating the effects of excessive capital outflows.It should be mentioned that the short term capital flows have weakened recently, and equity valuations in the developing countries seem to be relatively low. This may imply that the risks of an exit are largely in bond markets.The macroeconomic impacts of a QE exit can be relatively limited, however, this is conditional on the behaviour of investors in bond markets, and policy actions aimed at mitigating instabilities in the financial markets.Appendices Event study and statistical analysis  detailsOur event study analysis looks at the impacts of QE policy announcements on weekly, monthly and quarterly changes in yields (columns a-c in table ). Next we look at changes in yields between consecutive rounds of QE (column d) and estimated changes in yields between consecutive rounds of QE (column f). The latter are calculated on the basis of a simple statistical model. We estimate the relationship between long term yields in the US, UK, euro_area, Japan and FEDs, BoEs, ECBs and BoJs bank assets, respectively. We also estimate the relationship between long term yields in Brazil, China, India and Russia and measures of global quantitative easing from the Brazilian, Chinese, Indian and Russian perspective, respectively. Table A below reports the results of estimation for individual countries. While this equation should not in any case be interpreted in terms of a significant, causal relationship, we use the estimated yield values to compute changes in yieldsTable Abetween QE rounds (as reported in column f in table  in the text and table A below).While for the US, UK, euro_area, Japan, Brazil and China, the estimated parameters correspond to expectations, suggesting that increases in the global supply of money result in lower yields, the Indian and Russian yields do not seem to respond directly to the estimated measures of global QE. Therefore, in the table below estimated changes between QE rounds for Russia and India are not shown (and we do not use them to calculate shocks in columns f and g).Table below shows the lower bound of changes in long term yields in the developing countries (calculated on the basis of global quantitative easing measures)The upper bound of changes in yields in calculated on the basis of changes to individual policy announcements by the FED, BoE, ECB, and BoJ. Tables below show the results for the Brazilian, Chinese, Indian and Russian yields.    A brief description of NIGEMFor a macroeconometric model to be useful for policy analyses, particular attention must be paid to its longterm equilibrium properties. At the same time, we need to ensure that short-term dynamic properties and underlying estimated properties are consistent with data and well-determined. As far as possible the same long run theoretical structure of NiGEM has been adopted for each of the major industrial countries, except where clear institutional or other factors prevent this. As a result, variations in the properties of each country model reflect genuine differences in data ratios and estimated parameters, rather than different theoretical approaches.Production and price settingThe major country models rely on an underlying constant-returns-to-scale CES production function with labour-augmenting technical progress.where Q is real output, K is the total capital stock, L is total hours worked and t is an index of labour-augmenting technical progress. This constitutes the theoretical background for the specifications of the factor demand equations, forms the basis for unit total costs and provides a measure of capacity utilization, which then feed into the price system. The elasticity of substitution is estimated from the labour demand equation, and in general it is around .. Demand for labour and capital are determined by profit maximisation of firms, implying that the long-run labour-output ratio depends on real wage costs and technical progress, while the long-run capital output ratio depends on the real user cost of capitalwhere w/p is the real wage and c/p is the real user cost of capital. The user cost of capital is influenced by corporate taxes and depreciation and is a weighted average of the cost of equity finance and the margin adjusted long real rate, with weights that vary with the size of equity markets as compared to the private sector capital stock. Business investment is determined by the error correction based relationship between actual and equilibrium capital stocks. Government investment depends upon trend output and the real interest rates in the long run. Prices are determined as a constant mark-up over marginal costs in the long term.Labour marketNiGEM assumes employers have a right to manage. Hence the bargain in the labour market is over the real wage. Real wages, therefore, depend on the level of trend labour productivity as well as the rate of unemployment. Labour markets embody rational expectations and wage bargainers use model consistent expectations. The dynamics of wage-setting depend upon the error correction term in the equation, the split between lagged inflation and forward inflation, and the impact of unemployment on the wage bargain. There is no explicit equation for sustainable employment in the model, but as the wage and price system is complete the model delivers equilibrium levels of employment and unemployment. An estimate of the NAIRU can be obtained by substituting the mark-up adjusted unit total cost equation into the wage equation and solving for the unemployment rate. Labour supply is determined by demographics, migration and the participation rate.  Consumption, personal income and wealthConsumption decisions depend on real disposable income and real wealth in the long run, and follow the pattern discussed in Barrell and Davis (). Total wealth is composed of financial and tangible (housing) wealth where the latter data is available.where C is real consumption, RPDI is real personal disposable income, RFN is real net financial wealth and RTW is real tangible wealth. The dynamics of adjustment to the long run are largely data based, and differ between countries to take account of differences in the relative importance of types of wealth and of liquidity constraints.Financial marketsWe generally assume that exchange rates are forward looking, and jump when there is news. The size of the jump depends on the expected future path of interest rates and risk premia, solving an uncovered interest parity condition, and these, in turn, are determined by policy rules adopted by monetary authorities:where RX is the exchange rate, rh is the home interest rates set in line with a policy rule, ra is the interest rates abroad and rprx is the risk premium. We assume that bond and equity markets are forward looking, and longterm interest rates are a forward convolution of expected short-term interest rates. Forward looking equity prices are determined by the discounted present value of expected profits.Public sectorEach country has a set of equations for the public sector. Direct and indirect taxes depend upon their respective tax bases and on the tax rate. Government spending on current goods and services and investment spending depend in part on current plans, and by default rise with trend output. Transfer payments depend upon unemployment and the dependency ratio as well as on policy. Government interest payments are determined by a perpetual inventory model based on the flow deficit and the stock of debt, with the appropriate structure of short and long-term interest payments on the debt stock. Budget deficits are kept within bounds in the longer term (Barrell and Sefton, ) through a targeted adjustment on income tax rates.External tradeInternational linkages come from patterns of trade, the influence of trade prices on domestic price, the impacts of exchange rates and patterns of asset holding and associated income flows. The volumes of exports and imports of goods and services are determined by foreign or domestic demand, respectively, and by competitiveness as measured by relative prices or costs. The estimated relationships also include measures to capture globalization, European integration and sector-specific developments. Exporters are assumed to compete against others who export to the same market and domestic producers via relative prices; demand is given by a share of imports in the markets to which the country has previously exported. Imports depend on import prices relative to domestic prices and on domestic total final expenditure. As exports depend on imports, they will rise together in the model. The overall current balance depends upon the trade balance and net property income from abroad, comprising flows of income on gross foreign assets and outgoings on gross foreign liabilities. Gross national product is GDP plus net factor income from foreigners.    Macroeconomic simulations details