From "Structural change" to "Transformative Change":Rationale and ImplicationsAbstractThis paper examines the relationship between "Transformative Change," as aimed for by the Agenda 2030 for sustainable development, and "Structural Change," which has been an important concept in Development Economics. It shows that while structural change is still relevant, growing concerns for social development and environmental protection made it necessary to switch to the more expansive and encompassing concept of "Transformative Change" that can provide adequate space for inclusion and interaction of all three dimensions of sustainable development. The paper notes that globalization has made it possible for structural change to assume more varied patterns, all of which are not equally suitable for sustainable change. The paper emphasizes that Transformative Change subsumes Structural Change and shows what modifications structural change needs to undergo in order to be compatible with sustainable development. From "Structural change" to "Transformative Change":Rationale and Implications1. IntroductionIn September, 2015, the world community adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, formulated in the form of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets. This Agenda has been popularly described as "transformative," aimed at "Transforming the World," as its title puts it. In other words, the goal is to achieve a Transformative Change (TC). Meanwhile, the development literature has long been familiar with the term Structural Change (SC), which refers to changes in the sectoral composition of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of an economy.  This term, in a sense, is as old as the modern discussion of development itself. 2030 Agenda too uses this term with regard to particular goals set, in particular, for the Least Developed Countries (LDCs). For example, in the Declaration part, the Agenda states the intention to "strengthen the productive capacities of least developed countries in all sectors, including through structural transformation (para 27)." How does "transformative change" differ from "structural change"? Is this switch mere terminological or does it signal an important conceptual shift? What are the implications of this shift? How should structural change under the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development differ from structural change as it happened until now? These are some of the questions addressed in this paper. The paper shows that, while the concept of structural change still remains relevant, it was necessary to go beyond and have a more spacious and encompassing concept that can accommodate all three dimensions of sustainable development and promote structural change that is more compatible with the concerns regarding social development and environmental protection. The paper notes that deepening of globalization in recent decades widened the possibilities regarding patterns of structural change, not all of which are equally conducive to sustainable development. Thus, it is a challenge to achieve the type of structural change that suits the specific conditions of a country and yet conforms to the goal of "transformative change". The paper tries to show what modifications structural needs to undergo in order to be compatible with sustainable development and thus be a part of the transformative change aimed at by the 2030 Agenda.The discussion of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief recapitulation of the origin and evolution of the concept of structural change, taking note of the contributions by Kuznets, Lewis, Fei, Ranis, Chenery, Sen and other scholars. Section 3 discusses the impact of globalization on the experience and concept of structural change. Section 4 shows how the broader goal of sustainable development made it necessary to go beyond structural change and switch to a more encompassing concept that provides the necessary space for inclusion and interaction of all three dimensions of sustainable development. Section 5 examines the implications of sustainable development for structural change. Section 6 concludes.2. Origins and evolution of the concept of structural change2.1 Classical concept of Structural ChangeIn Development Economics, the expression "structural change" generally refers to changes in the sectoral composition of GDP. One of the early uses of this term can be found in the writings of Simon Kuznets, which is not surprising, because Kuznets pioneered the concept and measurement of national income. In doing so, he naturally had to take note of the shares of different sectors in the GDP and the changes in these shares over time. The classical concept of structural change assumed that there was a major difference in labour productivity between the agriculture (primary) and manufacturing (secondary) sectors, so that a shift of labour from the former to the latter could raise the aggregate productivity of the economy and thus serve as a major source of economic growth. Since the agriculture sector was often termed as the "traditional" sector -- referring to the traditional technologies used in it -- while the manufacturing sector as the "modern" sector, the process of structural change was also equated with "modernization" and considered to be the essence of development.  This concept of "structural change" was based on the actual history of "modern economic growth," which began with the First Industrial Revolution in England. Prior to this Revolution, production depended mainly on the "muscle power" of either humans or animals, and, as a result, productivity was low. The Industrial Revolution ushered in the "machine power," which raised labour productivity to a qualitatively new level. Historically, application of machine power began in the manufacturing sector. As a result, a greater share of the latter implied higher productivity of the aggregate economy. Shift of labour from agriculture to manufacturing was thereby considered as the hallmark of economic growth and development. The share of the manufacturing sector in GDP however cannot increase ad infinitum. It was thought that at some point, the share of manufacturing in the GDP will stabilize and then decrease, while the share of the service sector will rise and eventually become dominant. These propositions accorded well with the actual experiences of many of the Early Industrializing Countries (EIC), as shown in Figures 1-4 below. 2.2 Modelling of structural change Though Kuznets noticed structural change as a feature of economic growth, he did not quite formalize the process through which sectoral change can be a source of growth. Moreover, the neoclassical conception of the economy did not allow structural change to be an important source of growth, because, in this conception, factors of production are perfectly mobile across sectors of the economy, resulting in equalization of their marginal products and rates of return. In such a scenario, productivity differences across sectors at any point of time are likely to be of minor magnitudes, because demand and supply situations are constantly changing, prompting the economy to adjust to the changes constantly, leaving no scope for large productivity differences across sectors to emerge. As a result, shifts of factors from one sector to another are not likely to cause major changes in the aggregate productivity of the economy. Instead, in this view, it is the technological progress that it is the driver of growth. In view of the above, it is not surprising that the neoclassical growth model does not pay much attention to the sectoral division of the economy and to structural change as a source of growth. Following the models of Harrod (1939) and Domar (1946) -- which were one-sector models -- the neo-classical growth model developed by Solow (1956), Swan (1956), Cass (1965), and Koopmans (1965) also had one sector only. Though Uzawa (1965), Lucas (1988), and others extended the neoclassical model to allow more than one sector, the purpose for that extension was mostly to allow a source of "technology" or "human capital" or "technology" that can drive the growth process. Thus the neoclassical growth model basically ignored the issue of structural change.It was Arthur Lewis (1954, 1955) who first tried to formalize the process of economic growth achieved through structural change. To do so, he proceeded from the above mentioned assumption that labour productivity was lower in the "traditional" sector than in the "modern" sector. As a result, the aggregate output increases when labour moves the former to the latter. The important question of course is why the same factor of production would have different productivity in different sectors. Lewis did not explain this difference; instead he took it as a historically given. As noticed above, historically, the use of machines indeed began with the manufacturing sector, creating a big difference in labour productivity between this sector and the traditional agricultural sector. However, the question remains why the historical reality of the 18th century would still apply to the contemporary periods. Sen and others strive to address this question. They show that the answer lies basically in institutions, both at the micro (household) level, and at the macro level. Sen (1966, 1967) for example draws the analytical distinction between "marginal product of labour" and "marginal product of a labourer." In a household economy, where output is shared, what matters is the total or average output. In such an economy, it is quite rational to apply labour till the marginal product was zero, so that the total and average products of the household were maximized. This behaviour at the household level however requires certain institutional conditions at the macro level, whereby the opportunity cost of labour of the household (in the low productivity sector) is zero or at least less than the marginal product of labour in the high productivity sector. This may happen if there are various types of restrictions on migration of labour from the low to high productivity sector (for example, the Hukou system in China) or if various restrictive practices of labour and management in the high productivity sector disallow or discourage such migration. One implication of the Lewis model is the Turning Point, which refers to the hypothesis that, after a process of transfer of labour from the low to high productivity sectors, the productivity levels equalize across sectors.  The economy then conforms to the neoclassical assumption of equal factor returns across sectors, and structural change as a source of growth gets exhausted. Ranis and Fei developed the Lewis ideas further, but the essential story remained the same. Following Ranis and Fei, Chenery and his co-researchers also adopted an agnostic approach towards the institutional underpinnings of the Lewis model. Instead, they adopted a statistical approach and looked for "patterns of economic growth," based on the variations in the ways that changes in sectoral composition of the GDP occurred in different countries. Based on their empirical analysis, Chenery and his colleagues developed a typology of three distinct patterns of structural change, characterizing three different groups of countries, namely the (i) large economy, (ii)  small, primary oriented economy, and (iii)  small, industry oriented economy. Since scale and resource endowments interact differently in each group, pattern of structural change is best described, in their view, by analysing separately the three groups of countries. In the process, Chenery and his colleagues put forward several additional characteristic features of the development process, such as steady accumulation of physical and human capital, change in consumer demands, increased urbanization, and demographic transition. It may be noted that the Lewis model is not a complete general equilibrium model. It provides mostly, what may be called, a "supply side" explanation of structural change, based on some ad hoc assumptions, as noted above. While continuing with this tradition, Chenery and his associates drew attention to some "demand side" explanations of structural change. Important among these is the Engel's Law, according to which, as the income level rises, the share of income spent by a person on food (agricultural products, in general) decreases, while the share of income spent on manufacturing products increases. It may be noted that for the above process to unfold, it is not necessary for labour to have lower productivity in the agriculture sector than in manufacturing and services sectors. Thus the demand side factor, represented by Engel's Law, can explain change in sectoral composition, but not structural change as a source of growth. For the latter to happen, one needs again the assumption of lower labour productivity in food producing sectors as compared to that in non-food producing sectors. While it is true that historically labour productivity in the agriculture sector was lower than in the manufacturing sector, many different possibilities opened up in this regard with time. In order to see these possibilities, it is first necessary to note an important analytical distinction between "manufacturing" and "industry." 2.3 Manufacturing vs. industryIn understanding the implications of structural change and particularly the diverse outcomes that are now possible in this regard, it is necessary to notice an analytical distinction between "manufacturing" and "industry." Manufacturing refers to a particular type of economic activity or sector (or sub-sector) of the economy. By contrast, the word "industry" is used in two senses. In one sense, it is considered to be synonymous with manufacturing as a sector or what is sometimes referred to as the "secondary" sector. In another sense, industry refers to a type of technology, namely technologies that rely on "machine" power, instead of "muscle" power, as noted earlier. The use of machines allows labour to produce far more than was possible using muscle power by even the most skilled worker. In this sense, "industry" is synonymous with higher productivity. Though the use of machines began historically with the manufacturing sector, there was no reason why machines could not be used in other sectors too. Indeed, the use of machines spread to other sectors over time, raising labour productivity in them. Thus, other sectors also can undergo "industrialization," by switching from the use of muscle power to the use of machines, and thus transiting from low productivity to high productivity. Indeed, in all developed countries, traditional (pre-industrial) agriculture has transited to industrial agriculture, using machines. In some of these countries, labour productivity in agriculture is not all that different from that in the manufacturing sector. Similarly, the service sector can get industrialized by switching to the use of machines. Many parts of the service sector in developed countries use highly sophisticated machines, yielding very high labour productivity. The discussion above shows that to become a high productivity economy, it is no longer necessary to switch from agriculture to manufacturing in the same way as before. Instead, a country can industrialize its agriculture or service sector. However, achieving the latter goal also requires machines, which are produced by the manufacturing sector. Hence, without some capacity to produce and service machines, i.e. without a certain degree of development of the manufacturing sector, it may be difficult for an economy to industrialize its non-manufacturing sectors. It is not surprising therefore that technological progress achieved in the manufacturing sector is generally found to have positive externalities benefitting the entire economy benefits. In view of the above, it may indeed be argued that developing the manufacturing sector to a certain level should be a priority task for many developing countries, as has been postulated in the 2030 Agenda. The range of possibilities with regard to structural change noted above has widened further with deeper globalization since the 1980s. We discuss these possibilities in the next section. 3. Globalization and its impact on patterns of structural changeThe models and theories of structural change developed in the 1950s and 1960s generally assumed a closed economy. Though this assumption was not always explicit, external flows did not have an important role in these discussions. A corollary of the above was that a similar pattern of structural change was expected to hold in all countries (or in all countries belonging to particular groups, as in the case of Chenery's classification). This closed-economy assumption ignored the fact that the First Industrial Revolution itself depended greatly on the colonies as both source of capital and raw materials and as captive markets. In that sense, England was actually the first example of "export-led" growth. Since the 1980s, however, globalization reached a higher level. The introduction of "container-shipping" and revolution in information and communications technology created a new situation where "offshoring" (export of production processes overseas in order to import back a significant part of the output) became more profitable. The phenomenon of offshoring also created opportunities for developing countries to expand their manufacturing sector. It also made it possible for them to sustain the growth of the manufacturing for a longer period, postponing the downturn implied by the hunch-back shaped pattern that was characteristic of the classical pattern of structural change. At the same time, globalization created greater possibilities of disruption and decline of the local manufacturing sector through ill-conceived and ill-implemented liberalization of the economy to external markets. Also, globalization made it easier for a country to meet its demand for non-food items through import, so that the Engel's Law mechanism pushing for higher share of manufacturing in the domestic economy lost some of its force. Globalization thereby unleashed forces working in different and sometimes opposite directions, and the outcome regarding structural change depended on the concrete situation of a country and the concrete policies it adopted. Evidence suggests that globalization can have the following effects on structural change: (a) Manufacturing-enhancing effect(b) Agriculture-enhancing effect(c) Services-enhancing effect(d) Stalled industrialization effect(e) Premature de-industrialization effect, and(f) Manufacture hollowing-out effectLooking around the world, we indeed see examples of these various effects. The first four apply primarily to developing countries, while the "manufacturing hollowing out" effect is largely applicable for developed countries. For example, the experience of such countries as the People's Republic of China, Republic of Korea, and People's Republic of Bangladesh shows evidence of the manufacturing-enhancing effect of globalization (Figure 5). These countries have been able to raise the share of the manufacturing sector in their GDP and also to avoid its decline (the hump) so far. China's manufacturing share curve shows a downward turn in recent years. However, it still remains to be seen whether this trend has become durable. The experience of countries such as India, Mauritius, and Costa Rica shows evidence of service sector-enhancing effect of globalization. As the Figure 6 shows, these countries witnessed marked increase in the share of the service sector in their GDP. On the other hand, the experience of Thailand, Uruguay, and Vietnam shows evidence of agriculture-enhancing effect (Figure 7). These countries have been able to raise or keep stable the share of the agriculture sector, while at the same time increasing the share of the industry. The experience of some of these countries illustrates the intertwined character of different effects of globalization. For example, India has been able to raise the service sector's share in its GDP while at the same time increasing the share of the industry sector. Similarly, Thailand has been able to raise the share of the agriculture sector while at the same time raising the share of the industry in its GDP.The complicated nature of structural change is also illustrated by the fact that apparently structural change can be growth-enhancing, but may actually represent very different underlying processes. A comparison of the experiences of the People's Republic of China and China, Hong Kong SAR may illustrate the point. Figure 8 shows that the People's Republic of China witnessed significant increase in the share of manufacturing in total employment. However, much of that increased employment was achieved through transfer of labour from the agriculture sector, which -- conforming to the classical pattern of structural change -- had a lower productivity of labour than the manufacturing sector. As a result, expansion of the manufacturing sector in mainland China led to an increase in aggregate productivity and growth-enhancing structural change, as indicated by the upward sloping line in figure 8.Figure 9 shows that China, Hong Kong SAR witnessed significant employment decline in the manufacturing sector, with most of the displaced labour absorbed by the service sector. The general perception is that labour productivity is lower in the service sector than in manufacturing. This was however not the case in China, Hong Kong SAR. As a result, decline in manufacturing led to an increase in aggregate productivity in China, Hong Kong SAR and thus this was also the case of growth-enhancing structural change. Thus both the economies witnessed increase in aggregate productivity and growth-enhancing structural change. However, while in the People's Republic of China it was caused by an increase in the share of manufacturing in the GDP, in China, Hong Kong SAR, it was caused by a decrease in the share of the manufacturing sector. As noted above, globalization affected structural change in many developing countries in a negative way. Stalled industrialization and premature de-industrialization, resulting in stagnant or declining aggregate productivity, are two manifestations of this negative effect. These negative consequences have been particularly true for the countries of Africa, Latin America, and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and East European countries. The phenomenon of stalled industrialization can be seen in such countries as Kenya, Burundi, and Burkina Faso. As the Figure 10 shows, the share of industry in GDP of these countries remained limited to about 20 percent. The phenomenon of premature de-industrialization is more prominent in Latin America and Caribbean countries. Figure 11 shows that while East Asia and the Pacific Region have been able to hold the share of the of the manufacturing in GDP at around 30 percent, in Latin America and the Caribbean, it plummeted from around 27 percent in the 1980s to around 17 percent in the late 1990s and then to below 15 percent since 2012. Figure 12 shows that in such countries as Argentina, Brazil, and South Africa, the share of industry in the GDP reached high levels in the late 1970s. However, instead of getting sustained at these high levels -- as has generally been the case with the classical pattern of structural change -- this share started to plummet in the 1980s and has continued to decline. Finally, it may be noted that the process of offshoring that facilitated the "manufacturing-enhancing effect" of globalization has its counterpart in "manufacturing hollowing-out effect" for the economies of many developed countries. Figure 13 presents evidence of this process of de-industrialization of many developed economies. As we can see, there has been a precipitous decline in the share of industry in total employment in France, Germany, Japan, the UK, and the USA. There has been a similar decline in industry's share in total output, though the pace of decline of this share seems to have slowed down in recent years (since 2010), most likely due to faster increase in labour productivity in this sector. Overall, the evidence confirms that globalization created both opportunities and challenges for developing countries regarding structural change. On the one hand, it created the opportunity for these countries to achieve a higher share of manufacturing and sustain it for a longer period. It also allowed countries to reach higher aggregate productivity levels without having to conform to the classical pattern of structural change. On the other hand, globalization has made it harder for many countries even to follow the classical pattern of structural change. It is largely in view of the above that the 2030 Agenda took a proactive stance with regard to structural change, particularly in the Least Developed Countries, recommending significant increase in the share of the manufacturing sector in their GDP. However, it is also clear that the recommended structural change has to conform to sustainable development. Accordingly, the 2030 Agenda could not just focus the traditional pattern of structural change, but rather on a broader agenda of transformative change. 4. From Structural Change to Transformative Change4.1 More encompassing nature of 2030Agenda The quest for more socially meaningful and environmentally sensitive economic growth became strong by the 1990s. The end of the Cold War and the possibility of the Peace Dividend created a lot of enthusiasm, and the advent of a new millennium prompted long term thinking. The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (Rio Earth Summit) adopted the wide ranging Agenda 21. A series of global conferences came up with quantitative goals regarding different social development objectives. These processes culminated in the adoption of the Millennium Declaration, followed by the adoption of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), in which the focus was directly on various social development goals. This however did not mean that the importance of economic growth was ignored, because achieving social goals generally requires economic growth. Also, the very distinction between economic and social goals has often been an artificial and tenuous one. For example, development of human capital through better education and healthcare can hardly be separated from economic goals when human capital is the most critical input of production. Furthermore, it was realized over time that broadening of the attention from economic to social goals was not enough. In particular, environmental protection needed more attention than was accorded to it in the MDGs. The classical concept of structural change however did not have much to say with regard to either social development or environmental protection. A broader concept of change was therefore necessary. The concept of Transformative Change provides that broader framework.4.2 Universality of 2030 Agenda The shift from Structural Change to Transformative Change was also prompted by the realization that the development agenda had to be universal (Figure 13). Recall that the agendas of the Development Decades during 1960-1990 were universal, with goals set for both developing and developed countries. These goals however were focused on GDP growth. The MDGs shifted the focus to social goals (such as health, education, gender parity, drinking water and sanitation). However, these goals were not universal, as they were meant primarily for developing countries, and the role of developed countries was thought to lie mainly in provision of financial and technical assistance to developing countries in achieving the social goals. With time however it was realized that, despite economic and social advances achieved by developed countries, many social goals are relevant for them too. Moreover, as the emphasis shifted to the task of protection of environment, it became clear that the agenda has to be universal again, applicable to both developing and developed countries. In fact, so far as environmental protection is concerned, it was clear that, in many respects, developed countries will have to play the leading role. For example, the 2030 Agenda urges to "decouple economic growth from environmental degradation in accordance with the 10-year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production (8.4)." In this regard, it makes it explicit that this decoupling is to be achieved "with developed countries taking the lead (8.4)." In other places, the leading role of developed countries is implied. For example, the 2030 Agenda calls for "increased resource efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes (9.4)." Clearly, developed countries are expected to play the leading role in these areas too. Needless to say, developed countries are expected to play a leading role in climate change mitigation and adaptation. It may be noted in this context that the focus of the structural change paradigm was not universal. Instead the focus was on developing countries. It was believed that economies of developed countries have already undergone the necessary structural change and have become mature and stable, so that no further significant structural change of their economies was expected. The research by Ranis, Fei, Chenery, and other scholars therefore focused on developing countries to find out whether these were succeeding in carrying out the structural change (that was implied by the historical experience of currently developed countries) and what could be done to facilitate this change. Thus the concept of structural change was also not adequate to accommodate the universality that the 2030 Agenda required. Interestingly, however, as noticed in the previous section and contradicting the expectation of the earlier researchers, the deepening of globalization since the 1980s caused and continues to cause significant structural changes in the economies of developed countries too. Figure 12 documents the dramatic "manufacturing hollowing-out" effect that many developed countries have witnessed as a result of the deeper globalization of the recent period. These countries have differed in dealing with the social consequences of manufacturing hollowing out. In some countries these consequences have been severe, leading to backlashes to the process of globalization and to efforts at reviving the manufacturing sector. Thus the issue of structural change has become relevant for developed countries too.4.3 Transformative Change subsumes Structural Change It is clear from the discussion above that the interrelated necessities of paying greater attention to social development and environmental protection and of moving to a more universal agenda required a shift from the paradigm of Structural Change to the more expansive and encompassing paradigm of Transformative Change. However, it does not mean the latter ignores the former. Transformative Change subsumes Structural Change. The very text of the 2030 Agenda makes this clear. As noted earlier, the Declaration of the 2030 Agenda calls to "strengthen the productive capacities of least developed countries in all sectors, including through structural transformation (para 27)." The SDGs themselves also include targets that directly imply structural change. For example, SDG-9 calls to "significantly raise industry's share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries (9.2)." Similarly, after calling for achieving "at least 7 percent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries (8.1)," SDG-8 calls for "achieving higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-intensive sectors (8.1)." Elsewhere, the 2030 Agenda calls for "industrial diversification and value addition to commodities (9.b)." It is therefore clear that Structural Change -- even in its classical sense -- is very much a part of the Transformational Change that the 2030 Agenda envisages. The question is how the structural change under the 2030 Agenda is to differ from what is has been so far. In other to answer this question, it is necessary to work out the implications of the sustainable development paradigm for structural change. 5. Structural change under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Sustainable development, as is known, has three dimensions, namely economic growth, social development, and environmental protection. The discussion of the implications of sustainable development for structural change can therefore be conducted by examining the implications of each of these dimensions.  In the following, we provide only an overview of the modifications and structural change will require in order to be compatible with sustainable development, hoping that detailed discussion of this important question will follow.5.1 Structural change and economic growthIt may appear that since the classical concept of structural change focused on economic growth, there are not too many additional implications of sustainable development for it. However that is not the case. For example, there has been a heightened realization in recent years that for sustainable development, economic growth has to sustained, instead of being characterized by a boom-bust pattern. Experience has shown that adverse social effects caused by economic downturns persist much longer than the downturns themselves. In many cases, these downturns cause permanent damages in well-being from which many sections of the population can never effectively recover. For example, families may never recoup the loss of capital assets that they had to liquidate in order to tide over the crises. Furthermore, these damages may persist through several generations because of setbacks in education and health that children of the affected families suffer, diminishing their job and earning prospects in the future. One way to mitigate the swings of economic cycle is diversification, not only across sectors but also within sectors. The classical structural change paradigm was mostly focused on the change of GDP composition in terms of such broad sectors as agriculture and manufacturing. While diversification across broad sectors is certainly helpful, diversification within sectors plays a crucial role in making an economy more resilient to trade cycles. For example, some developing countries that have been successful in raising the share of manufacturing in their GDP have done so through concentration on one or two subsectors, such as production of readymade garments (RMG). This creates a situation that is similar to that faced by the so-called "mono-crop" countries, which rely on one or two agricultural crops for their export earnings and economic well-being. Thus a country may remain as vulnerable to economic swings as mono-crop based agricultural countries even though it has raised the share of manufacturing in its economy and thus succeeded in achieving structural change, in its conventional sense. Another important requirement to sustain economic growth in the long run is to pay attention to dynamic comparative advantage. The traditional trade theory has been static and focused on comparative advantage at a particular point of time, based on existing factor proportions. The experience has however shown that comparative advantage evolves over time depending on the changes in the education and skill composition of the labour force, technological level, and product composition -- all of which can be influenced through policies. Thus the success of an economy based on the current comparative advantage may not last long unless it continuously upgrades its comparative advantage through appropriate policies directed toward its labour, capital, product composition, and technology. Conscious efforts need to be made to move from low-tech and low value-added products to high value-added and technologically sophisticated products. It is in view of the realization above that the 2030 Agenda lays considerable emphasis on diversification within the industrial sector, technological upgrading and innovation, and a focus on high value added. Thus, even remaining within the domain of economic growth, structural change under the 2030 Agenda needs a different focus than what was implied by the classical structural change paradigm. 5.2 Structural change and social development As noted above, social goals were not prominent in the discussion of structural change. The implicit assumption has been that once per capita income rises (as a result of GDP growth, attained through structural change), the social goals will also be achieved. However, as noted above, experience has shown that increases in aggregate or per capita income do not always ensure achieving the social development goals. Much depends in this regard on the distribution of income. Unless the distribution of the incremental income is favourable for people belonging to the low income groups of the population, a higher aggregate or per capita income may not have the desired effect on social development. Other proactive policies are also necessary to achieve the social goals. The question therefore is whether there are structural changes that are more favourable to social development than others. In particular, are there structural changes that lead to more equitable distribution of income than others? One way in which structural change can improve income distribution is by raising labour income. Therefore, in labour "surplus" developing countries, structural changes that make greater use of labour should be helpful for raising the wages and better distribution of income. By contrast, adoption of capital intensive technologies leaving large pools of labour unemployed is likely to worsen income distribution. In the context of the Hecksher-Ohlin model of trade (Heckscher (1919) and Ohlin (1933)), the Rybczynski theorem indeed predicts greater use of the more abundant factor of production, once the countries open up to trade (Rybczynski (1955)). The Stolper-Samuelson theorem traces this effect further by predicting a rise of the rate of return of the abundant factor and decrease of the rate of return of the scarce factor (Stolper and Samuelson (1941) ). For a labour-surplus developing economy, these predictions raised the hope of a more equitable distribution of income resulting from structural changes that opening up would cause. Unfortunately, the real world is so far apart from the simplistic construct of the Hecksher-Ohlin model that globalization has resulted in an increase in income inequality in most countries -- both developing and developed (Milanovic, 2016). Thus, it is difficult to rely on the spontaneous forces of trade and the structural changes they bring about for achieving the social goals of development. Instead, conscious efforts will have to be made so that the structural change leads to increases in the share of labour in national income. In doing so, attention needs to be given to the necessity of creating and making use of dynamic comparative advantage, noted above, so that the economy does not get stuck with labour-intensive but low value-added products that cannot sustain growth of labour income in the future. Furthermore, attention needs to be paid to intra-labour income differences. Much of the inequality increase in recent years in many countries has been traced to increased inequality between incomes of different groups and types of labour. ). Thus focusing attention on structural change that increases labour income share in the aggregate only may not be effective in achieving such social goals as eradication of poverty or gender disparity. In addition to influencing the nature of structural change, it will also be necessary to adopt other distributive policies in order to achieve the social goals. Thus structural change under the 2030 Agenda has to be different from the structural change of the spontaneous type. This will however require considerable concrete research and careful policy formulation in the light of the concrete circumstances of an individual country. 5.3 Structural change and environmental protection The classical concept of structural change did not have much to say with regard to environmental protection. To a great extent this was a limitation imposed by the time. During the heyday of the structural change discussion -- i.e. during 1960s -- environmental problems had not yet become acute. Currently however, environmental problems, in general, and climate change, in particular, are overshadowing other problems. Structural change now therefore has to pay much attention to its environmental impact. Environmental impact however is a wide ranging concept, and it is beyond the scope of this paper to consider all its elements. However, there are some aggregate measures of the state of environment that can be used for our purpose. One of them is Ecological Footprint (EF), which measures, in terms of hectares of bio-space needed on average for generation of the resources a person needs and to absorb the waste that he or she creates. While conceptually an appealing concept, the EF has many measurement issues. Another broad measure of environmental impact is Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, which reflect the level and nature of a variety of economic and ecological processes. Though less comprehensive than EF from the conceptual viewpoint, GHG however can serve the purpose, because other dimensions of environment left out of its scope will not matter much if catastrophic climate change does  come about. Furthermore, GHG has fewer measurement issues, and reliable data on it are more widely available. In the discussion below, we therefore use GHG as the measure of environmental quality. We noticed in Section 3 that globalization can have different effects on structural change. It is important to note that these effects are not neutral with regard to their environmental impact. The previous sections identified countries that have experienced, respectively, agricultural (Thailand, Uruguay, and Vietnam), manufacturing (Bangladesh, People's Republic of China and Republic of Korea) and service (Costa Rica, India and Mauritius) enhancing effect of globalization. Figure 14 shows the GHG emissions, excluding land-use change and forestry, per million US dollar of GDP for these countries, referred to as the emissions intensity.Overall, all countries have experienced a drop in emissions intensity, and it is not the case that countries witnessing "manufacturing-enhancing" effect of globalization had any specific trends in emissions intensity. In fact, the country with the lowest reduction in emission intensity is Mauritius, a country that experienced a "services-enhancing effect. Also, countries such as Thailand and Vietnam that witnessed an "agriculture-enhancing effects are among the countries that experienced the lowest decrease in emission intensity. This is not surprising, because agriculture now is heavily dependent on chemical fertilizer and pesticides and mechanized irrigation, which cause emissions to increase. Also, agriculture sector often emits a lot of methane, which is a more potent GHG than even carbon dioxide, and expansion of agriculture often occurs at the expense of forests through land-use changes. If land-use change and forestry had been included in the measure of emissions, the graph would have shown that emission intensity have skyrocketed in Uruguay and Vietnam, two of the countries that experienced an "agriculture-enhancing" effect.The evidence presented in Figures 14 shows that, no matter which particular effect of globalization on its economic structure a country experiences, it is possible for its GHG emissions to increase. However, variations among countries witnessing similar kind of effect of globalization on their economic structure indicate that the volume and rate of growth of emissions depend on the particular conditions and policies of a country. In other words, regardless of the particular sector a country emphasizes, it has both the scope and the obligation to minimize GHG emissions, so as to counteract climate change and environmental deterioration in general. To see whether there are systematic differences across "manufacturing-enhancing," "agriculture-enhancing" and "services-enhancing" effects of globalization on structural change regarding GHG emissions, one would need to move this analysis forward and compute GHG emissions per value added by different sectors, so-called emission intensity. This is however not easy, because the sectors distinguished in the GHG emissions data do not always match with the sectors distinguished in the national income accounting data of the corresponding countries and time periods. Here we show some trends in sectoral emission intensity for three countries, but we leave a more complete analysis for future. Figure 15-17 show that for all three countries there has been a drastic reduction in emission intensity in almost all sectors, most notably in the manufacturing sector. Beyond that, it is interesting to note that in both China and India the manufacturing sector is still the sector with the highest emissions intensity. In Republic of Korea, apart from mining and quarrying which is a very small sector in terms of value added, manufacturing is also the sector with the highest emission intensity. Following manufacturing, in China, mining and quarrying is the second sector, while in India it is services and in Republic of Korea it is agriculture, hunting and forestry. It is in view of the above that the 2030 Agenda refers to environmental sustainability and reduction of GHG not only in goals that are directly related to environment, but also in goals that concern production sectors, such as agriculture, manufacturing, and even services. For example, the Agenda calls for "sustainable agriculture (SDG)" sustainable industrialization and infrastructure (SDG 9.2 and 9.4), and even "sustainable tourism (SDG 8.9)." The Agenda also calls for environmental sustainability in connection with the goals concerning housing, transportation, energy, and infrastructure. In other words, all structural change related processes have to be viewed and modified in the light of the environmental sustainability requirement. The concrete ways to do so will have to be determined through concrete research and analysis focused on individual countries. Concluding remarksThe switch from "structural change" to "transformative change" is not a matter of mere rhetoric. There was a strong rationale for this switch, and it signifies an important paradigm shift. This paper tries to clarify the rationale and implications of this shift. The concept of "structural change" focuses on changes in sectoral composition of the GDP of an economy and had a significant role in Development Economics. In its classical version, structural change provided a theory of growth by assuming that the "traditional" (often equated with the agriculture) sector had a lower productivity of labour than in the "modern" (often equated with manufacturing or industry) sector, so that transfer of labour from the former to the latter could raise aggregate output and productivity. It was further postulated that the increase in the share of manufacturing in the GDP however had a limit after which this share declined, compensated by the rise in the share of the services sector in the GDP. This classical conception of structural change was in part based on the actual experiences of the early industrializing countries. With time however important changes occurred. First of all, use of machines -- which was the reason why manufacturing originally had a higher labour productivity than agriculture -- spread to other sectors too, so that it was not always necessary to raise the share of manufacturing in the economy to raise aggregate productivity level. In other words, the classical pattern of structural change -- in which agriculture was followed by manufacturing, in turn followed by services, to be the dominant sector -- was not the only successful pattern of structural change that a country could follow. Second, deeper globalization since the 1980s, widened the possibilities regarding patterns of structural change. It allowed developing countries, on the one hand, to experience a more rapid increase in the share of manufacturing and to sustain the higher share for a longer time. On the other hand, it led to stalled industrialization and pre-mature de-industrialization in many developing countries. Third, focusing exclusively on GDP growth proved to be inadequate, and it became important to give more and direct attention to social and environmental issues, which were by and large absent from the structural change paradigm. Fourth, the greater focus on the social and environmental outcomes also made it clear that the development agenda has to be universal, unlike structural change which focused mostly on developing countries. As the world community embraced sustainable development as the overarching goal, it became necessary to switch to a more expansive paradigm that can provide more space for effective integration of all three dimensions of sustainable development and in doing so can subsume structural change by imparting it the characteristics necessary to be compatible with sustainable development. The concept of "transformative change" provides this new paradigm. The concrete ways in which structural change under transformative change will have to differ from the earlier processes of structural change can be understood by looking at it in the light of the three dimensions of sustainable development. From the viewpoint of economic growth, it is clear that structural change has to ensure sustained economic growth, avoiding the boom-bust cycle. This requires more attention to within sector diversification, something that structural change discussion largely ignored, because of its focus on sectoral composition of GDP. More attention is also needed on building and making use of dynamic comparative advantage in order to continue to participate successfully in the global division of labour. From viewpoint of social development, structural change has to lead to greater increase in the share of labour in the national income. Furthermore, the distribution of the labour income itself has to be more favourable for those labour groups who are at the very low end of the scale. From the perspective of environmental protection, the evidence shows that while industry generally tends to be more threatening to the environment, other sectors -- such as agriculture and services -- also pose considerable threat to the environment. Hence it is not possible to put at rest concerns for environment simply by choosing a more agriculture- or service-oriented structural change. Moreover, the effect on environment of different patterns of structural change seems to depend more crucially on the concrete circumstances of a country and the policies it pursues. Hence, attention to the environmental impact has to be a constant concern no matter what particular pattern of structural change a country follows. The 2030 Agenda for sustainable development that aims at "transformative change" includes "structural change" as an important component. However, this structural change has to be such that it promotes sustainable development. 