Inequality and Household Economic Hardship in the united_states
 In recent decades, income disparity in the united_states has increased. Employee compensation as a share of national income has tended to decline, the profit share of national income has grown, and inequality within labour has risen. The increase in inequality may have had effects on the economy at large. Some have argued that greater inequality could have resulted in faster productivity growth, while others have contended that more unequal distribution of economic resources can impede demand growth. Empirically, there is no support for the former, but there is some indication that rising inequality has been connected to slower demand growth. In the U.S., the adverse effects of higher inequality on demand growth may have been temporarily muted due to the greater ease with which households can borrow money to sustain their consumption levels, however, over time, this may result in greater financial instability, reflected in greater economic hardship, especially for poorer households.
Rising U.S. income inequality
A striking characteristic of the economic recovery in the U.S. that started in late  was a rapidly growing gap between supply and demand. Economic growth and employment diverged, as historically weak demand growth did not keep pace with productivity growth. Rising profits were achieved by excessive oversupply over real demand, while employee compensation was held down to contain costs (Bivens and Weller, a; Weller, a) (Figure ). In response to lower real income, households borrowed more to maintain their consumption levels (Weller, a), while businesses did not step up investment quickly (Weller, Bivens and Sawicky, ; Weller, b). Instead, corporations used a substantial share of their additional resources for share repurchases and dividend pay-outs (Bivens and Weller, a). Such measures tend to contribute to rising capital income inequality.
The job loss recovery was, however, the culmination of long-term trends. Since the mid-s, growth in productivity has outpaced growth in labour compensation (Figure ). In an earlier period, between  and the middle of , productivity had grown  per cent faster than real hourly compensation, while from  to  productivity grew . per cent faster than hourly compensation. Paralleling this divergence, firms saw rising profits (Bivens and Weller, b; Wolff, ). After-tax profit rates and shares, including net interest earnings, already saw the strongest growth, compared to other profit measures in earlier periods (Table ). The trends in profit shares are accompanied by the opposite trend in labour shares. Regardless of how the labour share is measured, it declined in the period, particularly after , whereas in the earlier period, -, it had been growing (Table ).
Inequality in the economic circumstances of workers and their families is one outgrowth of the increased inequality in the trend towards greater share of national income going towards profits, rather than labour income. Over the past few decades, the united_states has seen an unprecedented and significant increase in inequality between workers at the top and the bottom of the earnings distribution. Further, although wages and salaries make up the bulk of family income, research has found that changes in the distribution of other kinds of income (interest, dividends, and rent) have played just as important a role in explaining the rise in inequality. The rise in inequality is exacerbated by the decline in opportunities for upward income mobility.
Wage inequality
The sharpest increases in wage inequality occurred during the s. From  to , workers in the bottom decile saw their wages fall by . per cent. Simultaneously, those in the top  per cent saw their wage incomes rise by . per cent. Inequality also increased between workers at the median and those at the top, as wages for the median worker remained the same over the period (Mishel, Bernstein and Boushey, ). The overall trend was for the top and bottom to diverge with little change in the middle.
Between  and , the U.S. economy saw a slowdown in the growth of inequality. Wages increased by . per cent for those in the bottom decile, and by . per cent for those in the top  per cent. Between  and , wages for those at the bottom of the wage distribution actually saw their wages rise faster than those at the top for the first time in decades (Mishel, Bernstein and Boushey, ). Inequality between the top and the middle increased more than between the top and bottom levels, as the median workers saw their wages rise by only . per cent.
Across-group inequality
If overall inequality rose primarily because of rising inequality between different groups, such as ethnic, gender or professional groups, this could be ascribed to factors specific to particular groups, such as discrimination or increasing returns to skills. But if inequality has been primarily driven by differences within groups, then the problem is more generalized.
 Across-group wage inequality declined among male and female workers over the past three decades. From  to , average male wages stagnated, while average female wages rose by about one-fifth. Even after wages are regression-adjusted to control for education and experience, the gender gap closed from  per cent in  to  per cent in . However, since , the gender pay gap has remained unchanged, hovering at around  per cent (Gottschalk and Danziger, ).
The inequality gap by race, however, remained. Controlling for personal characteristics, among women, the black/white gap was virtually non-existent in the late s, but increased to  per cent by . Among men, the black/white gap was  per cent in , rising to about  per cent in the early s. It came back down to  per cent by .
Inequality by educational level
During the same period, inequality by educational attainment increased, however. Greater educational attainment should signal higher levels of productivity. Thus, there is an expectation of inequality across education levels, but there is no expectation of an increase in this inequality over time. However, in , college-educated men earned . per cent more than high-school-educated men, whereas in , the college premium was only . per cent. For women, the rise was less dramatic. In , college-educated women earned . per cent more than high school-educated women, compared to a . per cent premium in  (Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto, ). Most of the increase in educational inequality occurred between the late s and the early s. Since , the gap between high school-educated and college-educated workers has been relatively flat among both men and women, although there is slight upward trend, more so for men than for women (Gottschalk and Danziger, ).
Implications of within-group inequality
If there are changes in the level of inequality within groups, this indicates that a fundamental change has taken place in the U.S. economy a change that affects all categories of workers, rather than only certain groups based on their educational attainment or other identifying characteristics. As with across-group inequality, the largest increases in within-group inequality occurred during the s and s. Among both men and women, the residual wage inequality in hourly wages in the bottom decile rose dramatically between  and the late s. A person in the bottom decile of the distribution where  per cent of households have incomes below the benchmark level and  per cent have incomes above that level in the late s had earnings roughly  per cent lower than what a similar person had earned in . For individuals in the top decile, wages were about  per cent higher in the mid-s, compared to , but stopped increasing during the s (Gottschalk and Danziger, ).
Income inequality
Trends in income inequality closely mirror wage inequality. From  to , annual growth in real family income was similar across quintiles. However, from  to , those in the top quintile, particularly the top  per cent, saw their family income grow significantly faster than those in the lower income quintiles (Figure ).
The largest increases in income inequality occurred during the s. Between  and , rising inequality was the result of large increases in income among high-income families and declining income among lower income families. During the s, income among lower-income families started to rise, but higher-income families saw their incomes rise even faster. Between  and , among married couple families with children, incomes of those in the bottom fifth of the income distribution rose by . per cent, compared to . per cent among those in the top fifth (Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto, ).
Gains were concentrated at the very top. Research using tax returns found that, between  and , the average real income of the bottom  per cent of U.S. taxpayers fell by  per cent, while the income of the top  per cent grew by  per cent (Piketty and Saez, ).
While the top pulled away from the bottom, it also pulled away from the middle. Thus, households in the top quintile now have over twice the income (. times) of the top half of households, whereas back in , this ratio was only .. In contrast, the gap between households at the bottom and middle quintiles has remained relatively constant, at . in both  and . Similarly, the ratio of the income cut-off for the top  per cent of income earners where  per cent of the population has less income to the bottom quintile where  per cent of the population has more income rose from . in  to . in  (Figure ). This means that the top  per cent of households have grown increasingly richer than the bottom  per cent. Also, the annual increases almost doubled after . From  to , the ratio of income cut-offs increased annually by . per cent, whereas it rose by . per cent on average each year from  to . In comparison, the ratio of the income for the bottom quintile to the median stayed fairly constant at about . (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor and Mills, ).
In the aggregate, this means that more income became concentrated at the top of the income scale and even less at the bottom. The share of total income accruing to the top quintile of households rose from . per cent in  to . per cent in  (Figure ). In comparison, the share of income going to the bottom quintile of households fell from . per cent to . per cent over the same period. Interestingly,
the aggregate income share of the bottom quintile of households had actually been rising until , when it reached . per cent, whereas the share of income accruing to the top quintile had been falling slightly until , when it reached . per cent (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor and Mills, ).
 Economic mobility
This rise in income inequality happened even as the number of members within a family who worked for money increased. In , most mothers did not work outside the home, while by , most mothers did. The increase in hours worked by wives was greater among families in the bottom fifth of the income distribution. Between  and , wives in families with children increased their hours by . per cent, compared to a . per cent increase in hours among wives in families in the top fifth. Among married-couple families with children, inequality would have increased even more without the contribution of wives income. Between  and , among families in the bottom fifth, incomes would have fallen by . per cent without the earnings of wives, rather than rising by . per cent, as was the case. Among families in the top fifth, incomes would have increased by . per cent, rather than by . per cent, as they did (Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto, ).
If wage and income inequality were counterbalanced by mobility, then greater inequality would not necessarily mean that some people got stuck at the bottom (or at the top). However, wage and income inequality was not counterbalanced by mobility. In the s, . per cent of families who began the decade in the bottom quintile and . per cent of families who began the decade in the second quintile from the bottom moved into a higher quintile over the decade. However, in the s, only . per cent of families who began the decade in the bottom quintile and . per cent of families who began the decade in the second quintile from the bottom moved into a higher quintile (Bradbury and Katz, ).
Wysong and others () found that social class matters now more than ever. Sons from the bottom three-quarters of the socio-economic scale were less likely to move up in the s than their counterparts had been in the s. By , only  per cent of sons of fathers in the bottom quarter (defined by income, education and occupation) had moved into the top quarter, whereas in , by comparison,  per cent of lower-class sons had moved up to the top. Thus, the chance that a low-income family will move up the income ladder has diminished over time.
The labour force participation of wives has had an impact on mobility. Families where wives had high and rising employment rates, work hours, and pay were more likely to move up the income ladder or maintain their position (Bradbury and Katz, ).
Capital income also mattered, since its share of personal income doubled from . per cent in early  to . per cent in the second quarter of  (BEA, ). However, the assets underlying these income streams are fairly unequally distributed. For instance, Wolff (a) reported that the bottom  per cent of households had negative financial net worth in , and little total net worth. Further, Wolff () reported that wealth inequality for total net worth rose between  and .
Causes of increase in inequality
Various authors have ascribed the rising inequality observed in the U.S. since the mid-s to either the increasing openness of the economy to international trade or to technological change, mostly biased against unskilled labour. Autor and others () provide a good review of the latter literature (technological change), while Cline () provides one of the former. Both theories can partly explain the increasing divergence between compensation and productivity, but a lot still remains unexplained.
Institutional authors have argued that a relatively deflationary macroeconomic environment was the dominant cause of inequality in wage and capital incomes. Galbraith () examined the rise in interindustry wage differentials and their relationship with the unemployment rate, arguing that high unemployment is associated with rising inter-industry differentials. This still leaves ample room for competing or complementary explanations, especially since Galbraith () primarily addresses inequality within labour earnings.
Another factor that explains the divergent trends between capital and labour is a rising imbalance in the corporate governance realm. Specifically, a growing concentration among institutional shareholders and the rising power of managers in deciding on the allocation of corporate resources is juxtaposed to a declining unionization rate. Over the years, more funds have become concentrated among institutional shareholders. In , institutional investors owned less than  per cent of outstanding equities, and in , their share surpassed  per cent for the first time (BOG, c).
Over the last  years, institutional investors have had increasing incentives to use their expanded managerial leeway to allocate resources towards capital. Starting in the s, institutional changes, such as the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of  and the introduction of (k) plans, gave fund managers and households a common interest in maximizing asset returns (Bivens and Weller, a). This altered the way corporations were run, creating a new class of professional managers who enjoyed greater freedom in allocating corporate resources towards a strategy of rent extraction, including downsizing, outsourcing, and restructuring, as well as a reorientation towards financial service activities, away from actual production (Lazonick and OSullivan, ; OSullivan, ). Consequently, labour compensation declined, along with union representation, as jobs, especially in manufacturing, were lost. Thus, the allocation of corporate resources towards raising profits proceeded with less opposition than in the past.
In important ways, the rise in income inequality is explained by changes in corporate governance. For one thing, these changes have been a main driver of the growing emphasis on profit generation, which in turn has reduced the allocation of corporate resources towards labour. Changes in corporate governance also explain the growing inequality within labour that has resulted from increased rent extracting activities and from making executive compensation contingent on share price performance. Finally, the close tie between executive compensation and share prices also explains the fact that a growing proportion of personal income derives from assets. This in turn contributes to the rise in income inequality related to unequal distribution of household wealth.
The level of unemployment is critical in explaining rising inequality within labour: higher unemployment leads to increasing inequality; conversely, inequality tends to shrink during periods of tight labour markets. This is because unemployment adversely affects the fortunes of those at the bottom more than those at the top. Individuals with limited education, or those who earn at the bottom of the wage distribution range, are more likely to lose their jobs when unemployment rises. In the U.S., the mechanisms through which unemployment affects wages are not always direct, but, at their core, they are related to the relative power of labour and capital within the economy. At times of high unemployment, workers will be less likely to bargain hard for higher wages, for fear of losing their jobs; they will also be less able to find a new position at a higher wage (or benefit) level.
Structural changes in the U.S. economy are also implicated in the rise of inequality. The decline in unionization, the lessening of labour market regulation, changes in the industrial and occupational mix of jobs, and globalization have all contributed to growing inequality. A declining real minimum wage and de-unionization can explain about one-third of the growth in wage inequality, while globalization immigration, trade, and capital mobility can explain another one-third of inequalitys rise (DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, ; Gottschalk, ; Lee, ; Card, Lemieux and Riddell, ).
Growing inequality is also the result of the lack of a broad-based social insurance system. Once an American becomes poor, it is exceedingly difficult for him or her to rise back up into the middle class. The OECD has found that, in the U.S., not only are there more poor families, but also, these poor families are less likely than the poor in other countries to exit from poverty. For example, while . per cent of poor Germans exit poverty each year, only . per cent of poor Americans do so. Because income transfers are so small, the only way out of poverty is through earnings or by marriage. This circumstance has left poor people in the U.S. more likely to exit poverty through earnings than their counterparts in other OECD nations. Yet, because of limited growth in wages among low-wage workers over the past few decades (up until the late s), this led to lower poverty exit rates in the U.S. Thus, the U.S. social welfare system does not reduce inequality by helping families back into the middle class; further, the U.S. has more wage and income inequality than any other OECD country (OECD, ).
Economic trends in the U.S.
The U.S. economy has been characterized by a number of major trends. For one, households have been saving less and borrowing more to maintain their consumption levels. The personal savings rate declined from . per cent in the early s to . per cent in the latest business cycle (Table ). Over the same period, consumer debt rose from . per cent of disposable income in the early s to over  per cent in the most recent business cycle, from  through .
These changes did not come without a cost. Economic strains on households grew. From  through mid-, households dedicated at least  per cent of their disposable income to servicing debts the largest share in twenty years (Figure ). Also, for instance, credit card charge-off rates, the share of loans deemed uncollectable, were above  per cent since  (BOG, a). In addition, personal bankruptcies have risen, so that the share of households that declared bankruptcy reached an estimated record . per cent in  (Figure ).
In a context of weak growth in labour income, consumption growth slowed down (Table ).
For  and , average real consumption growth was . per cent, compared to . per cent in the s the slowest consumption increase of any post-war business cycle. However, consumption never declined during the most recent recession in , and consumer spending on new homes and home improvements accelerated more than in prior recoveries. Thus, consumer spending contributed more to growth than the actual growth rate, reflecting the continued trade deficits and the slowdown in investment 
On the other hand, firms used their profits for purposes other than investments in productivity. They increased their share repurchases and dividend pay-outs. Corporations used . per cent of their resources for such purposes in the s, but more than  per cent since the s, while capital expenditure simultaneously declined (Table ).
Inequality and the macroeconomy
What is the relationship between inequality and the macroeconomy? If the rise in the profit share translates into an increase in the profit rate, firms could have a greater incentive to invest (Bivens and Weller, b; Palomba, ). However, at the same time, a higher profit rate may raise market entry and ultimately lower the profit rate (Peretto, ). Further, if a higher profit rate is achieved by reducing the share of labour costs, demand growth may suffer, thereby lowering profit growth in the long-run (Palley, ). Moreover, firms may abandon core activities to allocate funds towards rent extraction, which could impede organizational learning and innovation (Lazonick and OSullivan, ; OSullivan, ). These concerns, though, do not necessarily contradict the original notion that a higher profit rate will lead to more investments. They do suggest, however, that over time, countervailing forces will gain ground and weaken the link. The existence of another positive link between inequality and the macroeconomy is confirmed by the fact that inequality may imply a greater wage premium on skills, leading to greater productivity growth. On the other hand, greater inequality could lead to political instability, and thus to disincentives for investment (Alesina and Perotti, ; Larrain and Vergara, ; Rodriguez, ). There may be a threshold, below which inequality fosters growth, but above which, increasing political instability outweighs any gains from skills development (Benhabib, ; Chen, ).
Patterns of wage growth show no link between inequality and skills (Mishel, Bernstein and Schmitt, ; Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto, ). Entry-level wages among male college graduates were stagnant from  to , and fell . per cent from  to . Among young college graduates, real wages rose . per cent for men and . per cent for women between  and , a period when increases in wage inequality slowed down, but productivity growth accelerated. Also, wage inequality rose the fastest in the s, a time when productivity growth did not accelerate (Mishel, Bernstein and Schmitt, ; Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto, ). Also, the occupations that account for the largest wage differentials for education were managerial and sales positions, not technical professions (Mishel, Bernstein and Schmitt, ). Research on the effect of inequality on innovation shows, by and large, no systematic link. Scully () found a positive, albeit small effect of inequality on growth (Scully, ). However, others found a negative relationship between the two (Alesina and Perotti, ; Panizza, ; Rodriguez, ; Rupasingha, Goetz and Freshwater, ). The findings of a link between inequality and growth, though, appear to be sensitive to the specifications of the empirical model (Crafts, ; Panizza, ). Alternatively, if the labour share declines, aggregate demand could fall due to a slowdown in consumption. This effect could be greater if more income is concentrated among high income earners who have a higher propensity to save. However, the share of consumption relative to disposable income, which should be expected to decline in the face of rising inequality, has actually grown (Table ). Lower-income households generally spend a greater share of their income, compared to higher-income households, and rising inequality has led to lower growth in income at the bottom, which should lower consumption overall. Also, savings incentives should be relatively more effective for high income earners. Engen and Gale (), though, found that savings incentives seem to be more effective in raising savings for low income earners, and not for high income ones (Engen and Gale, ). In comparison, several studies suggest a negative connection between inequality and aggregate demand (Arestis and Howell, ; Brown, ; Pressman, ).
Consumer debt and household economic hardship
One explanation for the fact that consumption did not slow in the face of rising inequality may be the easy access to consumer credit. As inequality rose, consumption should have declined without any increase in consumer debt (Brown, ). Specifically, it has been argued that greater inequality gave rise to an endogenous credit market, prompting the credit supply to grow as inequality rose (Kruger and Perri, ). An endogenous credit market is the outgrowth of low labour income; as families see their inflationadjusted incomes fall or remain constant, they turn to increased credit to make up the difference in their family budgets.
In fact, as inequality grew, the credit supply expanded, particularly among low-income households. This was due mainly to three important developments:
 The standardization of mortgages and the introduction of mortgage backed securities;
 Financial innovations that increased the credit supply; and
 Access to credit increased as financial competition intensified.

First, the standardization of mortgages and the introduction of mortgage backed securities began in the s: with the creation of Ginnie Mae under the Housing and Urban Development Act of ; the creation of Freddie Mac; the engagement of Fannie Mae in the pass-through market under the Emergency Home Finance Act of ; and tax advantages for mortgages under the  Tax Reform Act (Vandell, ). These innovations helped to reduce the risks for mortgage lenders and lowered the costs of mortgages (Figure ) (Van Order, ). Pearce and Miller () estimated that the cost savings to consumers facilitated by these policies amounted to somewhere between $. billion and $. billion.
Second, the credit supply increased as a result of financial innovations. The Tax Reform Act of  phased out the deductibility of most non-mortgage interest and introduced new marginal tax rates that reduced the tax advantage of all types of debt. This led to a shift in consumer debt towards mortgages and home equity loans (Figure ) (Dunsky and Follain, ; Stango, ). Stango () estimates that by , aggregate mortgage debt was over  per cent higher, credit card debt approximately  per cent lower, and auto loan debt approximately  per cent lower than they would have been without these changes.
Third, access to credit increased as financial competition intensified. Competition among credit card providers gave financial institutions incentives to offer credit cards to clients who had previously been underserved, leading to a sharp increase in credit card debt (Figure ), especially among lower income households (Manning, ; Yoo, ). Non-bank credit, including payday loans, pawn-broking, rent-to-own and appliance title loans, and tax refund anticipation loans grew in parallel to rising inequality, especially among low-income customers (Barr, ; CFA, , ; Stegman and Faris, ). The mechanics of consumption, income and consumer debt are as follows. Greater availability of credit can offset the effects of greater inequality, but higher debt service costs can outweigh the added impulse to spend resulting from greater debt (see Box ).
During the last business cycle in the early s, personal income became a negative contributor to changes in consumption, i.e. consumption grew faster than personal income. Since the s, debt has outpaced consumption, helping to finance the gap left by slower income growth. Yet, despite faster debt growth, interest payments relative to consumption spending remained unchanged and even declined since the s, due to falling interest rates (Table , Figure ). For our estimate regarding the effect of inequality on the credit supply, see Box . Under credit rationing, realized credit is equal to the credit supply (Stiglitz and Weiss, ). The term credit supply indicates credit in relation to disposable income. Its explanatory variables are expected income gains and interest rates.
Table  presents our results for total debt. Regression () shows the baseline results. All variables have the expected sign. In regression (), we add our measure for inequality between capital and labour. A greater distribution of national income towards labour is less likely to give rise to endogenous credit expansion and thus should reduce the credit supply, ceteris paribus. The estimated parameter is statistically insignificant.

Mechanics of consumption, income and consumer debt
Greater availability of credit can offset the effects of greater inequality, but higher debt service costs can outweigh the added impulse to spending resulting from greater debt:
In regression (), we add our two measures for income inequality, which are statistically insignificant. Regression () introduces an alternative measure for inequality between capital and labour. Now, we consider proprietors income as part of total labour compensation. This generates a statistically significant, yet positive correlation between inequality and the amount of debt. One explanation for this unexpected sign may be that more labour income may also constitute more collateral for households to borrow against.
In regressions () and (), we test the robustness of our results with respect to within labour inequality. In regression (), we replace the Atkinson measure with the . calibration factor, with the Atkinson measure with a . calibration factor. The results remain robust. To circumvent any collinearity problems, we combine both within labour measures using factor analysis. We first standardize both variables and then calculate the principal factors. We use only the first factor to generate a new variable labour inequality. This is a linear combination of the two variables and explains  per cent of their variance. Using this new variable, instead of two separate measures for labour inequality, generates regression (). The results are again largely robust.
Inequality linked to debt?
One reason for the lack of a link between inequality and debt may be that in the aggregate total of borrowing by both high and low income households, these may have had a mutually offsetting effect. Specifically, higher income earners are more likely than lower income households to own a home, and thus be able to borrow against their real estate (Wolff, b, ).
  
Income inequality rose partially because incomes of higher earners pulled away from the middle. Thus, households that were more likely to own their residence also had more collateral to borrow against, but less need to borrow additional money. In comparison, lower income households saw below average income gains as inequality rose, but also had fewer opportunities to borrow against their own homes. As they had a greater need to borrow, but less collateral, endogenous credit expansion may have taken place, manifesting itself in more credit card debt for low income households. Thus, we estimate our results separately for mortgages (Table ) and credit card debt (Table ).
We find a consistent, positive, and statistically significant relationship between the labour share of national income and mortgage debt, suggesting that less labour income allowed fewer households to buy a home and borrow against the value of their real estate than otherwise would have been the case. A  per cent decline in the four quarter average of labours share of national income translated into a  per cent decrease in the ratio of mortgage debt to disposable income. The results also show that the rising inequality in the distribution of wage earnings had an adverse effect on mortgage debt. A rise in earnings inequality translated into less mortgage debt (Table ).
In comparison, we find no link between the inequality between capital and labour and the amount of credit card debt, but we find that greater inequality within labour results in more credit card debt (Table ). A  per cent increase in wage inequality has resulted in a . per cent increase in credit card debt relative to disposable income. From  to , an increase in inequality by  standard deviation would explain a . per cent increase in debt relative to disposable income. In comparison, a  standard deviation increase in capital inequality would have meant a . per cent increase in the ratio of credit card debt to disposable income.
Increased consumer debt may have paralleled greater economic hardship, especially since the credit supply expansion was concentrated among lower income households (Iyigun and Owen, ). The debt service burden rose from an average of . per cent in the early s to . per cent since ,
a  per cent increase (Figure ). Also, household debt relative to disposable income rose from . per cent to . per cent between the late s and early s, or a  per cent increase (Figure ). Thus, the burden of repaying debt rose more slowly than debt levels. In contrast, however, personal bankruptcies as a share of households rose fourfold from . per cent in  to . per cent in ; default rates on consumer credit almost doubled from the early s to the period after  (Figure ), and the charge off rate on credit card loans increased almost threefold from . per cent in  to . per cent at the end of  (BOG, a). Consequently, trends in economic hardship were out of line with debt service trends, but consistent with the greater debt levels. Increasing inequality may explain this divergence. Credit, especially in more costly forms, such as credit card debt, may have grown faster where income growth was slower, i.e. low and moderate income households (Bird, Hagstrom and Wild, ; Black and Morgan, ). Additionally, lenders may have screened customers carefully and offered worse terms to customers who were more likely to become delinquent on their payments than to others (Ausubel, ; Stavins, ). Thus, both types of inequality may have contributed to a rise in economic hardship, due to the ensuing demand for credit and the extension of rising, and more costly credit, such as credit card debt (Chatterjee and others, ; Gross and Souleles, ; Stavins, ).
Inequality and economic hardship
In estimating the link between inequality and economic hardship, we use alternatively economic hardship, personal bankruptcy, charge-off rates on all consumer credit, and charge-off rates on credit card debt as dependent variables. The inclusion of inequality measures in addition to debt service and debt composition controls for the fact that credit may have expanded in forms not captured here (e.g., payday loans and pawnshops). Economic hardship is typically a function of income growth, debt composition, out-ofpocket medical expenditures, debt service, and unemployment, in addition to demographic characteristics (Ausubel, ; Chaterjee, Corbae, Nakajima and Rios-Rull, ; Gross and Souleles, ; Stavins, ). We supplement this model with our measure for between-labour and capital inequality and within labour inequality
All explanatory variables have the expected sign or are statistically insignificant (Table ). Regression  presents our baseline results for personal bankruptcies, which seem unaffected by inequality between labour and profits, as regression  shows. However, inequality within labour, especially arising from wealth inequality, results in a higher personal bankruptcy rate (regression ). Using our combined labour inequality measure does not change the results materially (regression ). A  standard deviation increase in labour inequality would result in a  per cent increase in the personal bankruptcy rate explaining less than one-tenth of the rise in the personal bankruptcy rate. The effect of the within-labour inequality on charge-off rates is similar to that on personal bankruptcy rates as they also rose fourfold from  to  (Table ).
Conclusion
We have studied the potential link in the U.S. between rising income inequality and increasing financial instability of households. Our research shows that the increase in inequality between labour and capital and within labour has contributed systematically to a rise in credit card debt. While easy access to credit may have helped to maintain consumption levels in the short term at a time of slow income growth for low and middle income households, it may also have contributed to a rise in household economic hardship. Our results suggest that the rise in inequality may be able to explain about one-tenth of the increase in household economic hardship observed over the past few decades. Although not an insignificant economic factor in the aggregate, it is important to keep in mind that rising inequality may have contributed substantially more to the economic hardship of particular income groups, where credit expansions, especially more costly ones, may have been more pronounced relative to disposable income.
