Global Income Inequality: What It Is And Why It Matters?
 Global inequality is a relatively recent research topic. The first calculations of inequality across world citizens were done in the early s (Berry, Bourguignon and Morrisson, ; Grosh and Nafziger, ). This is because in order to calculate global inequality, one needs to have data on (within-country) national income distributions for most of the countries in the world, or at least for most of the populous and rich countries. But it is only from the early to mid-s that such data became available for China, Soviet Union and its constituent republics and large parts of Africa.
Before we move to an analysis of global inequality, however, it is useful to set the stage by delineating what topics we shall be concerned with and what not. This is necessary, precisely because of the relative underdevelopment of the topic, reflected in the fact that the same or similar terms are often used in the literature to mean different things. We need to distinguish between inequality among countries mean incomes (intercountry inequality, or Concept  inequality, as dubbed by Milanovic, ), inequality among countries mean incomes weighted by the countries populations (Concept  inequality), and inequality between the worlds individuals (global, or Concept  inequality).
Concept  inequality deals with convergence and divergence among countries, and although this line of work was at first couched in inequality terms (see Baumol, ), most of the later work used crosscountry regressions and  convergence. In such regressions, each country/year is one observation. This line of research, which has generated a huge literature, is interesting for a number of reasons, but it has very little to tell us about income inequality among world citizens. This is basically because countries are of unequal population size. Thus, a fast increase in the income of a poor small country will not have the same effect on global inequality as the same per capita increase in a poor and populous country.
Concept  inequality tries to take this into account by weighing each country by its population. It is a low-cost approach since it requires knowledge of only two variables: mean income, which is approximated by gross domestic income (GDI) per capita, and population size. The first such calculations were done by Kuznets in  (see Kuznets, : ff). Some thirteen years later, as part of their first study of purchasing power parity (PPP), Kravis, Heston and Summers () calculated Concept  inequality for the nonsocialist world.
There are two reasons for the enduring popularity of this approach (for recent examples, see Schultz, ; Boltho and Toniolo, ; Firebaugh, ). First, Concept  inequality is the largest component of global inequality. Global inequality is, by definition, composed of population-weighted international inequality (Concept  or between-inequality), and inequality due to income differences within countries. The relationship is shown in equations () and () for Gini and Theil coefficients respectively, where yi = per capita income of i-th country, pi = population share of i-th country in total world population, i = share of i-th country in total global income, n = number of countries, Gi = Gini coefficient of national income distribution, Ti = Theil coefficients of national income distribution, and L = the so-called overlapping component. Since the between component is by far the larger, accounting for between  and  of global inequality (depending on what inequality measure one chooses), Concept  inequality can be used as a lower-bound proxy to global inequality. Moreover, its movements can be presumed to track changes in global inequality. Second, the data requirements for the calculation of Concept  inequality are modest.
 Of course, what Concept  inequality does not take into account are within-country inequalities. In calculating Concept  inequality, we implicitly assume that each individual within a country has the same per capita income (and thus Gi=Ti=L=). This last assumption needs to be abandoned if we want to calculate true global inequality across individuals. But in order to abandon it, one must have access to national income distributions which are available only from household surveys. It is this jump that makes such a big difference in data requirements between Concept  and Concept . From being modest, the data requirements now become huge, since, ideally, we should have access to national income distributions from all the countries in the world.
This leads to a very important, albeit not sufficiently appreciated, difference between Concepts  and . This is not a conceptual difference, but rather the difference in what is a commonly used metric of welfare. To be sure, Concept  inequality can be calculated using either GDIs per capita or mean disposable incomes retrieved from countries household surveys (HS). It is however almost never calculated using the latter because HS means are much more difficult to obtain than from national accounts (NA) data. In contrast, Concept  inequality must be based on household surveys because the only sources of distributional data are, as said before, household surveys. Because there is no world-wide household survey, this means that the best one can do is to combine individual countries surveys, and use disposable per capita income or personal per capita consumption as welfare indicators.
Now, the first problem is that there is a definitional difference between GDI which comes from national accounts, and disposable income which comes from surveys. Second, there has been a recent tendency for these two measures not to move in unison in several important countries (see Deaton, ). Thus, even if everything else were fully comparable, a commonly calculated Concept  measure that uses national accounts data will differ from an equivalent Concept  measure calculated using household surveys because welfare
 The overlapping component accounts for the fact that somebody who lives in a richer country may have an income lower than somebody from a poorer country (and the converse). L is calculated as a residual, and this is why the Gini index is, unlike the Theil index, not exactly decomposable.

indicators are different and because they have recently diverged for reasons that are not yet quite clear.
This review will deal only with studies of global or Concept  income inequality. The way to estimate global inequality is to calculate Concept  inequality using nation accounts data, and to combine it with the empirical observation that within-country income distributions tend to follow a log-normal pattern. Then, the only additional piece of information needed is a Gini coefficient, or some other summary inequality statistic describing national income distributions. They are published in various compendia of Gini coefficients such as the WIDER and Deininger-Squire databases, etc.
Under the assumption of a log normal distribution of income, the inequality statistics allow us to derive an estimate of the variance of each national distribution. Once we know the variance and the mean, and given the assumption of log-normality, we can estimate the entire distribution, that is, each fractiles income. It is then a relatively simple task to combine these national distributions into a single world-wide income distribution, particularly so if one uses an exactly decomposable measure of inequality like the Theil coefficient or the variance of logs. This was precisely the approach followed by many early and some recent studies of global inequality (Berry, Bourguignon and Morrison, ; Grosh and Nafziger, ; Quah, ; Shultze, ; Chotikapanich, Valenzuela and Rao, ). At times, this approach can be refined by using a bit more information than what is contained in a Gini or Theil index. Sala-i-Martin and Bhalla have used quintiles of income distribution to get a better handle of national distributions and thus a more precise estimate of global distribution. All these methods can be considered tatonnements, groping for the global distribution.
These methods are quite ingenious, given their rather minimal information requirements. But they are also very costly, because it is often the numerous assumptions, rather than the data, that drive the results. A lot of assumptions are made simultaneously (e.g. that each countrys distribution is log normal; that GDP per capita gives the correct mean income, and that its under or over-estimation, compared to household surveys, is constant across poor and rich alike), and it is nearly impossible to tell the impact of each separate assumption on the results. Further, since even the minimal data requirements (national Ginis) are not satisfied annually, authors are led to make additional assumptions (for example, that national inequality does not change or changes in an assumed fashion), so that in the end, the part of the results driven by various assumptions may vastly outstrip the part based on actual data. The best recent examples of such approaches, which are often thinly disguised Concept  inequality calculations, are Bhalla () and Sala-iMartin (a; b). In Bhallas () calculations of global inequality, only one out of his  distributions is based on actual data, while  are derived through assumptions; in Sala-i-Martins (a) paper, the ratio is one actual to four derived distributions.
 This area understanding why national accounts and household survey averages move differently represents one of the most important areas for further research. Bhalla () must be credited through his, at times single-minded, insistence on using national accounts data for highlighting this issue.
 And with global inequality conventionally defined as inequality in relative, not absolute, incomes, and using conventional measures of inequality like the Lorenz curve, Gini coefficient or Theil index. The focus on absolute inequality, however, has its own uses (see Atkinson and Brandolini, ; Svedberg, ; Ravallion, ). Similarly, relative income inequality, with the use of different inequality aversion parameters (reflecting, in principle, different welfare judgments), will produce ambiguous results, even where conventional statistics yield a clear outcome (see Capeau and Decoster, : Table ).
Compared to this method, the quantum leap is to directly use household surveys from as many countries as possible (ideally, all). This was done by Milanovic (; ) and by the world_bank (). Here, in principle, global inequality is calculated the same way one calculates within-country inequality, using not national accounts data, but survey data. Another quantum leap in this line of research will occur when these, so far disparate, national surveys are standardized, or a single world-wide household survey is conducted. We shall come back to this in the third section. Now, we have to briefly cover some methodological issues that are very important in this type of research although they seldom receive the attention they deserve.
Some methodological issues
We start with the simplest question of all: what is income in calculations of global inequality? As we have seen, most of the early work used national accounts data, that is GDI per capita expressed in the same currency (international or PPP dollars). This is because household survey data for many countries were simply unavailable (and even when they existed, researchers could not get them because the statistical agencies refused to release them). There are currently three main sources of world wide data on GDI per capita across time and across countries. They are world_bank data, available in world_bank World Development Indicators (WDI), the Penn World Tables, and Angus Maddisons data. The advantage of using GDI per capita as income is that these numbers are relatively uncontroversial, even if the three sources do not always agree among themselves. We know what is meant by GDI per capita and we know that these values do give some generally accepted mean incomes of all nations.
The main drawback of this approach is that GDI per capita is not income in any recognizable sense to any individual or household. Gross domestic income includes components such as corporate investment from retained profits, build-up of stocks, government spending on defence, etc., which are not part of even broadly defined household disposable income. In addition, publicly financed health and education are part of GDI per capita, but not included in household per capita disposable income unless one is able to impute which is quasi impossible in a multi-country context these values back to individual households based on survey data on school attendance and use of medical services.
Another drawback is that the combination of GDI per capita with some distributional statistics (to reflect national income distribution) mixes two aggregates, calculated from different sources, and this mixing is not distribution-neutral. On the one hand, we are using country GDI per capita, and on the other, we are applying to this mean, distributional parameters obtained from surveys of household disposable income. It was already explained that the two instruments are different by definition. But in addition, such an adjustment is not distribution-neutral. We know that surveys tend to under-represent capital income or under-survey rich people (see Mistiaen and Ravallion, ). Thus, a simple scaling-up of all survey incomes by a given parameter will reduce poverty below what it really is and underestimate inequality. When a different mean (GDI per capita) is applied to a survey-based distribution, we implicitly allocate the difference between GDI per capita and disposable household per capita income across all households (more exactly, in proportion to reported household income). Poor peoples incomes are increased in the same proportion as rich peoples incomes. But if most of the difference between the two concepts is due to the unreported income of the rich, then this approach wrongly inflates the incomes of the poor.
 This is still the case with many countries that refuse to release micro data to any institution or individual. Such countries are quite diverse, ranging from Japan to Algeria. There is thus a paradoxical situation that a number of expensive instruments like household surveys exist in the world; yet, they cannot be used because of misplaced policies of some countries statistical offices. The issue of confidentiality, with which they sometimes defend their practice, is clearly bogus since no researcher can ever identify the participating households. Are we to believe that a researcher in  is going to identify the Japanese households that took part in a survey conducted in ?
 It has not always been like that. Consider the problems of converting Communist countries national accounts methodology to the national accounts statistics (NAS) system, and of course, the issue of the deliberate falsification of national accounts.
 The difference in coverage and definition between national accounts and surveys means that, even if everything were perfectly measured, it would be incorrect to apply inequality or distributional measures which are derived from surveys which measure one thing, to means which are derived from national accounts which measure another (Deaton, : ).
Now, the income of the rich, which accounts for the bulk of the difference between GDI and disposable income, is of two types: first, the definitionally different part, which consists of publicly-financed health and education, corporate profits, etc., that are consumed by the rich, but also by the middle-classes and some poor in rich countries; second, the income of rich people in each individual country that is missed out by surveys (e.g. property incomes). All actual recipients of these incomes are globally-rich because the middle-class and even the poor from the rich world are in the top quintile of the global income distribution, but the difference between the two aggregates is spread much more widely: some of it is imputed to the poor in the poor countries which, we know, receive none of it.
Consider the following example. Let the poverty line $PPP per capita per day. Let the average per capita disposable income from surveys of several groups of the poor in India be $., $., $.. Now, suppose (very realistically) that Indias GDI is some  per cent higher than disposable income. We know that most of this  per cent is received by the rich, either because they benefit more from publicly-funded public services, or because they fail to report their property incomes. What the authors (in particular, Salai-Martin, a; Bhalla, ) then do is to multiply the incomes of the poor by the factor of .. Then, suddenly, none of them is poor any longer: they have all crossed the poverty threshold. Pure magic!
But if we decide that income in global studies should be the same concept as in national studies of inequality that is per capita disposable household income the problem is not solved yet. This is because national definitions of survey income are very different, and the more countries we include, the more different they become. A huge effort, conducted by the Luxembourg Income Study, has gone into standardization of national definitions. A similar project is underway at the world_bank using Living Standards Measurement Surveys (LSMS). Yet, the standardization covers only a small portion of all countries and surveys.
 Income from property is notoriously underestimated in household surveys (even leaving aside the fact that most surveys do not include capital gains at all). Concialdi (: ) claims that the best available French household surveys underestimate capital incomes by about  per cent. Wagner and Grabka () estimate German property income to be underestimated by almost one-half compared to national accounts data. In Japan, according to Ishizaki (), only  per cent of property income is captured by household surveys (quoted in Bauer and Mason, : ).
 We speak of scaling-up, rather than scaling-down, because GDI per capita is normally greater than household per capita disposable income.
 Disposable household income, retrieved from surveys in West European nations, amounts to about  per cent of GDI. A bulk of that difference is explained by health and education consumption. Publicly-financed health and education as a share of GDI is much less in poor countries.
 On the additional pitfalls caused by the use of averages from national accounts and distributions from household surveys, see Ravallion (), Deaton and Dreze (), and Deaton ().
The main differences arise in the treatment of self-employed income (what are business expenditures for the self-employed?), valuation of home-consumption, including owner-occupied housing, treatment of publicly-provided health and education benefits, and the use of top-coding of high incomes (where all incomes above a certain ceiling are coded as equal to that ceiling). For different countries and at different levels of development, differences in the treatment of these categories are not equally important. For poor countries, it is the problems of valuation of own consumption and self-employed income that are the most difficult and that can make individual incomes often move up by a factor of  or more; for the rich countries, it is the treatment of publicly-provided health and education benefits that is of most concern. Swedish disposable income with them or without them is quite different. For countries with extravagantly rich individuals, it is the underestimation of capital incomes which is of concern.
But there is no agreement that income in global inequality studies should be income at all. Many people think that rather than income, one should look at consumption or expenditures as the true indicator of the standard of living. This debate mirrors the debates in individual countries since obviously inequality can be measured using either income or consumption. What lends this debate an added importance in the case of global inequality is that in many countries, household surveys ask questions about income only, while in other countries, they ask for both, or for expenditure only. Then, a global study of inequality has to do what all national studies try to avoid, that is to mix household survey data that use two different concepts of income: disposable income and consumption. This introduces an error whose direction and magnitude cannot be estimated.
Although in the last few years, there has been a trend toward the use of consumption measures (not the least through the efforts of the world_bank and the influence it has exerted on the choice of survey instruments in the former communist countries and in Africa), we are still far from unanimity on this issue. In the study of global inequality based on  benchmark data, Milanovic (: ) used  consumption instruments and  income instruments. This represents a significant increase in the number of consumption instruments compared with ten years before ( income-based and  consumption-based distributions), but for some of the most important countries (like China), one still depends on income data alone. If a guess had to be ventured, it could be said that there is likely to be a tendency toward greater use of household per capita consumption as the main welfare indicator. While quite defensible from a strictly methodological perspective, this will open up a number of issues of comparability since most historical income distribution statistics (e.g. in the united_states, UK, France, Germany) are income-based. One thus needs to weigh methodological and quality improvements in snapshots of recent income distribution against the breaks in historically existing series.
Considering the problems of the appropriate welfare indicator, other methodological issues are easier to deal with. Whatever income is, that income should be expressed in per capita terms, and should be equal for the members of a household. This means that the two issues often debated in national inequality studies are solved here: the issue of equivalence scales, and intra-household inequality. They are solved because at the current level of statistical development, there is simply no way to account for economies of scale and size across different countries.
 For example, in , the Chinese statistical office changed the valuation of grain output produced by rural households from state-mandated to market prices. This generated a large change in calculated poverty rates and a break in the rural mean income series (see Ravallion and Chen, ).
 For example, the US Current Population Survey top-codes all very high wage and capital incomes. Similarly, the maximum capital gain that can be recorded in the survey is $, per household annually.

The main reason for this is that economies of scale and size depend on the relative prices of public and private goods (if housing is very cheap, economies of size will be small) and they systematically differ between poor and rich countries (see Lanjouw and others, ). Until we have a better handle of the relative prices of public and private goods, we cannot adjust internationally for equivalent units. The use of a given equivalence scale for all countries in the world would be much more arbitrary than the use of per capita calculations. Similarly, we lack information about within-household inequalities.
Another issue on which there is agreement is that whatever income is, it needs to be adjusted using a countrys relative price level. In other words, we need to use PPP exchange rates to translate domestic currencies into international dollars. Ideally, of course, one would like to move toward a better adjustment where, at least for some large countries with less than fully integrated markets, PPP exchange rates would differ between different parts of the country (e.g. the price level in the richest Chinese province is estimated to be  per cent higher than in the poorest; see Brandt and Holz, ).
Another concern is that the relative prices faced by different parts of the income distribution are not the same. According to Pogge and Reddy (), relative food prices faced by the poor in poor countries are higher than implied by the use of a single all-consumption PPP. Food prices are what really matters for the poor, and the use of a lower overall price index will artificially boost poor peoples incomes in India and elsewhere in poor countries. Pogge and Reddy advocate a cross-country project akin to the one currently conducted by World Banks International Comparison Project which would generate PPPs relevant for the very modest, principally food, basket consumed by the poor across the world. But so long as within-country (e.g. provincial) PPPs and PPPs differentiated by income class are not available, we are obliged to use a single PPP exchange rate per country.
How about the use of market (rather than PPP) exchange rates in global inequality calculations? This is a useful complement because it gives us a different insight into inequalities. If one is interested in global purchasing power or ability to affect the world economy, then conversion of local incomes into actual US dollars makes sense. But there are relatively few instances where we are interested in this, and most of our interest in global inequality is really based on the desire to compare living standards of different people. For that purpose, PPP exchange rates are, of course, better.
How great is global inequality?
There is general agreement about the size of global inequality, and there is general disagreement about the recent direction of change of global inequality. Table  shows the results for global inequality obtained by a number of authors using quite different techniques: most of them mix national accounts information (using GDI per capita as mean income) and household survey information, and only a few use household surveys directly. In all the studies however, the recipients are individuals (inequality is expressed on a per capita basis), and national incomes are converted into international (PPP) dollars although the PPP exchange rates may be drawn from different sources. All Gini values for the s, with the exception of the two extremes ( and ), lie within a relatively narrow range between  and . The similarity in the results is even more remarkable when one realizes that the standard errors of these estimates are between  and  Gini points, and that most of the estimates are consequently within one standard error of each other.
 As for the direction of change comparison between s and s there is no unanimity. Salai-Martin and Bhalla, using very similar methodologies, argue that global inequality has declined by between  and  Gini points. Dikhanov and Ward as well as Bourguignon and Morrison find an increase of about  Gini point. Sutcliffe concludes that there was no change, and Milanovic finds an increase of  Gini points between  and , followed by a decline of  Gini point in the next five years. His most recent (and unpublished) calculations for  show another small increase of about  Gini point. Thus, according to Milanovic, there are zigzags. They are explained by the slow growth of rural incomes in India and China as well as the economic collapse of Eastern Europe in the early s, both of which contributed to global inequality. When both developments were reversed in the next five-year period, global inequality decreased. But these are zigzags caused by specific economic events in large countries, not a trend.
This lack of unanimity on changes, and disagreements on whether there is any trend at all, stem not only from the differences in methodology, but paradoxically, also from the very similar results that all authors obtain regarding the overall level of inequality. The reason is as follows. Different methodologies yield similar inequality levels, but they do so with quite a lot of noise caused by measurement problems. Mean incomes, whether obtained from surveys or national accounts, are not consistently calculated, and key data sources disagree among themselves. The computation of Concept  inequality using GDI per capita a metric on which there is apparently least disputefrom world_bank or Maddisons data series will differ by several Gini points. This is because, as pointed out by Sutcliffe (), Maddisons data include estimates for a number of worn-torn or otherwise excluded countries like Sudan, Afghanistan, Somalia, the Congo, Cuba, North Korea, etc., that are almost invariably poor and not included in the world_bank database. In addition, Maddisons growth rates for China are less than the official rates and those used by the world_bank. It is then not surprising that when one superimposes estimates of national distributions on one or another set of GDIs per capita to generate global inequality, the choice of the GDI database will clearly influence the end result.
Income distribution data, particularly when extrapolated from quintiles or from Gini coefficients, are even noisier. Furthermore, due to the absence of income distribution data for many countries, some authors (e.g. Bhalla and Sala-i-Martin) resort to very dubious assumptions, e.g. that income distributions do not change over time or change in a certain (linear) fashion or everyone in a country has the same income. In most cases, this myriad of assumptions and measurement errors tend not to bias the results in one direction only, but probably to offset each other, producing relatively similar levels of inequality. But when one re-estimates global inequality for another year, while the level hardly changes, the result is (on account of the measurement error, if nothing else) likely to be slightly different. It is that slight difference that is then interpreted as the evidence of a change, or in some cases, even of a trend.
How big is a Gini of around ? It is larger than the inequality found in any single country including South Africa and Brazil, two of the most unequal countries in the world, whose Ginis are in the upper fifties or low sixties. The Gini coefficient however does not give an intuitive feel for how large global inequalities are. A better way to look at it is to consider how the overall pie is distributed among different fractiles of the distribution. Thus, for example, the top  per cent of individuals in the world receive about / of total world (PPP-valued) income, and the top  per cent get one-half. If we take the bottom  and  per cent, they receive . and . per cent of total world income respectively. This means that the ratio between the average income received by the richest  per cent and the poorest  per cent of people in the world is  to  (Milanovic, ). The richest people earn in about  hours as much as the poorest people earn in a year.
Another important question is to ask how much of global inequality is due to differences in the mean incomes of countries and how much is due to income differences within countries. Some  per cent of global inequality is explained by differences in countries mean incomes. This is a sharp reversal from a situation which existed around the time of the Industrial Revolution when more than half of the (admittedly very rough) estimate of global inequality was due to income differences within nations (see Bourguignon and Morrisson, ). Then, in contrast to today, the differences between countries mean incomes were relatively small. For example, in , the average (un-weighted) GDI per capita of the ten richest countries was  times greater than the average (un-weighted) GDI per capita of the ten poorest countries. In , the ratio was  to .
 For example, Concept  inequality calculated using world_bank GDI per capita data from  countries shows a decrease of some  Gini points between  and . The same concept calculated using Maddisons data over the same period for about  countries shows a decline of only  Gini point (authors unpublished calculations).
 This is an estimate based on the Theil decomposition between inequality due to the differences in incomes between six country groups, namely Africa, Asia, Japan, Korea and Taiwan, latin_america, Eastern Europe, and Western Europe and its offshoots, and inequality within country groups. Since there are no data on income distributions for most countries in the world prior to , Bourguignon and Morrison use estimates for a few select countries to impart the same distributions to other countries in the group. Their between-component accounts for some  per cent of global inequality. Obviously, if they had data on all countries distributions, the between-component would have been larger. However, it is unlikely to have exceeded one-half of global inequality.
While income inequality between countries is the largest component of global inequality, overlaps between countries distributions (that is, some people from a poor country being better off than some people from a rich country) are not negligible either. We illustrate this in Figure , which plots the position of each  per cent (ventile) of different countries distributions in the global distribution. Consider the line for France. We calculate the mean income (in international dollars) of each French ventile from the lowest (first) to the highestarrayed on the horizontal axisand then find their positions in the global income distribution. As can be seen, the poorest  per cent of Frenchmen have a mean income which places them in the nd percentile of the world income distribution; the richest  per cent have incomes which place them in the top percentile of the world. Hence, French income distributions span the range between the nd and th percentiles in the world. Consider now rural Indonesia at the bottom of the figure. Here, the range is from the th percentile to the th percentile in the world. The two distributions (France and rural Indonesia) do not overlap at all. But this is not the case if we compare Brazil and France: more than a third of all Brazilians are richer than the poorest  per cent of the French.
The figure illustrates not only that inequality due to within-country distributions is still significant, and that countries are not homogeneous entities composed of either rich and poor people only, but will have practical implications when we discuss global transfers (see the fifth section). In short, if transfers were to flow from mean-income rich to mean-income poor countries, and we do not a priori know who their beneficiaries are, a glance at Figure  immediately convinces us of the need to take recipient countries income distributions seriously. This is because of the probability that money raised from a French citizen will end up in the pockets of somebody who is richer than he, is higher if money is transferred from France to Brazil than if it is transferred from France to rural Indonesia. But we shall return to this topic below.
Is there a link between globalization and global inequality?
 Note that in a world of large between-country income differences, and very small within-country inequalities, there would be no overlap at all, and  per cent of global inequality would have been caused by between-country differences.
 This is, of course, true at the level of ventiles. It is quite possible, even likely, that there are some individuals in rural Indonesia who are richer than some individuals in France. If we conducted the analysis in terms of national percentiles, rather than ventiles, there would be some overlap. But it would be clearly minimal.
 Even if at each given ventile, the income of the French is higher than the income of the Brazilians. This means that French income distribution is first-order dominant over the Brazilian distribution (as is, for example, the Sri Lankan over the rural Indonesian), even though the French and Brazilian distributions do overlap (unlike the French and the rural Indonesian).
Percentile of world income distribution


It is often implicitly assumed that the changes in global inequality can be interpreted as telling us whether globalization leads to widening or shrinking income differences among individuals in the world. However, the causal link between globalization and global inequality is very difficult to make. To see this, consider several ways in which globalization affects inequality among individuals in the world. The first channel goes through globalizations effects on within-country distributions. As we would expect from economic theory, the effect varies between rich and poor countries. In the simplest Hecksher-Ohlin world, globalization would increase demand for, and the wages of, low-skilled labour in poor countries and the wages of high-skilled workers in the rich world. Consequently, we would expect income distribution in poor countries to become better and income distribution in rich countries to get worse.
This is not, however, consistent with what has been observed over the last twenty years when distributions in poor, middle-income and rich countries have tended to grow more unequal (Cornia and Kiiski, ). This is an issue which has recently been studied a lot and is still the subject of intense debate: Is openness to blame for increasing wage and income differences in the US? Is openness associated with rising income inequality in poor countries? For example, Milanovic () and Ravallion () find that openness is associated with increased inequality in poor countries, and lower inequality in rich countries, while Dollar and Kraay () argue that there is no systematic effect of openness on inequality.
Then, and this is the second channel, globalization may differently affect mean incomes in poor and rich countries: in other words, it might lead to divergence or convergence in country incomes. There is no unanimity on this point either. Most authors agree that openness is positively associated with mean income growth, but some of them (Sachs and Warner, ; world_bank, ) find the effect stronger for poor countries, while others (DeLong and Dowrick, ; Dowrick and Golley, ) argue that the openness premium has been larger for rich than for poor countries during the last twenty years. The first group of authors would expect openness to lead to shrinking differences in national mean incomes. Therefore, they have to explain away the observed divergence in mean country incomes by the lack of openness among the laggards. According to the second group of authors, the divergence is an indication that the effects of openness might change over time, and that openness, even if positive for all on balance, may exacerbate inter-country inequality.
Third, the effects of globalization may vary between populous and small countries. This area has not been much explored except in the context of the rather limited (in scope and number) studies of small island economies. Yet, one can imagine that globalization may play out differently in populous countries with large domestic markets, or in small niche economies like Hong Kong, Singapore or Luxembourg, than in middle size countries.
And finally, and possibly, most importantly, the effect of globalization on global inequality will depend on history, that is on whether populous countries happen to be poor or rich at a given point in time. To see this, assume for a moment that globalization has a positive impact on the growth rates of populous and poor countries, and has no effect on within-country income distributions. This will, in the current constellation of world incomes (see Figure ), mean that India and China would be expected to catch up with the rich world, while their national distributions will not change, and global inequality will tend to decrease. There would be both mean-income convergence and reduction of global inequality. But let us decouple the poor and populous countries. Suppose that India and China are rich (and still populous) and let most poor countries be relatively small. Now, mean income convergence will continue, but the effect on global inequality will be ambiguous. China and India will benefit from the pro-big bias of globalization, but since they would be rich, globalization will be less beneficial to them than to poor countries. These two effects will pull in opposite directions, and global inequality may go down or up. Moreover, if populous countries are generally poor, the convergence effect is nil, globalization on average favours small countries and leads to the widening of national income distributions, then the overall effect must be to increase global inequality.
This illustrates a key point: even if the effects of globalization on within-country inequality, mean income convergence, and populous vs. small countries, are unambiguous and do not change over time, globalizations impact on global inequality will vary depending on where along the international income distribution, countries with different attributes happen to lie at a given point in time. The implication is, of course, that all statements about the relationship between globalization and global inequality are highly time specific, contingent on past income history, and not general.
 We are concerned with effects at one point in time only. Independent changes in population may, by affecting the weights in the inequality statistics, influence changes in global inequality on their own. For example, Chinas impact on global inequality can be decomposed between income per capita growth effects and population growth effects. Jiang () finds that one-third of Chinas contribution to reducing global inequality is due to its population growth.
 Does global inequality matter?
There are two views on this matter (as on pretty much everything else discussed here). One group of people believe that global inequality is irrelevant. There are two reasons why it may be so. According to Bhagwati (), even calculation of global inequality is lunacy as it is a mere number. There is no addressee to whom this mere number matters because there is no global government and there is no global civil_society. According to this view, national inequalities matter because they become the stuff of political discourse; they are used to form political parties or platforms, and to organize interest groups. But at the global level, none of that exists because there is no global polity.
Another reason adduced for the irrelevance of global (or for that matter, all) inequality is that only changes in absolute income matters to the poor and the rich alike (Krueger, ; Feldstein, ). In the words of Anne Krueger (), Poor people are desperate to improve their material conditions...rather than to march up the income distribution [ladder]. Thus, even if the absolute income gap between an average American and an average African increases, these authors are unconcerned. After all, they argue, the average African would be a bit less poor. This, of course, assumes that our income relative to the incomes of others does not matter. Yet, this conclusion is at odds with psychological studies that invariably show that people do not care only about their absolute income, but also about where they stand in the social pyramid, and also whether they think this position to be fair (Graham and Felton, ; Frank, ).
Or differently global inequality may matter. On this side of the issue, there are also different approaches. For Pogge and Reddy () and Singer (), global poverty and global inequality are ethical issues. Hence, the rich world cannot disown all interest in global poverty and inequality: to some extent, the fate of every individual in the world affects us. Distributional justice within a nation, and in the world as a whole, is -from an ethical perspective -the same thing (see Singer, : Chapter ).
There are also more pragmatic reasons why global inequality may matter. Kuznets ( [first published in ]: -) formulated the following half a century ago: Since it is only through contact that recognition and tension are created, one could argue that the reduction of physical misery associated with low income and consumption levels...permit[s] an increase rather than a diminution of political tensions [because] the political misery of the poor, the tension created by the observation of the much greater wealth of other communities...may have only increased.
When people observe each other and interact, it is no longer simply a national yardstick that they have in mind when they compare their incomes with the incomes of others, but an international or global one. What globalization does is to increase awareness of other peoples incomes, and therefore, the perception (knowledge) of inequalities among both the poor and the rich. If it does so among the poor, then their aspirations change: they may no longer be satisfied with small increases in their own real income, if they know that other people are gaining much more. Therefore, the process of globalization by itself changes the perception of ones position, and even if globalization may raise everybodys real income, it could exacerbate, rather than moderate, feelings of despondency and deprivation among the poor.
Globalization, in that sense, is no different from the process which led to the creation of modern nation states out of isolated, and often mutually estranged, hamlets. National income distribution was similarly an abstraction for the people who did not interact with each other, and almost ignored each others existence and way of life. However, once nation-states came into existence, national inequality became an issue simply because people were able to compare their own standards of living and to make judgments as to whether these income differences were deserved or not. If one believes that the process of globalization would slowly lead to the formation of a global polity, then global inequality will indeed become a relevant issue. For it is difficult to envisage that a fully free exchange of goods, technology and information, transfer of capital, and some freedom in the movement of people can go on for a long time without creating a global polity of sorts and requiring decision-making processes at the global level.
If so, then we need to develop some rules for global redistribution. The first rule, which may be called Progressivity  rule (a companion to Concept  inequality), is that funds should flow from a (mean income) rich to a (mean-income) poor country. This requirement is easily satisfied. Even today, bilateral aid is given by rich to poor countries (not the other way round). But in a globalized world, this is not enough. Redistribution needs to be globally progressive that is, to satisfy the same criteria that we require from redistribution within a nation-state. This means that the tax-payer ought to be richer than the beneficiary of the transfer. But both Progressivity  and global Progressivity may be satisfied (as shown in Figure  by points B and T) while the beneficiary is a relatively rich individual in a poor country and the tax payer a relatively poor individual in a rich country. And it is precisely the perception that many transfers end up in the pockets of the rich elite in poor countries which is fuelling the current discontent with multilateral and bilateral aid. Thus, the third requirement ought to be that transfers be such that inequality decreases in both donor and recipient countries. This will happen only if the tax payer is relatively rich, even within his/her own country, and the beneficiary is relatively poor in his/her country. This situation is illustrated by points such as T and B.
Now, these three requirements regarding global transfers will be more easily satisfied when the income distributions of rich and poor nations do not overlap. This is, for example, the case of France and rural Indonesia (illustrated in Figure ). Even if the distribution of aid money among Indonesian beneficiaries is random, global progressivity will be satisfied since there are practically no people in rural Indonesia who are better off than even the poorest Frenchmen. But this is not the case if we look at a transfer between France and Brazil. There, assuming that the tax payer belongs to the French middle class (say, around the median of French income distribution), a purely random allocation of aid to Brazil will still yield a non-negligible probability of 10 per cent for a globally regressive transfer.34 Th is means that in the design of global transfers, one needs to take into account national income distributions to determine the actual beneficiaries of aid. This is likely to give preference to poor and egalitarian countries since transfers to them are unlikely to be globally regressive.
