Riding the Elephants: The Evolution of World Economic Growth and
Income Distribution at the End of the Twentieth Century (1980-2000)
The huge gap between the worlds rich and its poor has made trends in world inequality a matter of much interest. That gap appears to have widened markedly during a period beginning in the early nineteenth century at the latest and continuing until at least the middle of the twentieth. Since about  it has been possible to follow the evolution of inequality with much more precision, given the availability of national accounts in all major countries and of intracountry inequality measures in an increasing share of them. Most prior studies have underscored three main points. First, the distribution of world income is highly unequal, considerably more so than that of any but the most inegalitarian countries (Whalley, ; Berry, Bourguignon and Morrisson, ; ); this is a natural result of the fact that both intracountry and intercountry inequalities contribute significantly to world inequality. Second, when the measure of income is absolute purchasing power (in international prices) the bulk of world inequality comes from intercountry income differences rather than from intracountry differences. Finally, the level of world inequality did not change markedly, in either direction, between  and the mid-s (Berry, Bourguignon and Morrisson, ; Bourguignon and Morrisson, ; Peacock, Hoover and Killian, ; Schultz, ).
Updated and wider-ranging analysis of recent patterns and trends of world inequality is warranted, partly because the period since about  has brought a wave of historic changes in several regions of the world and in the character of the world economy, and partly because a variety of theories and pieces of factual information suggest that past distributional patterns might be changing. Theories of economic convergence, which have received much attention in recent years, tend to support the presumption that globalization, with its increasing economic integration among countries, would strengthen the forces of convergence and lower world inequality (Barro, ; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, ; Ben-David, ). On the other hand, many countries have suffered significant increases in internal inequality over the last couple of decades, with some authors suggesting that this trend is causally related to globalization and market-friendly economic reforms (Wood, ; Robbins, ). Has this intracountry pattern of increasing inequality been strong enough to offset the effects of any impulse toward intercountry convergence, if indeed both of these effects can be shown to exist?
With slower world economic growth since the s, any serious increase in inequality might mean a derailment of the process of poverty reduction that had been fairly continuous over the post-war period. Concern on this point has been fuelled by two studies from the world_bank (Milanovic, ; Dikhanov and Ward, ), referring to the period and reporting significant increases in inequality (of percentage points in the Gini coefficient) over that period. If this result were accurate, and if the trend were to continue at anything close to the rate they estimate, the world could be in for an increase in inequality strong enough to imply an end to a long period of gradual reduction in the incidence of poverty.
With such issues in mind, this paper examines the evolution of world income and its distribution across regions, countries and individuals over the period -. The aim is to identify the main trends, to determine whether they support common perceptions about regional and country performances, and to see how important these trends have been in the overall pattern of changing world inequality during that period. To that end, the next section examines the theoretical approaches to the issue of global income distribution since  and the degree to which they inform current concerns. The following section presents estimates of the weighted average growth of the world economies from  to  and measures of the intercountry distribution of world income. The next three sections present estimates of the distribution of world income between persons (based on a methodology outlined in Appendix C) followed by caveats and clarifications related to those estimates. The penultimate section presents data on changes in world poverty during the period. The paper concludes with a brief review of the issues, results and implications.
The world since 
The s and s have seen several profound changes both in the nature of economic interaction between countries and in the economic and political fortunes of certain regions and countries. Prominent among these changes have been:
 the break-up of the Soviet bloc and the transition of its former members toward the market system;
 accelerated growth and an increasing role of the market in the Chinese economy;
 a long-awaited period of good growth in India;
 the first prolonged slump for the Japanese economy in the post-war period, suggesting that its period as the only fast growing high-income country has come to an end;
 the international debt crisis of the s, that made this a lost decade in South and Central
America;
 a severe regional crisis in sub-Saharan Africa due not only to the extended crisis of heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs)most of which are in sub-Saharan Africa but also to an underlying failure of agriculture to grow at a satisfactory rate, rapid population growth and, more recently, the traumatic incursion of AIDS;
 the information revolution featuring the arrival en masse of computer technology;
 a general policy shift in nearly all countries towards a greater use of the market in resource al-
location; and finally
 globalizationthe increasingly tight interaction among national economies, to the point where the economic raison detre of the national state is increasingly called into question.
Viewing these changes along more systemic lines, a number of authors have argued that the years around  have constituted a watershed between a previous relatively successful phase of Third World growth during which per capita output rose at a healthy rate (by about . per cent from the end of World War II until ), in Bairochs periodization (Bairoch, , vol. : -), that allowed some narrowing of the (intercountry per capita income) gap with the rich industrial world, and a subsequent period of slow and erratic growth, during which most of the Third World lost ground to the rich countries of the West. Arrighi () attributes the transition to the fact that the united_states, previously a major capital
exporter, became a major importer of capital, leading directly to the debt crisis of the s and to the rise in real interest rates, a shift to which many authors give great weight in explaining subsequent problems (Easterly, ; Galbraith, ). While a few developing countries did manage to achieve sustained growth over this period, it is often seen as one of bifurcation within the Third World, with the majority of countries doing badly in this most recent phase (Easterly, ; Milanovic, ).
Opinions vary widely on the anticipated effects of some of these events and trends. One prominent view, derived in part from trade theory, is that national economies which interact increasingly with each other will converge (Barro, ; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, ; Ben-David, ), either through a tendency for such interaction to equalize the returns to factors of production across countries and/or through technological diffusion, which suggests important advantages to being a follower, rather than a leader, and thus being able to borrow abroad to invest and to have low-cost access to the technological innovations made elsewhere. Much of the vast literature that relates overall economic growth in developing countries to export performance may be considered to fall broadly into this latter category (see the reviews in Bliss, , and Evans, ). Similarly, the neoclassical growth model predicts convergence in per capita incomes among countries because poorer countries with higher marginal rates of return to capital will grow faster than (and attract capital from) richer countries with lower marginal rates of return (Solow, ). Allowing for different steady states or augmenting the neoclassical model with human capital, and some specifications of new growth models, predict less strong or conditional convergence, which maintains the expected higher growth rate for poorer countries but allows for persistent differences due to varying rates of physical and human capital accumulation and population growth between countries (Mankiw, Romer and Weil, ).
Counterpoised against these theories is the idea that there are powerful centrifugal forces in the world economy, ranging from the extreme case in which rich countries straightforwardly control and exploit the weaker through the use of power, to less directly power-related mechanisms, as in the core-periphery model, that nonetheless produce a similar outcome. Beyond these propositions, the majority of new growth models predict either sustained inequality in country incomes or outright divergence. Several empirical studies have concluded that, at the world level, divergence among mean country incomes has been the prevailing pattern (Pritchett, ; UNCTAD, ) and hence that the world distribution of income has become substantially more unequal over the last few decades (Korzeniewicz and Moran, ; UNDP, ).
Dramatic conditions at the two ends of the world distribution persuade many people that inequality must have risen. The Forbes  survey of the worlds richest put Bill Gates well ahead of the pack of  billionaires with a wealth of  billion, and reported that this group had a total wealth of around . trillion dollars (Dolan, ). In  the low-income countries, with just over  billion people, had a combined gross national product (GNP) of just half this amount when converted to US dollars at the countries exchange rates, or about twice that level when converted at purchasing power parity (PPP)(world_bank, : ). In a similar vein, the united_nations Development Programmes Human Development Report  (UNDP, ) reported that the three richest people in the world have more than the combined GNP of all () least developed countries and their  million people. Meanwhile, conditions at the bottom end remain abysmal, not only in income terms per se but also in other respects. Bales () estimated that  million people around the world remain in violent economic bondage, from prostitutes in Thailand to bonded farmers in India and child workers in many countries. Chen and Ravallion () reported that billion people (or  per cent of the worlds population) were living on less than one  international dollar a day in , and that that number had remained essentially unchanged since .
Whether the sources of convergence or of divergence have, on balance, been the stronger, the pattern is unlikely to have been a very simple one. During much of the twentieth century there was a partial convergence in the sense that the fastest growing countries were neither those at the top nor those at the bottom of the income hierarchy, but rather a subset of middle-income follower countries, among which Japan and the Soviet Union were, for much of the period, the most prominent. While these countries were gaining on the leaders, the group of low-income countries below them was not. This pattern has changed since the late s when China, a (then) low-income country with about a fifth of the worlds population, began to register fast growth, thereby contributing to the equalization of world distribution. Since the early s, Indias growth has also accelerated, albeit less dramatically than Chinas. Two other large low-income countries, Indonesia and Pakistan, have (until recently) put in relatively strong growth performances. The poorer performing countries of Africa, a region yet to achieve a strong take-off and still experiencing rapid, though now falling, population growth, are home to an increasing share of the worlds poor.
There is little overlap between theories that address the question of convergence among countries in per capita income and those which focus on intracountry distribution although, naturally, some of the same aspects of economic life are assumed to be at work in both cases (e.g., international trade, technological change). The benchmark theory with respect to intracountry distribution is Kuznets () idea that the level of inequality would first rise, then fall, over the course of development. That view has lost currency over the last few decades, and similar results could be expected from the combined implications of the dual economy model and the efficiency wage theory or the Harris-Todaro models of development economics. But any current consensus on the long term changes in internal distribution is probably limited to a few rather obvious points, e.g., that an equalization over time in the distribution of such important assets as agricultural land and human capital will tend to produce a more equitable distribution of income.
Whatever the expectations may have been for the pattern of intracountry distribution, the overall experience of the s and s is generally recognized to have been negative, in both developed and developing countries (Corry and Glyn, ; Berry and Stewart, ; Cornia, ). Increases in international trade and technological change have been cited as possible causes of the frequent episodes of increasing inequality within both developed and developing countries. In the united_states they are the main candidates discussed (Wood, ; Bound and Johnson, ). In developing countries the analysis is less far advanced but these phenomena are again among the suspects. Both are discussed in the context of the increasing earnings gaps between more and less skilled workers that have been observed in many less developed countries (Robbins, ).
Growth trends and changes in the intercountry distribution of income
This paper presents evidence on the world distribution of income among persons over the period , and notes some of the more obvious possible links to the monumental events of the last two decades.
 The predictions of these models combined would suggest that, at the very earliest stages of development, the distribution of income in the dominant traditional sector would tend to determine overall inequality. However, as the high-wage modern sector grows at the expense of the low-wage traditional sector, intersectoral inequality would add to intrasectoral inequality to cause overall inequality to increase. Eventually, as the modern sector begins to dominate the economy, intrasectoral inequality (this time in the modern sector) would again become the dominant contributor to overall inequality as intersectoral inequality fades in importance with the disappearing traditional sector.
Of particular interest is the question of whether or not the impact of economic integration has been closer to the hopeful predictions of the optimists or the worrisome prognoses of the pessimists.
The period was punctuated by economic crisis in many countries of the Third World, especially those of South and Central America, sub-Saharan Africa, and most of the former Soviet bloc. However, this was also a period of continuing fast growth for most of east_asia (including China at an impressive per cent per year), and of a stronger performance by the Indian subcontinent than had been the case during most of the post-colonial period, especially by India itself with a rate of nearly  per cent per year. The developed countries of Europe and North America grew at  to  per cent per year (see table ), Japan decelerated substantially to a low of . per cent in the s, and the former Soviet bloc countries underwent marked economic contractions in the early s.
The s saw a slowdown in the weighted average rate of growth of the worlds economies to . per cent from the . per cent achieved in the s. This deceleration was the net result of three divergent patterns among the various regions (table ). South Asia joined east_asia as a high-growth region; Western Europe and North America experienced moderate slowdowns; and all the other regions (sub-Saharan Africa, South and Central America, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East) suffered sharp declines in growth.
The s brought modest changes to most regions. In particular, a moderate slowdown in east_asia (the combined result of the slowdown in the Japanese economy and the East Asian crisis), a moderate decline in Western Europe, a moderate increase in North America, continued brisk growth in South Asia, and slow growth in sub-Saharan Africa. The exceptions were South and Central America and the Middle East with marked accelerations, and the dramatic collapse of the former Soviet bloc (Eastern Europe and Central Asia). The net effect was a further deceleration in world economic growth to just . per cent.
 Several authors have argued that the official figures overestimate the actual growth of the Chinese economy, though the exact degree of overestimation is not clear. Reasonable accuracy is especially important in light of the size of that country. We conclude that, even with the most extreme assumptions, the growth rate would almost certainly fall between  per cent and  per cent per annum. Wu (), after examining official and alternative estimates, concluded that Chinas official figures underestimated output up until the late s and that the growth rate was overestimated by at least  per cent since the late s. Using these presumptions and the range of alternative estimates provided by various authors (Keidel, ; Maddison, ; Ren, ; Wu, ) we recalculated Chinas output levels (in international dollars) for the period based on an assumption of a  per cent underestimate of (world_bank-reported) GDP (in domestic currency) in , and a consistent overestimate of growth of . per cent. Fortunately, though these adjustments to the official data lower both the estimated average growth of the world economy and the degree of improvement in the distribution of world income, the impact is not overly sensitive to the size of the adjustments themselves. In effect, any combination of adjustments within the range suggested by Keidel (), Wu () and Maddison () leads to similar results. Appendix table B compares our output estimates for various years with the official estimates. Appendix table
B reports the sensitivity of world distribution to the choice of assumptions about the level of underestimation of  GDP and the overestimation of the GDP growth rate. While acceptance of the official Chinese data implies a more positive trend in global income inequality and slightly faster world income growth than does the use of our adjusted figures, the general pattern of change is the same.
 Estimates of world economic growth rates vary according to the details of the methodology, including such factors as the base years chosen at which to make PPP conversions to a standard currency. But there seems to be no disagreement that world growth did slow down since about . Milanovic (: ), for example, gives per capita GDP growth rates of . per cent over and . per cent over -, somewhat higher than ours for similar but not identical periods, but showing about the same amount of deceleration.
 At the income-group level, the pattern of world growth was similarly complex (table ). Africas weak performance notwithstanding, the per capita income in the poorest countries as a group (i.e., the World Banks low income category) grew faster than in the rich ones during both the s and the s, with an average gap of . per cent over the two decades. This differential would have been even wider, and contributed to a greater reduction in world inequality, had demographic trends been similar between these country groupings. With both the substantially faster population growth in the low-income countries taken into account and India excluded from that group, the result is slower per capita growth than in the high-income countries, creating a source of income divergence. Indias presence in the low-income group of countries can, therefore, be thought of as the source of convergence of that category towards the higher ones.
In a departure from the pattern of the s, when the middle-income countries as a whole substantially outgrew both the low-income and the high-income groups, this category suffered serious deceleration in the s and s (table ). In the s it was the upper middle-income countries that suffered the largest drop in output growth (from . to . per cent) as per capita growth became negativea reflection of the crises in South and Central American economies. In the s the lower middle-income group met this fate. Even with the impressive performance of China, that category showed almost zero growth in per capita income (. per cent). Excluding China, the average decline in per capita income was a dramatic . per cent per year reflecting the economic implosion that occurred in Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
The crucial role of China and India in determining changes in the intercountry pattern of distribution of world output since , suggested by tables  and , is confirmed by the conventional measures of income inequality. The Gini, Theil, and three Atkinson measures reported in table  all indicate a moderate improvement in world intercountry inequality in each decade between  and . However, when China and India are excluded the pattern is reversed, with all measures indicating deterioration in the distribution of world income, often of roughly comparable magnitude to the improvement that occurs when they are included. The exclusion of India alone does not reverse the trend. The exclusion of China alone does so for the Gini coefficient and to a lesser extent the Theil and Atkinson (.) measures as well, but the Atkinson () suggests no change and the Atkinson (), which gives most weight to changes at the bottom of the income ladder, continues to suggest an improvement an effect of the improving situation in India. The exclusion of Eastern Europe alone generally reinforces the overall trend of improvement. (Figure  presents the changes in Gini coefficient values depending on which countries are excluded).
The dramatic effect of the growth performance of China and India on measures of intercountry income inequality is perhaps best illustrated by a disaggregation of the Theil coefficient, presented at the bottom of table . In , over a quarter of estimated intercountry income inequality could be attributed to the low income levels of China and India. In , however, these countries contribution to world inequality was negative, i.e., their presence made the intercountry distribution of world income more equal!
The distribution of world income among persons
Although prior analyses concur on the conclusion that, at the world level, most of the inequality among persons is the result of differences in average incomes across countries, intracountry inequality is also significant and changes therein could have an important impact on the level of world inequality among people. The fact
 Though China was also a low-income country through most of that period, it had graduated to the lower middleincome category by  and is thus included in that group for these calculations.
 The Atkinson coefficients are implied welfare-based measures of inequality. As the number shown in brackets increases, income transfers near the bottom of the distribution have a stronger effect on the inequality measure. See Appendix C for a more detailed description of these measures.
that many developing and most major developed countries suffered worsening income distribution during the s (known, especially in the united_states, as the greed decade) or the s, makes this a possibility to be reckoned with.
Among the  large countries for which reasonably comparable Gini coefficient estimates from the beginning and end of the s are available (from the WIDER World Income Inequality Database and the  World Development Indicators),  recorded increases in the Gini coefficient (i.e., a worsening distribution of income) while  recorded decreases (i.e., improved distribution) and one saw no change. In the s, the general deterioration of intracountry income distribution appears to have been even more acute. Of  countries for which comparable Gini coefficient estimates were available,  suffered increasing inequality and only eight recorded an improvement. In the s, as they attempted the transition to capitalism, the great majority of the Eastern European and Central Asian countries with available data experienced worsening inequality. China, while going much less far along the path of economic reform than the former Soviet bloc countries, also appears to have experienced the negative effects of growing market forces on distribution.
To include within-country income in our estimates of the distribution of world income, all large countries were divided into five, ten or forty income groups based on estimates of the distribution of income among persons for the relevant years (,  and ). Thus, the world of  countries (used for estimating intercountry inequality) was decomposed into one of  income groups, of which  were subnational income groups with an identifiable range of income. These income groups accounted for  per cent of the population of the countries represented and  per cent of total world population in . This methodology is detailed further in Appendix C.
With both intra and intercountry income differences taken into account, our best estimate of the  decile distribution of world income among individuals (ranked by per capita household income, and converted to current international dollars using PPP rates) implies a Gini coefficient of ., a Theil coefficient of . and a ratio of .-fold between the average income of the top decile and that of the bottom one (table ).
Between  and , all of the indicators we use suggest that the overall level of world inequality declined at least slightly. The Gini coefficient fell to . (from .) and each of the various Atkinson coefficients dropped a little (table ). The Theil coefficient fell more noticeably, from . to .. Between  and  all of the indicators fell again, some by a bit more than in the s and some by a bit less.
 By our definition, large countries are those with populations of over  million.
 Gini coefficient estimates are considered comparable if they derive from similar enumeration and measurement approaches. Thus, income distribution estimates that use households as the enumeration and income as the measurement unit are not compatible with those that use persons as the enumeration unit or those that use expenditure as the measurement unit.
 Since very few countries have annual measurements of income inequality, the end/beginning of decade inequality measures had to be approximated in most instances from years close to the beginning or end of the decade. Thus, the  distribution was often approximated by an estimate from the period -; the  distribution from measures from the period -; and the  estimate from the latest distribution beyond .
 This means, of course, that  small countries are still treated as single income groups, but sensitivity analyses indicate that, because they represent only  per cent of the total population, further subdivision of these countries (into income groups) would add little to the accuracy of the inequality estimates.
 See Appendix C for a description of the method used in estimating the distribution of world income among persons or, more precisely, among sub-country income groups.
  
The ratio of average top decile income to average bottom decile income fell from . in  to . in  and to . in . Though all of the inequality measures we use indicate at least a mild improvement in the distribution of world income over the two decades, the  distribution does not Lorenz dominate either the  or  distributions, nor does the  distribution Lorenz dominate the  distribution.
All of the bottom six deciles gained in income share in both decades; the six combined moved up markedly from a share of . per cent in  to . per cent in  and . per cent in . The losing deciles were ,  and , their share falling sharply from . per cent in  to . per cent in , while the top decile gained over two percentage points, from . per cent in  to . per cent in . Much of the gain achieved by the bottom deciles reflects the fast growth in China and India. The fact that the deciles near the top were unable to hold onto their share was the combined result of poor growth of per capita income in the upper middle-income countries (South and Central America in the s and Eastern Europe in the s) and the widening income gaps within the high-income countries. The worlds poorest were, generally speaking, substantially better off in  than in . The bottom  per cent ( per cent) enjoyed an income increase of  per cent ( per cent) over the -year period. The temporal and geographic nature of that improvement will be discussed in the next section.
 One distribution is said to Lorenz dominate another one if the Lorenz curve corresponding to the former lies nowhere below and is at least sometimes above the Lorenz curve corresponding to the other distribution.
 In effect, these income groups consist largely of small upper middle-income countries and the middle classes of the large upper middle-income countries, together with the lower-income groups of the large wealthy countries.
What is perhaps most intriguing, and at first glance paradoxical, about the outcome for is that, though no previous post-war period seems to have been characterized by as general a pattern of intracountry worsening of distribution as this one, the overall level of inequality has moved in the opposite direction, again in contrast to the previous tendency of near constancy over the preceding decades (Berry, Bourguignon and Morrisson, : ; Bourguignon and Morrisson, : Table ).
Among other studies using the same methodology (conversion among currencies by International Comparison Programme (ICP) indices of the united_nations Statistics Division and the University of Pennsylvania, and national accounts-based figures for average income of each country), the finding of constancy or decline in global inequality over the past couple of decades appears to be the norm. Studies differ more in the absolute level of inequality that they report. This is not surprising because most methodological differences are likely to lead to fairly systematic differences over time between any two studies. Judged by the Gini coefficients, whereas our figures indicate a very small decrease in inequality (from . in  to in ), Bhalla (: ) finds a somewhat greater decline from a higher level (. in  to in  and . in ) while Sala-i-Martin (: ) reports a decline from . in  to .
in  and . in . Perhaps the faster fall in inequality reported by these two studies than ours is substantially due to the fact that we adjusted the official Chinese data and they did not. When we used the unadjusted official figures, our Gini estimates also fell by one percentage point in the s and two in the s (table B). If we include Bourguignon and Morrisson () data for  to  (Ginis of . and ., respectively) as approximating the story of the s, all four studies come up with minimal change in the Gini coefficient over that decade (one percentage point or less), but Bhalla () and Salai-Martin () find larger declines of a couple of percentage points in the s compared to our . percentage point. Milanovic (: ) reports a decline of . over the slightly different period for a common sample of countries, a decline that might be a little bigger had he converted to a common currency only in one year, as we did. Overall then, in light of a variety of differences in details of the methodology, adjustment of official data made or not made, and decisions with respect to which source of intracountry inequality to accept, these modest differences in estimates and in trends are reassuring.
As noted, world inequality reflects, in large part, the huge differences in average income levels across countries. Expressed in terms of the Theil index, which has the advantage of being decomposable in a straightforward way, this factor accounted for over three-quarters (. per cent) of overall world inequality in , while just . per cent reflected intracountry inequality (table ). These proportions had changed to . per cent and . per cent respectively by , reflecting the general deterioration of intracountry distribution evidenced by the rising Gini coefficients mentioned earlier, as well as the rapid decline of the intraregional between-country component of overall inequality over the period. Differences in average incomes across the six regions by themselves accounted for around  per cent of total inequality in all three decades (though the Gini coefficient reflecting the actual level of inequality fell from . in  to . in ). The average level of intraregional between-country inequality (i.e., the weighted mean of intercountry income differences within a region) fell by nearly one third (from . in  to . in ) leading to a rapid contraction in its share of overall inequality (from three-fifths to only slightly more than two-fifths).
 Another source of difference with Bhallas study is that his distribution data for India show no net change over the decades (Bhalla, : ) whereas our estimate is of an increase from . to .. (Our estimate is higher in absolute terms since we have adjusted the expenditure Ginis to the income concept in order to make them comparable to the data for other countries).
With its large share of world population, Chinas economic evolution is obviously important to what happens at the world level. Since its growth performance has substantially outpaced other countries in the period under discussion, and since its economic system has unique features, it is also of interest to ask what happened to distribution (and to growth) in the world outside China over these years. With China excluded, the Gini coefficient rises by about three percentage points, the Theil coefficient by about four points and the Atkinson (.) by nearly three points, while the other two Atkinson indices show less or no significant change. Noticeably, the indices that do not rise are those more sensitive to what happens at the bottom of the distribution. This is because, even without China, the bottom deciles did better than those in the upper-middle part of the distribution (table ). Thus the presence of China significantly changes our estimated outcome over this twenty-year period from a modest, but clear, decrease in inequality to a worseningat least as judged by most of the indicators. Interestingly, the pattern of change varies less than do the summary measures. Even with China excluded, the bottom deciles gain in income share though now only the bottom four instead of six,
and by a more modest amount (from . per cent of total income to . per cent). Meanwhile, the top decile records a dramatic gain of over  percentage points, while the second highest decile almost holds its own and deciles suffer a sharp net loss of share from . per cent to . per cent. With gains by the top and bottom at the expense of the middle, the ratio of the income of the top decile to that of the bottom one rises from about  in  to  in . It is noteworthy that to a considerable degree the same trends characterized both the s and the s, despite the markedly different events taking place in each.
The major redistribution of income within the top two-thirds of the (China excluded) world distribution reflects both differential growth (e.g., the poor performance of the former Soviet Union) and increases in intracountry inequality in the higher income countries. Since the growth of the world without China has been slower than that of the world with it (just . per cent and . per cent a year for the s and s respectively), it is not surprising that the falling income shares of middle deciles ,  and  also meant that they lost ground in absolute as well as relative terms, with overall negative growth in their ( international dollar equivalent) per capita income (table ).
The inequality trend is affected further if India is excluded along with China (table ). For the remaining  per cent of the world population there was a clear worsening of the distribution of income, as the Gini coefficient rose sharply from . to . between  and  and the ratio of average income of the top decile to that of the bottom rose from . to .. With two of the fastest growing countries (as well as the two largest) excluded, average income per capita for the rest of the world grew at only . per cent per year between  and , and . per cent per year during the s (table ).
Although the bottom three deciles still recorded marginal income growth, the next four all lost in absolute terms; only the top two showed substantial income increases, with the share of the top decile rising sharply from . per cent in  to . per cent in  (about the same amount as in the case where only China is excluded). Though the biggest losers are in the middle deciles, the fall in the income shares of the bottom deciles, as well, exposes and highlights the fact that growth in China and India offset the poor economic performance of other low-income countries, particularly those in Africa.
 The rates of decile income growth in the last two columns of table  (or table ) do not average the rates of growth in table  because the latter are a weighted average of domestic growth rates while the former are direct estimates of growth after translating all income to  PPP equivalents.
The deterioration in the distribution of world income when China and India are excluded is more unequivocal than both the improvement when these countries are included and the deterioration when only China is excluded. There is no Lorenz dominance in either of the latter two cases but, when both India and China are excluded, the  distribution of world income Lorenz dominates both the  and  distributions and the  distribution Lorenz dominates that for .
Given the dramatic events befalling the former Soviet bloc, it is also of interest to see what effect they had on the trajectory of growth and inequality (table A, Appendix A). During the s the world economy grew at just . per cent while the world outside the former Soviet bloc grew at . per cent, highlighting the major impact of its collapse on world growth. However, the significant increase in inequality reported for most countries of the bloc, even when combined with the effect of their falling income on intercountry inequality, contributes only modestly to the pattern of world income distribution. Excluding the countries of the former Soviet bloc leads to a moderate exaggeration of the pattern of decreasing overall inequality. In the world outside the former Soviet bloc the Gini coefficient fell by . points; with that bloc included, the decline was of . points. The world Theil coefficient fell by . points, while that of the world outside the former Soviet bloc fell by . points. Qualitatively similar stories emerge for the other indicators of inequality. Exclusion of this part of the world, however, does not lead to Lorenz dominance by later distributions over earlier ones.
Major caveats
Given the number of data problems and possible methodological flaws in calculations like those reported above, it is a foregone conclusion that the results are, at best, approximations to the true reality. It is almost certain that the country-level figures in most developing counties understate inequality, mainly because of the incomplete reporting of capital incomes (especially large ones) relative to labour incomes, but also because of the exclusion of income from asset appreciation. This creates a presumption that the estimates of world inequality are also downward biased, but since the methodological flaws involved in merging the data for different countries can create either upward or downward biases, this is less certain.
Our main concern here, however, is with possible biases in the estimated trends in inequality. These are far too numerous to list; much additional research will be required to sort out their impacts and their relative importance. Probably the two phenomena most capable of leading to significant bias are changes in the degree of the under-coverage of capital incomes, already mentioned, and differences in the price trends for different income groups within countries. The latter relates to the fact that each datum on inequality is based on current prices. If, in a given country, prices rise faster for some income groups than for others, the changes in the distribution of purchasing power will be misestimated by the change in current price inequality. Under many circumstances there may be no reason to expect income-group-specific price indices to move very differently over time, but in the context of major freeing of markets and the attendant, sometimes substantial, changes in relative prices, such an assumption is not so defensible. For example, countries of Eastern Europe which saw a reduction of the rationing systems and freeing of prices of staples may well have undergone differential price changes by group. The same goes for countries that have opened up quickly to international trade; in most developing countries this has led to declines in the relative prices of a number of luxury goods (such as cars), which may mean that the relative cost of the market basket consumed by the rich has fallen vis-a-vis that of the poor.
Another concern, which may technically be viewed as a special case of the previous one, involves public consumption goods. All of the country distribution data used here refer only to private income; though everyone recognizes the need to take account of the distribution of public good consumption, the practical difficulties have precluded it as a general practice. Given the widespread decline in public expenditure in recent years, it is probable that distributional trends would look somewhat different, and very likely more negative, were public consumption included in the data, though the increase in targeting of certain services may have had a sufficiently strong positive effect to prevent this outcome or even reverse it. 
The above biases involve the estimation of inequality at the country level as opposed to the merging of country data for the world-level estimate. In both cases there is a reasonable theoretical presumption (related to the processes of liberalization and globalization) that the bias will have risen since , and a modest amount of empirical evidence has been brought forward in support of that conclusion (e.g., de Ferranti and others, : ). Overall, these limitations suggest that, for the period in question, the available (conventional) measures of income inequality are more likely to err on the side of undue optimism (i.e., to overestimate improvements in the distribution of income or to underestimate deteriorations). Thus any picture painted by the data is unlikely to be overly pessimistic. Allowing for these possible (or probable) biases might suggest a best guess that the level of world inequality, instead of falling a little from -, was very close to staying constant, or might even have risen a little. It is worth emphasizing that, although there has been a considerable convergence of results around the modest decline in world inequality conclusion for at least the last two decades of the twentieth century, most of the major remaining possible biases in the estimates (especially the most glaring ones noted above) are common to all of the studies. Thus it is quite possible that all of them are significantly off the mark in the same direction.
Milanovic (: ), relying exclusively on household survey data for both mean income and its distribution, estimated that between  and , the Gini coefficient for the world income distribution had risen from . to . for a common sample of countries. This suggested that, if his methodology was indeed the correct one, not only was world inequality increasing, it was doing so very rapidly. The message contrasted significantly with that of the other available and comparable studies that, as noted above, pointed to a smallish decrease since . In fact, the difference between the two approaches turns out to have been much less than first met the eye since, when Milanovic added  estimates, these showed an inequality decline between  and  and hence a more modest increase from  to  of . Gini percentage points, from . to . (Milanovic, : ). From  to , our estimated Gini coefficient fell from . to . (table ). Milanovic also undertook estimates using national accountsbased figures for mean per capita income of each country, and in that case found the Gini coefficient to fall from . in  to . in , figures almost identical to our own for -. This suggests that the main difference between his preferred result and ours reflects the use of different figures for mean per capita income of countries (survey-based incomes in his case and national account-based incomes in our case) rather than a number of other differences of methodological detail or the fact that the end years are a little different. This leaves us with two interesting questions arising from Milanovics results, where they contrast with others.

Another source of imprecision lies in the fact that the ICP (International Comparisons Project of the Center for International Comparisons) conversion indices used here do not provide fully accurate translation of per capita income levels between countries; whereas use of nominal exchange rates tends to exaggerate income differences between richer and poorer countries, the ICP indices tend to understate them (Dowrick and Quiggin, ). Dowrick and Quiggin () derive an alternative index with desirable properties which, in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) context, implies that income convergence occurred between  and  whereas the ICP indices yielded no clear results. But Quiggin () reports that the opposite appears to be true when a sample including poor countries is used, and that there is no general presumption that the use of this index would lead to more frequent findings of convergence.
 Although intracountry trends do not usually have a major impact on world trends unless they are dramatic, they may have been playing a role here. Thus, Bhalla (: ) reports significant declines in inequality in both Mexico and Brazil between  and ; the general view among specialists is that inequality has risen markedly in Mexico since ; prior to that the comparability of surveys was weak, making it difficult to judge trends. In Brazil, most sources (including ourselves) indicate a smaller decrease in inequality than does Bhallahis Gini falls by six percentage points between  and  while ours falls by one percentage point over -. It would require a very detailed and careful comparison to sort out which differences show up in the mildly different estimates of world distribution trends. Almost all developing countries still suffer major problems and ambiguities in their data on distribution. Much of the statistical error and the non-comparability across surveys at different points of time are likely to be fairly random, such that it might not affect estimates of inequality trends much. The major possible sources of error in estimation of the time trend, in particular the inaccurate reporting of capital incomes, are present in all studies undertaken thus far. It would be useful to undertake simulation exercises to test for the sensitivity of trend estimates to plausible errors in this aspect of intracountry inequality.
First, was there, in fact, a rather sudden increase in world inequality between  and  as his figures show (albeit less markedly in his  publication than in that of )? Sorting out this question would require an analysis of the statistical sources of that increase to discern whether they more likely reflected true trends or statistical error and is well beyond the scope of this study.
Second, what can be said about the relative merits of using household survey-based estimates of per capita income in each country versus national accounts-based estimates? This is also a complicated mat-
ter that cannot currently be resolved on the basis either of theory or available empirical evidence. All approaches have to use distribution data from household surveys so the weaknesses of that information show up in all estimates. The difference between the two is the choice of the mean income measures. Milanovics approach uses the mean per capita income measure derived directly from household surveys with its likely underestimation of true mean income (mainly because of the underreporting of capital income) while our method uses national accounts-based per capita income figures (which is not without its own measurement problems). However, it is not accuracy of measurement that is the critical issue here. The main argument for using national accounts estimates of per capita income is that the methodology is likely to produce less variability in the errors of observation over time than the household survey data. Given the underreporting of capital incomes in survey data it is unclear how this effect plays out over time with respect to the distribution of global income. Capital incomes do vary over time and, at this point, our knowledge of the distribution of capital income in developing countries is too limited to allow more than conjecture as to patterns of change and consequent effects on income measures.
It should be emphasized that which methodology is best and which sources of bias are the most serious depends on exactly what one wants to learn from the data. One methodology may be better at approximating true inequality at a point of time but worse at identifying trendsour main interest here. One may be better at approximating the distribution of consumption expenditures and the other at approximating the distribution of income. If the former is ones main interest, household surveys (when there are enough of them and they are comparable enough) are likely to provide the better approach, since the capital income reporting problem becomes close to irrelevant. Meanwhile, studies of changing inequality in given countries do not confront many of the challenges involved in dealing with world inequality.
Our focus here is the direction of changes in world inequality among persons. For that purpose, we suspect that the use of national accounts-based per capita income measures is superior to the use of household survey-based figures. However, accepting that this is, nevertheless, debatable, it is somewhat reassuring that the apparent impact of that methodological choice is less than it appeared to be when Milanovic () was published. Over  to, the difference in change in the Gini coefficient, according to Milanovics (: ) calculations is . percentage pointsa . percentage point increase using the survey-based means and a . point decrease using the national accounts-based means.
  
A clarification with respect to studies showing increasing inequality of world distribution
Most of the confusion and ambiguity as to what has been happening to world inequality has been due, not to the methodological issues discussed in this paper, but to two others: whether the individual person or the country is the unit of comparison and whether per capital incomes are converted to a common base using official or market exchange rates or using PPP conversion rates. All of the studies previously referred to in this paper, with the exception of Korzeniewicz and Moran (), share with us the practice of converting national data to a common base using PPP conversion ratios and using the individual as the basic unit of observation.
When the country rather than the individual is the unit of observation, one is, in effect, giving equal weight to each country; China with several hundred times more people than Costa Rica, is given the same weight as that country. This treatment inevitably means that what happens in the many small or relatively small countries becomes the main determinant of world inequality. China and India, with between them around  per cent of the worlds population, have only between  and  per cent of the weight in these calculations. If most countries fell in about the same size range, it would not matter much whether one weighted by population or did not; but in fact, countries vary enormously in size, as the just-cited figures indicate. Hence, it does matter. Among those who have focused on this unweighted measure of world inequality is Castells (). The very widespread view that global inequality has been rising has been supported by these simple comparisons of growth rate in richer versus poorer countries and, ironically, has often been fuelled by statements coming from such establishment institutions as the world_bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Milanovic (: -) presents a time series covering that shows a modest increase in unweighted intercountry inequality from a Gini coefficient of . in  to about . around , followed by a very sharp increase to about . at the end of the century. Over the fifty years as a whole, most of the increase comes from what happens in Africa (as one might guess from the fact that there are so many small countries there and they have done relatively badly compared to other developing countries), but the concentrated increase since  does not have that origin, it is, instead, due mainly to events in latin_america and in the middle-income countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Conclusions about world inequality trends are also very sensitive to whether conversion of national data to an international currency takes the PPP route or uses official exchange rates. The united_nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) was one of the institutions, along with the UNDP () to report a major increase in inequality at some point in the last few decades, with the Gini coefficient rising from . in  to . in  and the ratio of the richest quintile to the poorest rising dramatically from . to . (UNCTAD : ). The report drew on Korzeniewicz and Moran (). The authors were aware that the choice between market exchange rate conversion and PPP conversion matters. They judged that the latter was the more appropriate way to gauge relative welfare conditions but followed Arrighi (: -) to the conclusion that exchange rates provide a better indicator of the command that different countries have over the human and natural resources. However, most users of these estimates are basically concerned with the distribution of welfare and, by implication, access to locally available resources at domestic pricessuggesting the use of PPP exchange rates. Thus, as Firebaugh (: ) puts it, virtually all recent studies of betweennation or global income inequality use income data adjusted for purchasing power parity differences.
 Thus The average income in the richest  countries is  times the average in the poorest -a gap that has doubled in the past  years (International Monetary Fund, : , cited in Firebaugh, : ).
 Although there are tricky issues within the broad PPP approach (see Milanovic, ; Dowrick and Akmal, ; Dowrick and Quiggin, ; and others) these appear to matter much less to most results than does the choice of any variant of this general approach as opposed to official exchange rates.
Poverty trends and patterns
Trends in the incidence of poverty naturally depend on where the poverty line is drawn. Rather than choosing one line, inevitably somewhat arbitrary, we estimate poverty incidence for three different levels, , , and   international dollars (annually). We diverge from the standard $ and $-a-day poverty lines partly because ours are income-based poverty lines, in contrast to the consumption-based approach used by the world_bank and united_nations. Given average national levels of private consumption relative to total income, the $-a-day (or $-a-year) consumption based poverty line is likely to be fairly close to our $ income poverty line. In effect, then, our $ and $, poverty lines can be considered roughly comparable to those $ and $-a-day consumption lines. Persons with income below $ can be reasonably considered extremely poor, those with income of $ or greater but less than $,, very poor, and those with income of $, or greater but less than $,, moderately poor.
For the world as a whole, it is noteworthy that poverty, when measured by the -internationaldollar poverty line, continued to decline rapidly during the s but the pace slackened markedly in the s (table ). During the s, the share of people below this line fell sharply in east_asia, mainly reflecting the growth of China and also in South Asia, while remaining about constant in Africa (table ).
 In the s, though it had already been lowered considerably, poverty by this definition was again roughly halved in east_asia. However, the rate of improvement fell sharply in South Asia due to increasing inequality in India (although per capita income growth increased slightly) and the fact that income groups were much less clustered close to that line than previously. Poverty incidence again held about constant in sub-Saharan Africa. Thus, these two decades saw modest poverty reduction (by this definition) in the world outside China, and very little indeed in the world outside China and Indiafrom . in  to . in . In both these latter two cases there was some reduction in the s followed by a loss of ground in the s.
The distinction between the s and the s is dramatically different when the poverty line is set at $. For the world as a whole and for the world minus China, the percentage point decline was greater in the s and substantial in absolute terms (table ). For the world outside China and India, there was only a very marginal decline in each decade. This reflects the fact that in South Asia (and, more particularly, India), the worsening distribution of income that muted the effect of rising overall income for the lowest income groups had a less dramatic effect in this intermediate range as well as the fact that fewer income classes were located near that poverty line in  than in . Through both decades, the Middle East continued to record moderate declines in poverty, but in South and Central America, the retrogression of the s was not erased in the s (table ).
At the higher poverty line of $, the pattern is again different. Poverty, by that definition, declines only moderately for the world as a whole, a little when China is excluded and marginally over the two decades when both India and China are excluded. In terms of the regional distribution, only east_asia and the Middle East record large declines in poverty defined by this line, while South Asia recorded a moderate decline and Africa, surprisingly, a modest decline as well. However, increasing proportions of the Eastern European, and the South and Central American populations fell below that level over the two decades.
The area for concern, then, with respect to world poverty trends involves the bottom decile or so of world population, who are still below or close to the $ line and who have been climbing above this line at a slower rate than higher deciles historically did. As has been widely noted, this new challenge has a strong regional component. As of , the average income of the poorest quintile of the population was strikingly similar across South Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and east_asia (table ). The succeeding two decades have seen a remarkable divergence in the fates of these groups, with average incomes rising rapidly in east_asia and moderately in South Asia but falling slightly in sub-Saharan Africa. By , the average income of East Asias bottom quintile was  per cent above that of the corresponding quintile of South Asia and over three times that of the bottom sub-Saharan African quintile. The extent of the collapse of incomes in sub-Saharan Africa is further illustrated by the fact that that bottom quintile was earning a higher proportion of total income in  than it was in , but the purchasing power of its income had dropped!
 The two regions with the largest populations in poverty have been reducing poverty rapidly, while the third one has been going in the opposite direction. But the net positive outcome a significant decline in world poverty incidence seems to have run out in the s. An improvement on the performance of that decade, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa, and more equitable growth in South Asia will be necessary for poverty reduction to regain the momentum of the earlier decades.
Summary and conclusions
In the light of divergent income trends across other regions, rapid and sustained expansion of the Chinese economy, and the more moderate, but consistent growth in India, were critical to the modest expansion of the world economy during the s and s. World inequality among persons fell during both the s and the s, according to all of our indicators marginally according to some (including the Gini coefficient) and more markedly according to others (including the Theil coefficient). Income share was transferred from deciles seven to nine to the bottom six deciles and to the top decile. This outcome can be seen as the net result of two offsetting trends: falling intercountry inequality and rising intracountry inequality in wealthier countries and some of the developing ones (most prominently China). In fact, the observed improvement in the distribution of world income can be attributed entirely to the fact that the lessening of income gaps between countries was sufficient to offset the rising inequality within countries. As a result, the worlds poor were, generally speaking, substantially better off in  than in  and, accordingly, world poverty incidence continued its long downward trend. The rate of poverty reduction (in the world as a whole) was brisk in the s, continuing the pattern of the s and s, as East and South Asia (the home of the majority of the worlds poor) expanded at a significantly faster rate than the rest of the world. However, despite continued growth in these regions in the s, we see that increasing intracountry inequality (particularly in China and India) and the fact the most of the remaining poor had incomes well below the poverty line, combined with increasing poverty in Africa, led to a near cessation in the reduction of extreme poverty globally.
It might be argued that the overall pattern of world income distribution over the period was one of convergence; but with such a finding resting largely on the performance of a single country (China), its meaning would be open to question. When India is excluded along with China, the pattern is unmistakably one of divergence. In the world outside those two countries, overall per capita economic growth fell by close to  per cent in each successive decade after the s, the distribution of income became markedly more unequal and poverty levels were roughly unchanged. Thus, the two decades spanning the period  to  can be described as manifesting strong pressures towards divergence, offset plus a little by the rapid growth of the two largest low-income countries. In short, these two countries can be considered to have rescued the world from a dismal overall performance, on the equality front, in the closing decades of the twentieth century.

