-
 The literature on the determinants of average real income growth is vast. However, until recently little attention has been paid to characterizing or explaining the qualitative features of the income or growth sequence (going beyond averages). There is a burgeoning interest in understanding patterns (as opposed to average levels) of economic growth. Examples include Ben-David and Papell () (who attempt to identify structural breaks in the income series between  and  in a cross section of countries) and Pritchett () (which analyzes the instability and volatility of growth rates). Rodrik () considers growth collapses and concludes that countries that are conflict-ridden and have weak institutions of conflict-management have experienced the sharpest income downturns. More recently, patterns of growth acceleration have been studied by Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (), who find that growth acceleration episodes are not well predicted by standard growth determinants or by the occurrence of economic reforms.
This paper contributes to the existing literature in two main ways. Firstly, it describes patterns of growth in an innovative way. Specifically, the paper identifies and describes episodes of sustained negligible or negative income growth, which we refer to as stagnation spells. We discuss the conceptual difference between real income stagnation spells and other concepts concerning the pattern of economic growth. Secondly, the paper aims to identify the factors disposing countries to stagnation.
We find that real income stagnation has affected a significant number of countries ( out of ). Countries that suffered spells of real income stagnation are found more likely to be poor, in latin_america or sub-Saharan Africa, conflict ridden and dependent on primary commodity exports. Stagnation is also found very likely to persist over time.
The study of growth patterns is driven by two main motivations, one explanatory and the other normative, both of which underpin our work. The explanatory motive is to analyze patterns of real income growth in order better to understand the process of economic growth. The normative motive is to determine whether and how distinct welfare assessments should be made of different income streams (and associated growth patterns).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section defines stagnation, describes the conceptual difference between stagnation and low average growth, that between stagnation spells and other features of the growth sequence, and discusses the welfare implications of different stagnation experiences. In the following section, we describe features of the stagnation experience in a large cross-section of countries between  and . The fourth section investigates the factors associated with stagnation. The penultimate section provides evidence of the persistence of stagnation over time. The final section contains our conclusions.
What Is Stagnation?
Identifying and explaining stagnation may in principle require a distinct approach than does identifying and explaining the causes of poor growth experience as such. The reason is that stagnation spells are concentrated periods of negligible or negative growth. An uninterrupted sequence of poor growth years constitutes a stagnation spell. In this section of the paper, we begin by formalizing the concept of stagnation. Thereafter, we discuss the conceptual difference between stagnation and low average growth. Finally, we discuss whether the occurrence of stagnation spells should influence our judgments concerning the welfare experienced by different countries.
Identifying Spells of Stagnation
We use time-series data on the GDP per capita of countries. The study period is -. Since data are not available for all countries and all years, the end of the study period for a specific country refers to the most recent year for which data are available.
The onset of a stagnation spell is defined as a year in which a countrys per capita real income is lower than at any time in the previous two years and higher than at any time in the subsequent four years. At the onset of a stagnation spell, a countrys per capita real income is both the lowest in the three-year interval concluding with it, and the highest in the five-year interval beginning with it. This criterion is deliberately defined stringently, so as to avoid identifying brief interruptions of growth as stagnation spells. Although the onset of a stagnation spell is defined in terms of the relation between income levels in adjacent years, the motive is reliably to identify the onset of periods of sustained negligible or negative income growth.
A turning point is defined as a year in which a countrys real income is at least one per cent higher than it was in the previous year, and at least one per cent lower than it is in the subsequent year. This criterion is made permissive, so as to capture the resumption of sustained income growth, even at a low level.
 Income in a given year is represented by the three-year moving average centered on that year, in order to focus on meaningful variations that are not due to measurement error or very fleeting economic shocks. We use data on the GDP per capita in constant local currency units. Our reason for using LCUs is that PPP-adjusted real GDP figures are not, properly speaking, inter-temporally comparable. Attempts to make them so, such as the Penn World Table (Version .), introduce other distortions that we wish to avoid here. The spells of stagnation that we identify are largely dependent on the features of the per-capita income time series, which are appropriately captured by LCU data. Inter-country comparability of time-series is not required for this purpose. The main aim of the paper is to introduce the concept of real income stagnation and examine its empirical relevance. We operationalize the concept of real income stagnation using LCU GDP data; however the analysis can easily be conducted using PPP-adjusted GDP figures instead. Such an exercise would yield largely similar results due to the high correlation between year-on-year growth rates of the two GDP series. We have calculated these correlations for a sub-sample of  countries from our main dataset (for which PPP-adjusted GDP data for are available in PTW Version .). Almost two thirds of the countries had a simple correlation coefficient larger than ., and three quarters of the sampled countries had a correlation coefficient larger than .. For specific countries, the two times series diverge [For a detailed study of the divergence between PWT and LCU data in the case of Venezuela, see Rodriguez ()]. In our view the LCU time series is to be strongly preferred in such cases since it is dependent on local national income data and does not reflect adjustments brought about for the sole purpose of level comparability across countries. The PWT income series for a country often reflects the use of arbitrary premises or adjustments for a variety of reasons including the past or present non-participation of many countries in the price surveys of the International Comparison Programme (requiring reliance upon questionable regression estimates for these countries), the arbitrary choice of overlapping link countries to relate real incomes in one region to real incomes elsewhere, the impact of the choice of base year on comparisons of real-incomes across country-years, and other factors. We do use PWT incomes where they are needed to undertake cross-sectional comparisons of countries.

A spell of stagnation is defined as the period from the onset of stagnation to the first turning point after the onset. We define the length of a spell as the length of this period. Since the criterion for identifying the onset of stagnation is stringent and the criterion for identifying the turning point is permissive, spells defined in this way are defined stringently.
The depth of a spell of stagnation is defined as the difference between the income at the onset and the minimum income during the spell, expressed as a share of the income at the end of the study period. The depth of the spell of stagnation has a counterfactual interpretation. Specifically, it represents the percent-
age by which the per capita income of a country would be higher than it is at the end of the study period if it had experienced a constant income between the onset of stagnation and the year in which the minimum income during the spell was attained instead of having had the income path that it actually had. This counterfactual is conservative in that it assumes zero growth rather than positive growth in this time interval. The concepts of spell of stagnation, depth and length of stagnation, are illustrated in Figure  for Syria.
 The income at the end of the study period is defined as the average of the incomes in the last three years of the study period (-), so as to avoid idiosyncratic results that derive from the presence of short-term volatility.
Identifying Countries as Stagnators
A stagnator is defined as a country that has experienced a spell of stagnation at some point during the study period.
A countrys length of stagnation is defined as the sum of the lengths of all of the spells of stagnation it has experienced.
A countrys depth of stagnation is defined as the sum of the depths of all of the spells of stagnation it has experienced. A countrys depth of stagnation has a counterfactual interpretation. Specifically, it represents
  
the percentage by which the per capita income of a country would be higher than it is at the end of the study period if it had experienced a constant income between the onset of every spell of stagnation and the year in which the minimum income during that spell was attained, instead of having had the income path that it actually had. This counterfactual is conservative in that it assumes zero growth rather than positive growth over each such time interval.
During a given decade, a country is defined as a decadal stagnator if at least three years within the decade belong to a stagnation spell. This definition is designed to avoid counting as decadal stagnators countries that merely experienced the end (or beginning) of a spell of stagnation in a given decade. Rather, it identifies a country as a decadal stagnator if it has experienced a sufficiently long period of stagnation in the decade.
A countrys decadal length of stagnation is defined as the number of years spent in spells of stagnation during the decade.
A spell of stagnation is used to calculate the decadal depth of stagnation (defined below) if at least three years belonging to the spell are contained within the decade.
A countrys decadal depth of stagnation is defined as the percentage by which its income at the end of the decade would have been higher if it had experienced zero growth in each interval from the first year of a stagnation spell within the decade to the point at which its minimum income during the spell and during the decade were experienced (rather than having had the growth experience that it actually did).
Stagnation versus Low Average Growth
The conceptual difference between stagnation (as defined above) and low average income growth can be understood as follows: a stagnation spell consists of an uninterrupted sequence of poor growth years. In contrast, an episode of low income growth can be composed of any sequence of growth years, including a sequence which involves alternating positive and negative income shocks. Different income paths can possess the same average growth rates but very different patterns of growth, some of which contain stagnation spells and some of which do not. Suppose that yt represents the real income per capita of a country in time period t, and yt represents the growth rate of real income per capita between (t-) and t. Consider the following identity, which reflects the final income achieved by a country, given its initial income and annual growth rates:
The final income yT is invariant to the sequence in which the growth rates yt appear. Further, the average (geometric mean) growth rate over the period is invariant to the sequence. Countries can possess identical per capita income growth rates but very different growth sequences. As discussed briefly below (and also noted, for example, in Reddy and Minoiu ()), the resulting distinct growth sequences can have very different welfare implications.
Our focus in this paper is however on the description and interpretation of a possible feature of a growth sequence. In particular, we examine the occurrence in countries of uninterrupted sequences of negligible or negative income growth years (i.e., stagnation spells) as distinguished from patterns of negative income growth years alternating in some way with positive income growth years.
 We use the mean income over the last three years of the decade to represent the income at the end of the decade.

Distinguishing Stagnation from other Features of the Growth Sequence
Consider a sequence of real incomes {yt }. Associated with this sequence of real incomes is a sequence of  y& t 
rates of growth  y  . Associated with the sequence of rates of growth is in turn a sequence of rates of  t &y&t 
growth acceleration  y&  . t
Inter-temporal economic patterns can be sought in relation to any one of these three series. For example, it may be of interest to examine the lowness or (highness) of incomes, of growth rates, or of rates of acceleration. The concept of stagnation employed in this paper adopts a focus on uninterrupted sequences of low growth rates. In contrast, other recent contributions to the literature (e.g., Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik, ) (henceforth, HPR) adopt a hybrid concept, which simultaneously refers to more than one of these levels of analysis. An episode of growth acceleration is defined by HPR as fulfilling the following conditions: the average growth rate between the beginning of the acceleration episode and its end is at least . per cent per annum; the difference between the mean growth rate during the acceleration episode and the period preceding it is at least  per cent per annum. Finally, the post-episode income level is higher than the pre-episode peak. It is evident that HPRs approach mizes criteria involving income levels, rates of growth and rates of growth acceleration. From this standpoint, it is far from clear that it captures growth accelerations as such. The criteria used also appear to be somewhat ad hoc.
Growth Patterns and Welfare
It should be noted that neither the concept of real income stagnation, nor that of growth accelerations, can be used straightforwardly for purposes of welfare assessment. In this section, we shall use a few examples to illustrate the issues involved in making welfare comparisons of income streams characterized by stagnation experiences and associated steady-growth counterfactuals.
If two countries income streams begin and end at the same income levels over a single time period, then the countries will possess the same (geometric) average growth rates. However, they may possess very different income paths over this period. Consider, for example, the income growth experience of Jordan and Morocco between  and  [depicted in Figure ]. In this period, the two countries had an average growth rate of . per cent. Their (Penn World Table Version .) per capita income in  was in both cases around $, and that in  was in both cases approximately $,. While Jordan experienced rapid early income growth followed by a stagnation spell between  and , Moroccos income path was characterized by fairly steady growth throughout the period. Despite the stagnation experience, Jordan experienced higher welfare throughout the period according to a simple criterion, that of first-order dominance of its income stream over Moroccos: Jordans income stream was at least as high in every year as Moroccos. On average during the period, Jordanians were richer than Moroccans by $, international ( PPP) dollars.
Consider also the hypothetical case of two countries that possess the same average growth rate over a given period of time, and experience similar stagnation spells, but do so at different times, and as a re-
sult experience very different levels of material well-being. It is important to draw a distinction between an experience of stagnation which arises early in the study period and is followed by recovery, and an experience of stagnation that arises towards the end of the study period and is preceded by prolonged growth. An early stagnation spell followed by recovery will cause a country to have lost income relative to the steady-growth path, whereas an experience of high growth rates early on followed by a downturn towards the end of the period will lead a country to have gained wealth relative to the same steady-growth path. While both countries will be classified as stagnators (and possess the same average growth rate), the timing of the stagnation spell is greatly relevant to assessing whether the country has experienced gains or losses in welfare relative to the steady-growth counterfactual. It is not the experience of stagnation alone, but the entirety of the growth path that is important in assessing welfare.
Average growth rates are a useful summary statistic for the income growth experience of a country, but can conceal the occurrence of large gains and losses in wealth or welfare. Since it is implausible to believe that the (net) wealth which accrues to a country over a period of time is inconsequential for investment, capital accumulation and human well-being, we may conclude that features of the entire growth path (including the occurrence and timing of stagnation experiences) will have welfare implications.
Stagnation Experience across Countries and over Time
In the next section we rely primarily on a data set that we have constructed by expanding that used to analyze the determinants of growth by Levine and Renelt (). Our data set contains  countries for which constant LCU GDP per capita data are available over the period -, thereby permitting the identification of stagnation spells. Definitions and sources of all of the variables contained in the dataset are provided in Appendix . We treat the cases of small-island countries and transition countries (only some of which are included in the Levine and Renelt data set), separately.
Frequency and Features of Stagnation by Country Type
Countries in the Main Data Set
Table  reports the frequency with which stagnators appear among the countries that belong to the main data set. Of the  countries in the dataset, a remarkable  (or . per cent) are stagnators. Some striking facts are immediately apparent. For example, only  of the  rich countries belonging to the OECD were stagnators in this period (. per cent). In contrast . per cent (or  of ) countries in latin_american and . per cent (or  of ) countries in sub-Saharan Africa were stagnators.
It is also interesting to note that stagnators are heavily represented among countries dependent on primary commodities. Among countries belonging to OPEC,  of  were stagnators. We also check how prevalent stagnators are among primary commodity export dependent countries, by constructing two alternative measures of such dependence. Countries are classified as primary commodity exporters according to criterion I if the share of exports of primary commodities in GNP in  was above the mean level for the sample. Countries are classified as primary commodity exporters according to criterion II if the share of exports of primary commodities in GNP in  was one standard deviation above the mean level for the sample. It is interesting to note that a very large proportion of primary commodity exporting countries are stagnators; the proportion of stagnators is roughly the same regardless of which criterion is used to identify primary commodity exporting countries (. per cent when criterion I is used, and . per cent when criterion II is used). A majority of landlocked countries (. per cent) are also stagnators.
Table  reports in greater detail the stagnation experiences of the countries belonging to these different categories. It may be observed that the average depth of stagnation among stagnators varies considerably across geographical categories, from . in the case of latin_america to . in the case of sub-Saharan Africa, whereas the average length of stagnation varies between  years (for latin_american countries) and  years (in the case of sub-Saharan African countries). Thus, sub-Saharan African countries tend to have both longer and deeper stagnation experiences than latin_american countries. The former also tend to have more stagnation spells per country than the latter (. spells per country compared to . spells per country).
Remarkably, oil-exporting (OPEC) countries have both the highest average depth of stagnation among all categories of countries (.), as well as the highest number of stagnation spells (. spells per country). Intensive (criterion II) primary commodity exporters have an average length of stagnation of  years (almost half the study period). Furthermore, the depth and length of stagnation increases with the intensity of primary commodity exports in GNP.
Appendix II identifies the stagnation spells experienced by each of the countries in the sample as well as their traits. The longest spell of stagnation was experienced by Zambia ( years, from  to ) and the deepest was experienced by Iraq (.).
Transition Countries
Transition countries are not included in the main dataset, as for many countries the data with which to undertake the analysis do not exist for the period  to . Table  describes the frequency and features of stagnation among the transition countries, for which we have data during the period -. Of the  countries for which stagnation analysis was possible,  (or  per cent) were stagnators in this study period. Moreover, the average depth of stagnation was a striking . (more than two-thirds of the end of study period income) and the average length of stagnation was . (almost two-thirds of the study period). The country with the maximum depth of stagnation (.) was Tajikistan, whereas the country with the maximum length of stagnation ( years) was Moldova.
 The OECD stagnators are: Greece, Iceland, New Zealand and Switzerland.
 For several countries, there is data going back to as early as  (Hungary and China) and  (Georgia, Latvia and russian_federation). We do not employ this data here.
Small Island Developing States
Many small island developing states are also not included in the main dataset, due to gaps in the data available for many of them. Table  describes the frequency and features of stagnation among small island developing states (as identified by the united_nations) for the period  to . Of  countries for which stagnation analysis was possible,  were stagnators. The average depth of stagnation was . and the average length of stagnation was . years. Roughly half the island stagnators had a single spell of stagnation, and roughly half had two spells of stagnation. The maximum depth of stagnation (.) was experienced by Kiribati, while the maximum length of stagnation ( years) was experienced by Haiti.
The World as a Whole
The unified sample (including together the countries in the main dataset, transition countries and small island developing states) contains  countries. Of the  countries for which stagnation analysis was possible,  ( per cent, i.e., more than half ) were stagnators.
Experience Across the Decades (the World)
The stagnation experience of countries across the decades is described in Table  (for countries in the main data set). It can be seen that the number of decadal stagnators increased sharply and steadily between the s (when there were , amounting to  per cent of the countries for which data was available) and the s (when there were , amounting to  per cent of the countries for which data was available), and diminished somewhat in the s (to , amounting to  per cent of the countries for which data was available).
From a worldwide perspective, the s seem to have been the worst decade. The average length of stagnation peaked in the s at almost  years, as did the average depth of stagnation at .. The average depth of stagnation increased monotonically from the s to the s before diminishing in the s. The average length of stagnation varied between . and . years/country across the four decades, again peaking in the s.
Experience Across the Decades (Regions)
The proportion of countries that are stagnators (among the countries for which the analysis is possible) is higher in every decade in sub-Saharan Africa than in latin_america, with the exception of the s (Tables A and B). For the whole study period however, the proportion of latin_american stagnators exceeds that of sub-Saharan African stagnators. In both continents, the proportion of stagnators among countries increases steadily through the decades, peaking in the s (when it reached a maximum of  per cent in sub-Saharan Africa, and  per cent in latin_america) and diminishing somewhat in the s.
As shown in Table , in all four decades the countries that spent the longest number of years in stagnation were most likely to be in sub-Saharan Africa. As shown in Table A, the average depth of stagnation was higher in latin_america than it was in Africa in all decades other than the s. In sub-Saharan Africa, the average length of stagnation was highest in the s and s whereas in latin_america it was highest in the s and s. In sub-Saharan Africa, the average depth of stagnation was highest in the s whereas in latin_america it was highest in the s. This suggests that the s have not been a period of recovery in sub-Saharan Africa.

It is also interesting to examine the correlation between the length and depth of stagnation by region and decade (see Table B). It appears that in the s, stagnation experiences in latin_america were likely to be long and deep. This is also true, but to a lesser degree, in sub-Saharan Africa. It is notable that the correlation between depth and length of stagnation seems to have been increasing monotonically across decades for countries in both continents. Over time, it has become more likely that stagnation spells will be both relatively deep and relatively long.
Factors Associated with Stagnation
In order to identify the factors associated with stagnation, we undertook a probit analysis of the factors that appear to affect the probability of being a stagnator. We treat whether a country is a stagnator as a binary dependent variable. The probabilities of occurrence of stagnation are assumed to be influenced by the independent variables and to be distributed normally.
In Table , we report the summary statistics for the variables used in the subsequent regressions. Tables outline the regression results for three versions of probit models with STAGNATOR (a variable which takes on a value of one when a country is a stagnator and a value of zero when it is not) as the dependent variable.
Appendix  lists the variables used in the analysis. Summary statistics concerning the variables used in all the probit regressions discussed in this section of the paper are shown in Table . We have tried to include in the regressions undertaken (from which those reported are drawn) variables that are standard in the literature on the determinants of growth.
The models have relatively good fit, with pseudo-R ranging between . and .. In addition, they show that certain factors are significantly and often robustly associated with stagnation. These include the growth rate of domestic credit, negatively associated with being a stagnator; the difference between the growth rate of the economically active population between ages  and  and the growth rate of the population total (GEAPOPP), negatively associated with being a stagnator; a dummy variable taking the value one for primary commodity exporters (according to criterion I) and zero otherwise, positively associated with being a stagnator; the number of revolutions and coups per year, positively associated with being a stagnator; an index of civil liberties taking the value of  at the highest and  at the lowest, positively associated with being a stagnator (implying an association between weaker civil liberties and stagnation); a dummy variable taking the value  for latin_american countries and zero otherwise, and a dummy variable taking the value  for sub-Saharan African countries and zero otherwise, both positively associated with being a stagnator.
The signs of these relationships are as one might predict, as is discussed below. The magnitude of these relationships is also often very substantial, as shown in Table A (columns -). For example, the probability that a country is a stagnator when GEAPOPP (the rate at which the growth of economically active population outstrips the rate of growth of the entire population) is one-half a standard deviation above the mean for all countries is estimated (depending on the model specification) to be between  and  per cent less than when it is one half a standard deviation below the mean. The probability that a country is a stagnator when the number of revolutions and coups per year is one-half a standard deviation above the mean for all countries is estimated (depending on the model specification) to be  per cent more than when it is one-half a standard deviation below the mean. Similarly, the probability that the country is a stagnator when the index of civil liberties is one-half a standard deviation above the mean for all countries is estimated to be  per cent more than when it is one-half a standard deviation below the mean. It is also found that primary commodity exporters according to criterion I have a probability of being a stagnator around  per cent above other countries.
As a check on the possibility that some of the factors considered above arise endogenously as a result of countries becoming stagnators, we repeated the analysis by using as the dependent variable STAGNATOR, a dummy variable taking on a value of one if a country was a stagnator in the s, and zero otherwise. We used data for the independent variables from the earlier period  to , so as to capture possible lagged relationships running from these independent variables to STAGNATOR. It is important to be cautious in interpreting the results found here as revealing any causal information, however, since stagnation from decade to decade is highly correlated, as discussed further below. We find the relationships to be somewhat weaker, but still to be present. As reported in Table , the Sub Saharan Africa Dummy, the latin_america Dummy, GEAPOPP, and the number of revolutions and coups per year are significant. In contrast, the primary commodity exporter dummy I, the index of civil liberties, and the growth rate of domestic credit are no longer significant. This is not wholly surprising, as the Sub Saharan Africa Dummy, the latin_america Dummy, and GEAPOPP (directly or indirectly) capture structural features of the economy that may have a long-term impact, whereas the index of civil liberties, and the growth rate of domestic credit represent phenomena (such as ambient political circumstances and the conduct of monetary policy) that may arguably have only a more transitory impact on economic performance.
It is also not surprising that measures of primary commodity export dependence are significant determinants of stagnation, in light of the recent literature on the natural resource curse, which emphasizes that for a range of political and economic (e.g. Dutch disease) reasons, countries wealthy in natural resources may be poor economic performers (see, for instance, Rodriguez and Sachs (), Sachs and Warner (), Tornell and Lane ()). However, the lack of significance of the primary commodity exporter dummy I in regressions of STAGNATOR raises a question mark about the robustness of this relationship. This may be because a great deal of the effect of being a primary commodity exporter is captures by whether a country belongs in specific groupings (in particular latin_america or sub-Saharan Africa). The number of stagnating countries which are primary commodity exporters according to the first of our criteria but neither in latin_america nor in sub-Saharan Africa is only seven (Algeria, Fiji, Iceland, Iraq, Kuwait, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia). The number of stagnating countries which are primary commodity exporters according to the second of our criteria, but are neither in Latin-American nor in sub-Saharan Africa is only four (Fiji, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia). In the overall sample of  countries (of which  are primary commodity exporters according to the first criterion and  according to the second), the resulting independent variation may be insufficient to separately identify the effect of being a primary-commodity exporter on stagnation.
The fact that GEAPOPP is significant underlines that a rapid rate of population increase (or rapid aging) that creates an increased rate of dependency of the young and the elderly upon the productive workers in the middle age brackets, may be an important factor creating vulnerability to per capita income stagnation. However, the relationship may be purely endogenous. It may simply be that stagnation causes a reduction in the economically active population and therefore a reduction in GEAPOPP. This latter theory is a possible explanation of the results found in the regressions involving STAGNATOR but not of those involving STAGNATOR, as the latter seeks to identify the factors associated with subsequent stagnation. Both mechanisms may in fact be present. This is suggested by the fact that the magnitude of the effect associated with GEAPOPP is substantially smaller in relation to STAGNATOR than in relation to STAGNATOR [See Table A].
It is interesting to note that the investment share of GDP is also occasionally significant. The sign of the relationship suggests that higher investment is associated with a higher probability of stagnation.
This seems at first implausible, but may be understood in light of the possibility that investment (especially planned public investment) is not always as downwardly flexible as is real income. In this light, the identified relationship may be more of an accounting curiosity than it is causally important.
In both sets of regressions, the latin_america dummy variable is consistently highly significant, whereas the African dummy variable is moderately significant only in the STAGNATOR regressions. One reason that this might be true is that the African dummy variable is highly correlated with other variables that are significantly associated with being a stagnator (especially GEAPOPP, the primary commodity exporter dummy I, the number of revolutions and coups, and the index of civil liberties), whereas the latin_america dummy is not to the same extent. This may be seen in Table B, which reports pair-wise correlation coefficients among the variables used in both sets of regressions. Although stagnators are more likely to be present in both Africa and latin_america, the factors underlying stagnation in Africa appear to be captured better by those included in the regression analysis than are the factors that underlie stagnation in latin_america. The fact that the latin_america dummy variable is consistently significant suggests that there are variables omitted from the analysis that are important causes of stagnation in latin_america.
The Tendency for Stagnation to Persist
It is possible to undertake an analysis of the tendency of countries to shift between non-stagnator and stagnator status. Below, we explore whether countries that have a specific status (as stagnators or non-stagnators) in a particular decade are likely to maintain that status or change status in the subsequent decade. This analysis is undertaken in Table A in terms of the raw number of countries that stay or switch and in Table B in terms of the proportion of countries that stay or switch between stagnator and non-stagnator status in successive decades. The analysis leads to some striking conclusions.
First, if a country is a decadal stagnator in the s, it has a relatively small chance of not being a decadal stagnator in the s (. per cent). In contrast, countries that are stagnators in the s or s, have a higher chance of escaping stagnation by the end of the sample period (. per cent and . per cent, respectively). However, the probability of being a stagnator in the s if a country was a stagnator in previous decades is quite high:  per cent for stagnators from the s, . per cent for stagnators from the s, and . per cent for stagnators from the s. Finally, the probability that a non-stagnator in the s is a stagnator in the s is relatively high (. per cent). The probability of being a stagnator in the s is therefore raised by about  per cent by having been a stagnator (as opposed to a non-stagnator) in the s.
 Some caution is required in interpreting these results since the transition probabilities could be indicative of either transitory or systematic features of the causal process giving rise to stagnation. Furthermore, the estimates of the probabilities rely on one observation in the time series used to construct the stagnator dummy (i.e., on a single realization of the stochastic process that may be present in the world). Therefore, one cannot make a strong case based on these findings unless further assumptions are made concerning the underlying process.
  
The highest probability (. per cent) of a stagnator becoming a non-stagnator in a subsequent decade is experienced between the s and the s. The highest probability of a non-stagnator remaining a non-stagnator (. per cent) is experienced between the s and the s. It is notable that the probability of switching out of stagnation has slightly increased over the decades. However, the probability of staying out of stagnation has not increased over the decades for the entire sample of countries. In fact, non-stagnators have had chances often significantly higher than  of experiencing stagnation in subsequent decades.
It is most striking that the countries most likely to have been stagnators in the s have a  per cent probability of being so in the s. This suggests that underlying and difficult to change structural features of countries make them vulnerable to stagnation, or that stagnation episodes have long-lasting and detrimental effects that generate future vulnerability to stagnation.
It is also important to note that collapses do not occur randomly. There appear to be trigger effects that are concentrated geographically (sub Saharan Africa, latin_america). In sub-Saharan Africa (Tables A and B), once a stagnator, the probability of remaining a stagnator in a subsequent decade ranges between . per cent and . per cent. Even worse, in the s African non-stagnators were faced with a probability of . per cent of falling in stagnation during the s. A similar pattern is observed for latin_american non-stagnators (Tables A and B), which had a probability of . per cent of stagnating in the s, if they had not stagnated in the s. The data are suggestive of the fact that structural features of the economy may play an important role: if they have stagnated in the s, African countries are . per cent likely to have stagnated in the s, while if they have stagnated in the s latin_american stagnators are  per cent likely to have stagnated in the s.
Conclusions
We have examined the patterns and causes of real income stagnation (in which real-income growth was negligible or negative for a sizable uninterrupted sequence of years) during the last four decades in a large cross section of countries. Real income stagnation is a concept concerning the pattern of economic growth, and is distinct from that of low average growth as such. We have argued that real income stagnation is also conceptually different from other growth patterns studied in the literature (e.g., those proposed by Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik, ). However, all such concepts must be used with care when undertaking welfare assessment.
We have found evidence to suggest that a large number of poor countries in the world have suffered deep and lengthy spells of stagnation in the last four decades. These spells of stagnation have caused many of these countries to have lower incomes today than they had at some point in the past. All countries which have experienced stagnation spells have lost potential income. Countries that suffered stagnation are more likely to have been poor, to have been located in certain regions of the world (in particular latin_america and sub-Saharan Africa), to have been conflict-ridden and dependent on primary commodity exports.
Countries that suffered from stagnation in the distant past are also much more likely to have suffered from stagnation in the recent past. These results suggest either that stagnation spells have long-lasting effects that make the reoccurrence of stagnation likely or that there are enduring structural features (within countries or in the global economy) that predispose specific countries to suffer repeatedly from stagnation episodes.

