Growth with Equity in east_asia?
 The growth with equity said to characterize east_asia owes to a variety of political, social, and economic factors. In addition to government interventions crucial to growth and structural change, there has been considerable economic liberalization over the last two decades. The rapid economic development characterizing the region has undoubtedly raised living standards, but the impacts of this growth on inequality have been much less clear. In this paper we investigate these relationships through a comparison of East Asian countries social records in recent decades. We consider not only the effects of growth and liberalization on inequality, but also the inherent consequences and redistributive mechanisms associated with recent policies.
This paper explores the consequences of trade and financial liberalization including liberalization of the rules governing foreign direct investment (FDI)on inequality and poverty in several East Asian economies that have grown rapidly for several decades. The exercise begins with a review of the historical policies and events that have shaped these economies. In Northeast Asia, the study focuses on the Republic of Korea (South Korea) and the Taiwan Province of China (henceforth, Taiwan), while selected Southeast Asian countries include the second-generation newly industrializing economies (NIEs) of Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. The paper reviews the distributional impacts of liberalization in Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and China. The unusual urban economies of the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (SAR) of China and the island Republic of Singapore, which have seen greater and rising inequality, and the Philippines, which has experienced modest and volatile growth during recent decades, are also brought into this review.
All of the economies in consideration experienced unprecedented growth and structural transformation over the last few decades (see Tables ,  and ). Average annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth rates exceeded seven per cent and six per cent in the periods of and -, respectively.
The manufacturing sectors grew most rapidly, greatly contributing to growth, until some economies such as Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan began de-industrializing. Exports grew at double-digit levels annually between  and , resulting in a significant increase in average per capita incomes. As a proportion of total growth, primary exports fell sharply, while machinery and transport equipment production grew, especially in the manufacturing sectors. In addition to the eight high performing Asian economies (HPAEs) of Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia (see world_bank, ), China has also grown very rapidly over the last twenty-five years.
The remarkable economic growth in east_asia over the last four to five decades has generally improved living standards. According to the world_bank, falling poverty levels and better income distribution have accompanied the expansion of manufacturing and exports in these economies. Extensive interventions in the market were important for late industrialization yet, most governments substantially liberalized their economies in the mid s due to pressure from the West. The world_trade_organization (WTO) and international financial institutions (IFIs), in addition to a renewed interest in deregulation following unpopular and counter-productive government interventions, also encouraged this wave of liberalization.
East Asian economies also developed by subsidizing an array of social development programmes. Asian policymakers have pursued for instance; () regime initiatives to secure greater political support and legitimacy (such as land reform and rural development initiatives), () human resource development (HRD) programmes (especially meritocratic publicly-funded education to the tertiary level), () significant household savings (forced or otherwise) and () a greater role for government. This paper investigates all of these factors--human resource development (especially education and training); redistribution and poverty targeting; more effective social safety nets; social corporatist and communitarian initiatives; quality-of-life improvement efforts; technology promotion; and the more gradual liberalization of agricultural trade--in light of their impact on the distribution of wealth and poverty.
Though East Asian growth and structural changes led to spectacular reductions in poverty, the impact on inequality has been much less apparent. Income inequality has been low in Korea and Taiwan, but has increased with globalization. Trends in Southeast Asia, including Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, have been harder to discern as poverty declined and inequality rose in conjunction with economic liberalization. With rapid growth and strengthened (private) property rights, China has also experienced a swift increase in inequality and unemployment despite considerable poverty reduction. This evidence suggests that the World Banks () claim of egalitarian growth in east_asia may be exaggerated, if not erroneous. The initial conditions that appeared to be primarily responsible for more balanced growth in the Northeast (as compared to Southeast Asia) were not sufficient to prevent a spike in Chinese inequality. There are, of course, exceptions. Northeast Asian countries for instance, experienced low unemployment and skill enhancement that generally strengthened the bargaining power and remuneration of labour. In east_asia, Korea is unique because it institutionalised some redistributive and welfare measures during its recent democratisation.
For most of the economies under consideration, the regional financial crises had great, but varied impacts on equity. The substantial rhetoric on social safety nets during the crisis obscured the negative impacts of structural adjustment and economic liberalization programs in the s on redistribution, welfare rights, and social protection provisions and institutions. Yet, there has been some retreat from Washington Consensus market fundamentalism (pro-liberalization policies) in recent years, as reflected in the World Banks image under James Wolfensohn (-), the International Monetary Funds (IMF) more recent espoused commitment to poverty reduction, and the World Trade Organizations (WTO) apparent commitment to a Doha Development Round. Nevertheless, considerable and growing scepticism remains regarding the depth and extent of these changes sometimes referred to as the post-Washington Consensus consensus.
Unfortunately, available evidence does not allow robust and comparable commentary on recent trends in the distribution of assets, employment, social services (especially health and education), access to information and political participation in east_asia. The following discussion therefore focuses on poverty and income distribution trends, but even here, most available data were collected in the early part of this decade. It remains very difficult to assess the impact of East Asian government declarations promising greater equity, including those made at the  World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen.
A Brief Review of Poverty Alleviation and Redistribution in east_asia
The incidence of poverty declined sharply in the East Asian economies shown in Table . Income inequality declined or remained constant in Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia and Indonesia between  and . The exception to this trend was Thailand, which did not make a significant commitment to egalitarian redistribution. All these economies had explicit poverty alleviation and redistribution policies, though the impacts of these programs varied between countries. These countries also directed development relatively independently and maintained a strong commitment to achieving growth and redistribution.
Redistribution and Land Reform
The South Korean and Taiwanese land reforms in the late s were the first important initiatives to reduce poverty and inequity in the Northeast Asian economies under consideration (see Hamilton, ; Hsiao, ). In , during the Korean War, the united_states military forces distributed land confiscated from the Japanese colonial government to tillers in exchange for low rents. At the conclusion of the war, the Korean government acquired land from landlords and resold it at subsidized prices to , tenants (Amsden, ). In Taiwan, the Kuomintang government exchanged shares in public companies for landlords lands, and also sold it at favourable prices to tillers. These reforms reduced land rents to . per cent of the yield for major crops, resulted in the sale of public land to cultivators and tenants, and effectively limited ownership by landowners in Taiwan (Yu, : footnote ).
Meanwhile, competition among food producers and united_states food aid under Public Law  ensured low food prices in East Asian countries and beyond. The terms of trade between agriculture and manufacturing favoured the latter, as small-scale farmers enjoyed little market power or political influence (Hamilton, ; Yu, : footnote ). The Gini coefficient measure of income inequality in Taiwan declined from . in  to . in  as farmers moved out of agriculture and into manufacturing and services. The change for Korea however, was negligible, as the Gini moved from . in  to . in  (Rao, ; Medhi, : Table ).
When food aid ceased following the  oil shock, the Korean government launched the Saemaul Undong program that, inter alia, increased domestic food supply. With the help of price controls, the state succeeded in providing industrial workers with cheap food, thus lowering the wage bill for manufacturing firms. Price controls helped keep consumer prices low so that both savings and investment rates rose in these economies. Taiwan also emphasized rural industrialization, encouraging manufacturing alongside farming. In the s, both Korea and Taiwan introduced hybrid grain varieties and modernized farming, which helped expand the food supply and free more farm workers for industry. Since the s, with increased liberalization, income inequality has risen in both of these economies. In Korea, the Gini coefficient rose to . in  and then again from . in  to . in . In Taiwan, the Gini coefficient went from . in  to . in  (see Table ).
In the Southeast Asian economies, political and environmental circumstances have not induced proactive land redistribution measures comparable to those in Northeast Asia. Countries like Korea and Taiwan are not rich in natural resources. This is a contrast to the Southeast, where more abundant natural wealth may have weakened the imperative to industrialize, especially to promote export-oriented manufacturing. Political considerations as well as ethnic diversity may have further limited more activist industrial policy initiatives in Southeast Asia. After seceding from Malaysia in , Singapores leaders sought to quickly develop a large foreign stake in their economy to secure protection against potentially belligerent neighbours. With the introduction of pro-Malay affirmative action policies beginning in the early s, it is widely believed that foreign investment was encouraged to balance the ubiquitous ethnic Chinese presence in the Malaysian economy.
As a consequence, the region, especially Singapore and Malaysia, has relied far more on foreign direct investment (FDI) to industrialize and especially to develop export-oriented manufacturing capacity. Labour, in particular wage repression, has attracted FDI. Currency under-valuation also discouraged imports and boosted export competitiveness, attracting investments in new manufacturing activities. Different colonial interests and policies (such as those employed in the Japanese colonies of Taiwan and Korea) may have also been more or less conducive to industrialization. The success of agricultural exports as well as greater natural resource wealth further diminished the imperative to industrialize and develop higher value-added services. US-led Cold War efforts to secure a political cordon sanitaire around the communist bloc ensured considerable aid as well as economic policies conducive to equitable and rapid development. Compared to Korea and Taiwan, Southeast Asia has developed more modest planning and pro-active selective industrial promotion capacities and implemented fewer effective education, training and research programs conducive to rapid technological advancement. This has deepened the divide in the development of their industrial and technological capabilities, and hence, their prospects for greater productivity growth and labour remuneration (Jomo, ).
Although there has not been any major land reform in Malaysia, new agricultural areas have been distributed through land development schemes managed by government agencies such as the Federal Land Development Authority (FELDA), Federal Land Consolidation and Rehabilitation Authority (FELCRA) and the Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority (RISDA). Although these programmes have had some effect on poverty alleviation, their impact has been limited (see Halim, ; Jomo, ). Malaysia deepened its rural development efforts following the  introduction of the New Economic Policy (NEP), a program committed to poverty reduction and greater inter-ethnic parity via redistribution. Besides extensive investments to develop infrastructure in rural areas where Bumiputera were heavily concentrated, special ministries and government agencies, such as Bank Bumiputera, Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA), and Pernas, were also set up to enhance the socio-economic standing of the Bumiputera. With rapid economic growth led by export-oriented manufacturing in the s, poverty rapidly declined over the next two decades. In addition, the Green Revolution in rice cultivation, which involved double cropping, green revolution strains, fertilizers, pesticides, ploughing and harvesting machinery, raised yields and incomes. Income inequality trends are unclear, but seem to suggest growing inequality in the s, declining inequality in the s and s, and increasing inequality thereafter (Jomo and Ishak, ; Hashim, ).
Like Malaysia, Thai authorities emphasized agricultural diversification. In the s, new lands were opened with little emphasis on land or income redistribution to help disadvantaged groups (Onchan, : -). Thai land reforms were formally introduced with the  Agricultural Land Reform Act, however most property was transferred to wealthy, politically influential businessmen instead of the less fortunate (Onchan, ).
Though land reforms have generally been unsuccessful despite these important initiatives, growth has helped lower the overall incidence of poverty (except in the mid-s). The governments of Japan, Taiwan, and Korea have been fairly successful in boosting rural household incomes through the promotion of off-farm rural work. As a consequence, the proportion of rural household incomes from off-farm activities rose from  per cent in to  per cent in (Onchan, : ). This helped further reduce rural poverty in the period, when urban poverty was on the rise (see Rasiah, Ishak and Jomo, : Tables a, b). Unfortunately despite such poverty reduction, income inequality has worsened (see Tables  and ).
Human Resources and Education
Though the effects of land reform have been mixed, investments in human resources have helped reduce poverty and inequality. Through government efforts, Korea and Taiwan have developed highly educated labour forces. Universal primary education since the s has been complemented by high enrolments in secondary and tertiary levels, and a strong emphasis on technical and engineering disciplines. Clearly these investments in human capital went well beyond the primary schooling limit recommended by the world_bank, with labour market interventions based on long-term considerations beyond current prices (Rodrik, ). The expansion of education not only helped generate technical and professional human resources for industrial upgrading, but also enhanced opportunities for upward socio-economic mobility, including skills enhancement and higher remuneration (Deyo, ).
Achievements in secondary and particularly in tertiary education in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia have not been comparable to those in Korea and Taiwan, as shown in Table  and Table . Interestingly, the Philippines performed better on many educational achievement indicators than Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, raising serious doubts about the actual role and contribution of human resource development to growth and equality. While basic education has offered access to low-skilled jobs, such schooling has offered limited upward social mobility in the absence of significant technological change and value addition. Furthermore, while Taiwan and Korea have generated ample supplies of technical labour, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia continue to face serious shortages. In , these three South Asian countries had around  technologists and scientists per million people, compared to , for Korea; , for Taiwan; and , for Japan (UNDP, : ). Though Malaysia and Indonesia managed to reduce inequality over long periods, this success was not due to market forces, but rather to significant government expenditures on rural development, education, and employment programs.
Labour
Rapid growth, rising education levels, and declining unemployment have pushed up real wages in all fast growing economies despite the weakness of organized labour (see Table ).
In Korea, real wages grew at average annual rates of  per cent and . per cent over the periods and -, respectively (world_bank, : ). In Taiwan, real wages grew by . per cent (computed from Deyo, : ) and . per cent (Lee, : ) over the periods and respectively. Although labour was harshly repressed in Korea and Taiwan until democratization in the late s, efforts to enhance labour productivity, product quality, and firms competitiveness helped raise wages. Some of these trends also reduced occupational hierarchies and income differentials within enterprises. By the time unions grew in strength, real wages had already substantially risen.
The growth of wage labour in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia intensified following rapid export oriented manufacturing expansion during the s and s. This also reduced disguised unemployment and raised household incomes. As Table  shows, during this decade, wage labour grew by annual average rates of . per cent in Malaysia and . per cent in South Korea and Thailand, with noteworthy increases in female participation (see Kamal and Young, ; McGee, ; Onchan, ; world_bank, ). The migration of rural labour to urban industrial areas was pronounced enough to put upward pressure on wages.
The growing presence of foreign labour beginning in the early s, commodity price declines, and union repression undermined improvements in real wages and working conditions in plantation agriculture in Malaysia (see Jomo, ; Jomo and Todd, ). However, inter-ethnic and other redistribution efforts, the expansion of more remunerative employment (in particular the absorption of Bumiputera into the public sector), and manufacturing and modern service wage employment caused the Gini coefficient for income inequality to decline to . in ; to . in ; and to . in  (see Table ). Overall growth in wage employment and consequent increases in household incomes reduced poverty and inequality.
There has also been less corporatism at the firm level in Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia in comparison to Taiwan and Korea. In export-oriented high-technology firms (semi-conductor firms, in particular), enterprise-level corporatism has involved mutually beneficial cooperation between management and labour, but such enterprises tend to be much more exceptional in Southeast Asia. Meanwhile, rising demand for skilled labour in Malaysia and Thailand substantially pushed up the wages of skilled workers (world_bank, ; Rasiah and Osman-Rani, ). This increased wage differentials between skilled and unskilled labour, which was further undermined by labour imports.
While unions and labour militancy have been treated unsympathetically, if not brutally, in all five economies, the NICs of Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia have experienced much worse wage and working conditions. This is even in comparison to Korea and Taiwan, where labour protests are routinely suppressed. In Thailand and Indonesia, militant leaders have been beaten and murdered, unions weakened, and sometimes even destroyed (Narayanasamy, ). Collective bargaining rights for labour continue to be minimal in practice. Rising wages were mainly due to the exhaustion of labour reserves and technological deepening in a few export-oriented industries, but not union strength.
Unlike Korea and Taiwan, industrial policy in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia emphasizes low production and labour costs, which suppress rapid wage growth and attract investment. On average, real wages grew by . per cent in Malaysia and . per cent in Indonesia over the period, and by . per cent and . per cent, respectively, over the period (world_bank, : -). Real wages in Thailand grew by . per cent over the and by . per cent from(Rasiah, : ).
Besides poverty alleviation and redistribution mechanisms, the five governments have to varying extents, introduced social safety nets to reduce the dislocation caused by rapid structural changes and cyclical influences. The effects of such instruments have however, been mixed. In Malaysia, the cost-of-living-allowance (COLA) for workers is one such provision, but the unemployed do not qualify for it. There has been a pronounced tendency to minimize provisions on the presumption that full employment could be indefinitely assured and that this would eliminate the need for welfare. It was also often claimed that the unemployed could always count on traditional social safety nets provided by families, communities, and informal sector participation. The social dislocations during the recessions following the  East Asian financial crises have underscored the inadequacy of such provisions and the need for formal safety nets.
Summary
It is generally agreed that Korea and Taiwan were far more interventionist in the s and s than Malaysia and Thailand have been in recent decades. Income distribution was and remained better in Northeast Asia during periods of high growth while it has fared less well in Southeast Asia. Contrary to the Kuznets hypothesis, the cases of Korea and Taiwan suggest that lower inequality can be complementary to rapid growth in its early stages. The Northeast Asian experiences suggest a strong case for intervention to improve asset distribution and to enhance human resources in order to generate rapid growth. With increasing liberalization since the s, income inequality in Taiwan and Korea began to worsen. The Korean and Taiwanese experiences, however, have been rejected by the world_bank () as special cases unsuitable for emulation by other developing countries.
The cases of Malaysia and Thailand offer different lessons. The Malaysian economy remained largely laissez-faire until around  with income distribution worsening in the s (world_bank, ). After interventionist redistribution policies were adopted, growth, industrialization, and income distribution improved in the next two decades, before deteriorating again in the s with economic liberalization. While Thailand did not pursue redistribution policies or an explicit industrial policy, its income Gini coefficient continued to rise.
These experiences suggest that poverty alleviation and the reduction of income inequality can not only accompany, but may even be conducive to rapid growth and industrialization. Income inequality however tends to worsen with economic liberalization, especially in the absence of effective provisions for redistribution. Furthermore, the fact that income inequality in Taiwan and Korea declined in the initial stages of growth, and worsened as the two economies liberalized, turns the Kuznets hypothesis on its head. However, the unique circumstances of post-war asset redistribution (including land reforms) suggest that initial conditions, rather than subsequent growth itself, may better explain these Northeast Asian exceptions.
The next few sections examine the experiences of Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and China more closely, paying particular attention to the impacts of economic liberalization on inequality and poverty. The effects of public policy and the role of education are also considered.

Thailand
Inequality
Though poverty in Thailand declined markedly over the last four decades, income distribution actually worsened (, : Table ). Since , when data first became available, Thailands Gini coefficient continuously rose and peaked at . in  (Rao, : Table ). There is no evidence supporting the World Banks claim of a dramatic decline in income inequality in Thailand (see Tables  and  using different data sets or series).
Since the s, income inequality generally deteriorated, as indicated by a rise in the Gini index from . in to . in  (Suganya and Somchai, ; Isra, ). Equality improved only in , when agrarian prices were exceptionally high, and in recent years since , i.e. after the World Banks () study period. Full employment, economic diversification with new agricultural and manufacturing exports, and increased tourism earnings have all raised earnings among low income groups. Between and , the share of income going to the top  per cent of the population rose steeply from  to  per cent (, : Table ). Between the years of  and , this trend reversed (Table ; , ). The Gini index improved slightly, declining to . in , or roughly its level in the mid-s. This reversal of trend most likely reflected the countrys tight labour markets, as real wages in the formal sector quickly increased by the mids. In , the Gini index rose again to . (its  level), suggesting that recent improvements were reversed by the financial crisis (world_bank, ). The world_bank found that the crisis had the hardest impact on workers in small enterprises, wage earners below  years old, and the less educated.
Overall inequality increased between  and , and then declined until , which was the first recovery year following the financial crisis. (It is worth noting that the East Asian crisis was preceded by a recession that reduced the income of the wealthy more than for others, thereby initially decreasing inequality. When the crisis actually hit, income inequality rose sharply.) During this entire period, non-farm profits made the largest contribution to changes in distribution (see Table ). Between the years of  and , increasing inequality in non-farm earnings contributed to  per cent of the total increase in inequality. The boom during this period almost doubled inequality in non-farm profits, thereby increasing overall inequality. From  to , declining inequality in these same profits contributed to a  per cent overall decline in inequality. However, profit levels generally declined and inequality in non-farm profits fell back to their  levels by the end of this latter period. During the bubble, profits fell as wages and salaries continued rising due to full employment.
Changes in farm profits had the second largest impact on inequality, increasing inequity before and after the boom. Inequality in farm profits increased steadily and significantly, signifying widening disparity among farmers. The gains from agricultural commercialization and agro-technological changes were not well shared among farmers in different regions and agricultural sub-sectors. Some (e.g. small and medium farms operated by older farmers) were left behind while others gained disproportionately.
Inequality in wages and salaries decreased between  and , and then rose sharply until . This increase was most likely due to the spectacular high-level salaries of managers and professionals, particularly in the finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE) sectors, during the height of the boom and bubble. Shifts among the various sources of income contributed greatly to income inequality during the first period, but not in the second period. In the first set of years, increases in the share of wages and salaries and the share of non-farm profits accounted for most of the  per cent rise in inequality. Also during this timeframe, there was a pointed increase in manufacturing labour and a boom in FIRE.

These shifts boosted the returns to capital and wages, raised business profits, and squeezed agriculture with higher costs. In the period, when shares of the FIRE and manufacturing sectors remained almost constant, changes in income shares from various sources contributed almost nothing to the changes in overall inequality. Shifts in overall mean income were barely significant, but positive in both periods. This suggested that while growth tended to reduce inequality, its contribution was very small. Covariance among different income sources was not significant. Although the study only covered a limited period, the results clearly showed that the main determinants of inequality in Thailand before the crisis were business profit levels and returns to agriculture.
Orakoch () found that  per cent of overall (individual) income inequality can be explained by inequality (among individuals living or working) in the same region or community, or economic sector. Moreover, the contribution of such within-group inequality increased slightly between  and . Hence, the contribution of income disparities among regions, communities and economic sectors which explained only around  per cent of overall inequality decreased correspondingly over this period. Thus, the distribution of development benefits became more balanced between  and . Inequality among different communities, regions or sectors decreased compared to inequality within the same community, region or sector (, ). Meanwhile, however, regional disparities have been increasing, especially between Bangkok and other regions (Isra, ).
Despite the governments introduction of a minimum wage policy in , the minimum wage has not significantly impacted the labour market. In , only  per cent of workers were protected by minimum wage regulation. During the financial crisis, real wages proved highly flexible, suggesting that the minimum wage law had not introduced much rigidity. Average real wages in the formal sector rose by less than  per cent per annum between  and , but then surged to  per cent during the period. From  to , real wages increased by approximately  per cent for the workforce as a whole, and by  per cent for those in manufacturing (, : Table ). The wage differentials among workers with different education levels were still very significant in  (, : Table ).
In the s, s and s, industrial protection and concentration in Bangkok and its vicinity increased sectoral and regional inequality. Growing inequality due to trade protection policies outweighed any countervailing effects of industrial decentralization policies and the promotion of small-scale industries. Resources were allocated in favour of manufacturing, banking, and finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE) sectors at the expense of agriculture. This increased inequality between agricultural and non-agricultural incomes, as well as between rural and urban populations. Continued high industrial concentration in Bangkok and the surrounding area reinforced regional inequalities. Throughout this period, urban-rural inequality rose.  () cite studies that suggest that protection had regressive impacts on income distribution in Thailand, while Suphanee () and Chalongphob and others () show that trade taxes had been regressive in impact.
Income disparities among economic sectors and regions have been growing. Agriculture has  per cent of the population, but only  per cent of GDP. Industry has  per cent of the labour force but accounts for  per cent of output, while services account for  per cent and  per cent respectively. Regional disparities have also grown in recent years. In , Bangkok, with  per cent of Thailands population, accounted for  per cent of GDP, while the rest of the Central region (excluding Bangkok) had another  per cent of the population and  per cent of output. With  per cent of the population, the South had
 per cent of GDP, while the mountainous North had  per cent of the population and also  per cent of output. Meanwhile, the Northeast had  per cent of the population, but only  per cent of output (Kasian : , f.n. ).
Improvements in income distribution have also been associated with favourable agricultural prices, suggesting that policies that enhanced rural incomes also improved the overall distribution of income. While non-agricultural wage employment growth reduced poverty by raising the incomes of the employed, it may also have raised overall inequality. The equalizing effects of the growth of labour-intensive export-oriented industries may not be strong enough to counter either pre-existing structural inequalities or new sources of inequality. Therefore, policies required to check growing inequality should include: better educational policies and access; better social security provisions; agricultural growth; progressive fiscal policies; and more equitable social expenditures.
The Thai government has not made use of fiscal policy or other measures to redistribute income progressively. The bulk of government revenue came from regressive indirect taxes (sales taxes and tariffs), suggesting a regressive tax structure. In the s and s, fiscal policies were clearly regressive and most likely exacerbated inequality due to regressive revenue, especially tax trends. Though personal and corporate income taxes were progressive between  and , indirect taxes, which accounted for the majority of total revenue, were regressive. The tax on rice exports (abolished in ) also increased the urban-rural gap.
Inequality and social services
The governments expenditure on education, health and other social services could not counter the regressive effects of other fiscal policies and may not even have been all that progressive. Government expenditure on education, health, and services has not grown as much as other expenditure items, and has been urban biased. Myers and Chalongphob () showed that the government did not seek to transfer income to the poor via social services or other public expenditure, while Medhi () also concluded that the government did not try to use fiscal policies to improve income distribution. Chalongphob and others () found that well-to-do households received proportionately larger shares of the direct benefits of expenditures on education, public health, and infrastructure in agriculture, transport and communications. Although wealthier households bore a larger burden of the taxes, they also gained more than the poor. Thus, the overall impact of tax and expenditure policies in the s and early s probably increased inequality.
Thailand also did not have social policies that adequately protected workers from economic fluctuations. As a result, younger, rural, and less educated employees of small enterprises felt the worst impacts of the crisis, which most severely burdened the poor. Only a small percentage of the workers received compensation for layoffs, and no unemployment insurance was available. Ad hoc attempts at providing social safety nets post crisis were not very successful, as the government lacked the machinery and experience to institute such measures. Government regulations and policies designed to assist workers, such as the minimum wage, social security, and severance pay, were not widely observed or implemented among poorer wage labourers. Employment generation programs mainly benefited the more affluent workers.
Access to education has also been very unequal (see Tables  and ) and has not improved significantly over time (Myers and Chalongphob, ). Inequality in access to educational opportunities higher than secondary school most likely worsened income distribution throughout the s and s. Households with incomes below the poverty line in , , and  received very low shares ( per cent) of the direct benefits of government education expenditure, compared to households above the poverty line (per cent). This inequality increased over time. The pattern of government educational expenditure thus reinforced existing inequality (Chalongphob and others, ). Low secondary school enrolment ratios and the high share of the workforce limited to a primary education constrained productivity, value-added growth and equality (Myers and Chalongphob, ). Learning by doing, on-the-job training, and other training policies adopted for lowly educated workers, could not overcome the legacy of insufficient and unequal access to education.
During the mid-s, as Thailand became more committed to export-oriented industrialization, the government began to address inequality in access to education. Secondary school enrolment doubled between  and , when it reached over  per cent. However, dropouts from secondary schools
 The government extended the severance pay requirements from six to ten months (for employees with more than ten years experience); set up a fund to make severance payments to workers whose firms had gone bankrupt; extended the social security benefits for laid off subscribers from six to twelve months, while the tripartite contribution rate for such benefits was reduced by one-third; launched a major rural job-creation program in March , and then continued in , to absorb returning migrants; launched training programs to upgrade the skills of workers laid off during the crisis, through free short-term vocational and technical training with subsequent job placement. But the government also decided not to launch an unemployment insurance scheme as a long-term response to the crisis, ostensibly for fear of its fiscal burden.
The world_bank () argued that unemployment insurance schemes are not feasible or equitable for labour markets characterized by relatively small formal sectors. Yet, a detailed feasibility study conducted by the International Labour Organization (ILO) in  concluded that an unemployment insurance scheme in Thailand, phased in over three years, would be affordable and administratively feasible (world_bank ).
 In ,  per cent of children surveyed did not go to secondary school for financial reasons. Ten per cent of them said they had to work, and only  per cent reported no interest in further studies. Since , the government has promoted education by providing low-interest loans for education at all levels. The number of students receiving these loans increased from , in  to , in remained high and increased during the economic crisis. Government spending on education is still biased towards the tertiary level, even though increases at the secondary and vocational levels would have a more favourable impact on income distribution (Isra, ).
Poverty
Overall, Thailand has been much more successful in reducing poverty than in making social provisions. In , for example, the country ranked th out of  countries in terms of GDP per capita, but th in terms of the social (non-income) components of the united_nations Development Program (UNDP) human development index (UNDP, ). Since -, poverty incidence has been calculated using the nutritional adequacy method. The first calculation in found  per cent below the line. This was slightly less than the  per cent calculated using another method for the same year (Tables  and ). Although there have been several recalculations since, resulting in a number of slightly incompatible series, the overall trend has been clear. Poverty fell rapidly throughout the s and s, remained rather static through the s, and then fell rapidly during the s to six per cent in . Non-income measures of poverty confirm the trend. Infant mortality and maternal mortality rates decreased significantly over the s (, : Table ). During -, life expectancy was  years for males and  for females, and by -, it was projected to increase to approximately  for males and  for females.
The significant decline in poverty levels in the s and s (see Tables ,  and  summarizing different data sets) may be explained by the effects of the expansion in cultivated land. This occurred until the early s, when wage employment in manufacturing and other non-agricultural sectors expanded as a result of industrialization mainly based on import substitution. The decline in poverty stagnated over the s, but then picked up in the early s, with the acceleration of export-oriented industrialization.
Within five years,  per cent of the labour force had transferred out of agriculture. The tight labour market pushed up real wages rapidly, and some of this flowed back to rural areas as remittances, helping to reduce poverty. Poverty incidence increased from  per cent in  to nearly  per cent in , and then declined to  per cent in  due to better agricultural prices (Suganya and Somchai, ; Isra, ). Poverty fell more rapidly during the economic boom, from  per cent in  to  per cent a decade later (, : Table ).
All regions benefited from poverty reduction, though not equally (Table ). Until the late s, poverty incidence dropped much faster in urban than in rural areas. By , the characteristics of the poor were very clear:  per cent lived in villages;  per cent were involved in agriculture; and  per cent only had an elementary education or less (Suganya and Somchai, ; Medhi, ; Begemeier and Hoffman, ). Over the s, poverty fell slightly faster in rural areas compared to urban areas (see Table ). This was mainly because of out-migration and remittances by urban wage labour. The northeast remained the poorest area not only because of unfavourable resource endowments, especially low rainfall and poor soil, but also due to low investment in productive capital (irrigation) and human capital (Isra, ; Suganya and Somchai, ).
  
Indonesia
Inequality
The world_bank contends that inequality in Indonesia declined from a Gini Coefficient of . in the s to . in the s. Given the absence of reliable data on Indonesias income distribution until recently, it is likely that this claim is based on expenditure trends. Rao () notes that significant reductions in absolute poverty since the early s would be manifested in narrowing consumption gaps and declining expenditure inequality, especially since the ostentatious consumption of the rich is barely reflected in most household expenditure surveys. More importantly, such a reduction in expenditure inequality (see Table ) would not necessarily imply reduced income inequality. Hence, he argues, it is not entirely clear that economic inequality went down as much as asserted by the world_bank. He notes, for instance, the lack of any significant reduction in the relevant Gini coefficients between  and  (Rao, : Table ).
In the mid-s, Gini coefficients were estimated at around . in urban areas and . in rural areas. By , the urban Gini coefficient increased to ., while rural measures of inequality declined to .. For all of Indonesia, the Gini coefficient increased from approximately . in the mid-s to . in . Worsening Gini coefficients from  to  suggest that rapid economic development during this period involved rising urban inequality.
The s oil boom and rapid appreciation of the rupiah in real terms had negative impacts on non-oil exporters and producers, especially in the agricultural sector. While rice was protected through import controls and various producer subsidies, smallholder producers of other agricultural commodities, such as rubber, cocoa, and tea, suffered from adverse terms of trade trends. The sharp increase in rice prices during the early s helped rice producers, but adversely affected the rice consumers that accounted for the majority of society.
In the early s, during the oil boom, non-agricultural real wages rose very steeply, by per cent per annum for textiles, and by  per cent for the civil service. Agricultural real wages remained unchanged and rural poverty reduction was slower than in urban areas. Interestingly, general agricultural productivity, especially rice output, only increased in the oil boom years of the late s, possibly due to increased investments financed by oil rents. Since the late s, wage inequalities appear to have declined in agriculture, manufacturing, and urban and rural areas (Table ).
Since the s, wages have increased rapidly, even though real wage growth was somewhat lower but more uniform than in the previous decade. The growth of real wages for women was also impressive. In agriculture, manufacturing, services, and even construction, monthly wages for women rose faster than for men. After increasing by more than  per cent per annum in the s, the real wages of civil servants were relatively stagnant in the s and s. Economic deregulation, trade liberalization and booming exports increased wages very sharply as the labour market tightened.
Off-farm employment and income failed to reduce rural income inequalities as they had in the s. Instead, rural incomes continued to decline relative to the national average, and their fall was sharper for agricultural labourer households (Booth, ). This trend clearly worsened income distribution. The decline in government oil revenues in the mid to late s reduced agricultural development spending. The rice self-sufficiency program, which required massive subsidies, was no longer sustainable.
During the s recession, the growth of agricultural real wages was very high, and the Gini coefficient declined from . to . in urban areas, and from . to . in rural areas by . This period between the late s to the late s was characterized by rural-urban migration, and by a transition from protected import substitution to an export oriented growth strategy. Akita, Lukman, and Yamada () show increasing expenditure inequalities associated with rapid growth during this timeframe. They reported increased inequality, especially in urban areas, between  and . Urban-rural inequality had a greater effect on overall national inequal-
ity than inter-provincial disparities. While there have been larger interprovincial GDP gaps, inter-provincial expenditure inequality was less significant.
Akita, Lukman, and Yamada () argued that education determined expenditure inequality (see Table ), where between the years of  and , the expenditure of the more educated grew faster than those with less schooling. They showed that from  to  within-group inequalities increased for households with higher education and remained the same for households with elementary or junior high school education. In other words, expenditure inequalities among people with higher education increased during this period. However, income inequality with respect to education declined from  to , meaning that those with less education experienced faster increases in earnings compared to those with more education.
In later years, the financial crisis reduced inequality, as the Gini coefficient declined from . in  to . in  and to . in  (world_bank, ; ADB, ). During the crisis, the rich reduced their expenditures more than the poor. Personal consumption expenditure declined by less than  per cent compared with the overall economic contraction of almost  per cent in . The crisis was marked by massive declines in real wages, but only relatively small increases in unemployment. The crisis hit urban centres more than rural areas, coming down hardest on Jakarta and West Java, which had grown the fastest during the early s.
 Poverty
Table  shows the reduction of Indonesian poverty between  and . By , absolute poverty incidence had declined to . per cent in urban areas and to . per cent in rural areas. At this time, around  million people still lived below the poverty line.
Poverty reduction was uneven between urban and rural areas in the early s. While poverty incidence declined sharply in urban areas from  to  per cent, rural poverty increased slightly from  to  per cent. In other words, people in the urban areas and in the oil related sectors seemed to benefit more than those living in the countryside. This trend changed during the late s, when the incidence of rural poverty fell ( to . per cent) more rapidly than in urban areas ( to  per cent). While absolute poverty significantly declined for all areas of the country throughout the s, relative poverty waned more slowly, with faster reductions in absolute and relative terms, for the rural poor between the years of  and .
The program to achieve rice self-sufficiency in the early s significantly reduced rural poverty. It included heavy agricultural subsidies, rice price stabilization, and high protection. Indonesia achieved rice self-sufficiency in . More importantly, the government channelled its oil revenues to rice agriculture, and the rice program was favourable to the poor, for both producers and consumers. Large investments in rural infrastructure reduced production and marketing costs for farmers and boosted returns to rice agricultural investments. Thus, the real purchasing power of all households increased directly. However, these massive public outlays became a major fiscal problem when oil revenues declined in the s.
Improvements in infrastructure also reduced poverty during the early s. The poor were able to migrate more easily in search of better work opportunities at a time when a more flexible labour market encouraged labour mobility. New land settlement, increased rural off-farm activities as well as other rural activities such as increased logging also created new employment in rural areas. Off-farm employment and incomes increased significantly, which helped increase and diversify the sources of income for those living in the countryside.
Rapid economic development in Indonesia in the last three decades, and especially since the mids, significantly reduced absolute poverty in both urban and rural areas. However, household consumption inequality trends, as measured by Gini ratios, were mixed. During the first oil boom (s), increased output of non-tradables increased urban inequity. Rapid rural economic development significantly raised rural incomes. Both poverty and inequality declined until the mid-s. Rapid economic development during this period did not seem to adversely impact income distribution. Though rapid economic growth during the mid-s was associated with declining poverty, improvements were smaller compared to the previous decade, partly because poverty was more heterogeneous and scattered. Meanwhile, the Gini ratio increased, especially in urban areas. As in the s, consumption growth in urban, modern, and capital-intensive sectors tended to be faster than in rural sectors. Also, the expenditure of those with higher education increased faster than for the less educated.
Rapid economic liberalization during the late s and early s appeared to be accompanied by economic growth and continued poverty reduction. From  to , absolute poverty declined from about  to  per cent in urban areas and from  to  per cent in rural areas (see Table ). Rural poverty also continued to decline from  to , but much more slowly than between the years of  and . Slower poverty reduction during the s era of rapid growth might have also been due to the various pockets of poverty in the country that were bypassed by such growth. Though poverty was reduced, inequality increased, which meant that the benefits of more rapid economic growth had not been equally shared. Inequality rose in both rural and urban areas, but was more apparent in urban centres such as Jakarta and urban West Java (see Tables  and ). The Gini coefficient in both urban and rural areas increased from . to . between  and , and continued to rise until just before the crisis. These data point to a trend of rising inequality during the s era of liberalization and rapid growth.
Rapid economic development and poverty reduction took place despite limited social safety nets and income transfer programs. Tax collection was also generally low and ineffective. Despite such uncertainties, investments in primary and lower secondary education seems to have had strong impacts on poverty reduction and equity improvement. Thus, rapid growth in Indonesia from  to  was accompanied by reduced poverty in absolute terms, but not by improved equity, especially in urban areas. Growing inequality, especially in urban centres, was not because poor or rural people did not benefit from the booming economy, but because the rich benefited far more. Another reason for growing inequity was the absence of effective and progressive income transfer programs. Besides the regressive nature of the tax system, the social security system and government social spending have also been abused by politicians as well as other military and government officials.
The Indonesian economy grew at an average annual rate of  per cent between  and . During this period, overall poverty dropped by  per cent, and rural poverty declined from . to . per cent (ADB, : : Table .). The proportion of people living in absolute poverty stood at . per cent in . With the beginning of the economic crisis in  and the sudden reversal of confidence and capital inflows, the economy contracted by  per cent, inflation rose by  per cent, the rupiah depreciated by more than  per cent, and real wages fell by more than  per cent in . Thus, GDP growth fell from around  per cent per annum before  to -. per cent in .
All estimates indicate a rapid rise in poverty incidence during the financial crisis (Dhanani and Islam, ). The world_bank () notes that a large swath of the Indonesian population that is today not poor is nevertheless at risk of becoming poor... between  and  per cent of households are vulnerable to poverty over a three year horizon. The Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) estimates suggest that poverty incidence rose from  per cent in February  to  per cent in September  at the height of the crisis, before declining to  per cent in February . While poverty undoubtedly rose during the crisis, the increase was perhaps not as much as initially feared. According to the world_bank (), the number of poor increased from  per cent in  to about  per cent in August  (also see Figure ).
The increased poverty, due to inflation as well as recession (income loss), was more marked in urban areas than in the countryside. Between February  and February , the number falling below a reduced extreme poverty line, defined as of  per cent of the official poverty line, increased by over  per cent (Dhanani and Islam, ). More recent data suggest that urban poverty has dropped back to the precrisis level, though the rural index remains above the pre-crisis mark. While the over-all school enrolment ratio and dropout rates did not seem to have changed very dramatically in the short-run, the impact of the crisis on poorer and more vulnerable communities, especially females and children, was more severe (Chowdhury, ). The effect of the crisis on poverty has certainly been varied. Poverty is chronic in remote areas and is unlikely to be affected by aggregate economic growth. More targeted polices, such as those implied by the social safety net approach, may be difficult to implement because of weak bureaucracies, limited institutional capacities, and ambiguous decentralization processes.
Evidence also suggests that income inequality fell during the economic crisis (see Figure ). However, Skoufias, Suryahadi, and Sumarto () suggest that such findings fail to distinguish between nominal inequality and changes in income distribution adjusted for the differential impact of inflation on households. Also, more recent data suggest that any possible decline in nominal inequality during the crisis had been reversed by mid(Chowdhury, ).
According to the UNDP, Indonesias human development index (HDI) increased from . in  to . in , while the sharp drop in HDI in  was primarily due to the decline in purchasing power (see Figure ). Meanwhile, its human poverty index (HPI) dropped from . in  to . in . Figure  shows that the non-income components of HDI remained unaffected by the  recession.
Life expectancy at birth rose from  years in  to . years in . Over the same period, the infant mortality rate fell from  to . per thousand, while the adult illiteracy rate declined dramatically from  per cent to . per cent (Chowdhury, ).
Indonesia had around  million people ( per cent of the population) living in absolute poverty in . The number of absolute poor declined dramatically to . million (. per cent) in . By , the proportion had fallen further to . per cent. According to the UNDPs human poverty index (HPI),  per cent of the population lived in poverty in  and  per cent in . Using an alternative consumption based measure to take account of the many poor households that spend more than two thirds of their expenditure on food, Dhanani and Islam () estimated the incidence of poverty in  at  per cent. Provincial and district level data indicate that regional disparities in most HDI components either declined or remained unchanged. Inequality measures of non-income welfare indicators such as education, health, and the HDI suggest modest regional inequality.
Inequality and social services
Despite impressive gains, Indonesias achievements in HDI and HPI rankings are still well behind the other second-tier newly industrializing East Asian countries (see Figures  through ). However, starting from a lower base, Indonesia made more HDI gains than Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines, until around . This was also despite spending proportionately less on education and health relative to other countries in the region. Chowdhury () argues that Indonesia not only spent consistently less on human development than the regional norm, but also that social spending ... had to bear the burden whenever the need for adjustment arose. Total development expenditure dropped from over  per cent of total government expenditure to about  per cent over the same period. Expenditure on education and health fell from a peak of over  per cent of total government expenditure in to about  per cent in -, though Thorbecke () claims that Indonesia could not have done better with alternative packages. School dropout rates have been high ( per cent for primary schools and  per cent for lower secondary schools).
More troubling has been the decline in the rate of transition from primary to lower secondary schools from . per cent in  to about  per cent in  (world_bank, : ).
The main social welfare policy has been to rely on employment growth. Central government expenditure on social security has been very low, for example, less than one per cent of GNP in  (world_bank, : : Figure .). The absence of social safety nets became obvious in the aftermath of the crisis, with the economically vulnerable most severely hit. However, the official unemployment rate did not rise dramatically despite the severe output contraction. Those who lost employment in the urban and formal sectors are believed to have survived in the rural and informal sectors. About a million people were probably absorbed by the previously shrinking agricultural sector. The sudden movement of a huge number of unemployed to the agricultural and informal sectors obviously had negative repercussions on the earnings of those already there. The sudden increase in price inflation from  per cent in  to . per cent in , and the slower growth in nominal wages sharply reduced real wages by about  per cent (Chowdhury, ). Thus, although official unemployment did not rise due to the crisis, earnings contracted severely, sharply increasing poverty.
There were also declines in the development budget as well as in health and education spending from . This downturn was all the more serious in view of Indonesias historically low social spending and relatively modest human development gains by regional standards. The world_bank (: ) noted that the problem with health and education is not so much the new impact of the crisis as the continuing, and chronic, problems that have developed in the basic healthcare and education delivery systems in Indonesia.
Malaysia
Inequality
Curiously, the World Banks () Miracle Volume suggests that Malaysia was the only exception to the regional trend of declining income inequality. In fact, it appears that government efforts to reduce inter-ethnic inequality during the s and s apparently reduced overall inequality as well. Inequality increased from the late s to the mids, then declined among all major groups, especially in the s, before rising again between the s and  except during the crisis (see Tables  and ). Between  and , real per capita incomes rose by  per cent, or by an annual average of . per cent, despite a population growth rate averaging . per cent yearly (Kharas and Bhalla, : ). More significantly, per capita income levels generally rose with the rapid growth and structural change during the seventies, though this was checked by labour immigration from the s.
Using Theil index decompositions, Ikemoto (: ) argued that much of the (modest) decline in overall inequality between  and  was due to reduced inequality between rather than within ethnic groups. However, since Anand () found that less than ten per cent of overall income inequality in  may have been due to ethnic factors, the modest impact of its considerable ethnically-oriented affirmative action efforts on overall income inequality is not surprising. With the average Malay fertility rate about double the Chinese rate, and with the Indian rate slightly above the Chinese rate, Malay per capita income levels will continue to remain lower, and Malay poverty correspondingly higher, due to larger household sizes and dependency ratios.
Table  shows monthly household income trends by ethnicity and location in Malaysia, especially in Peninsular Malaysia, since the s. These trends suggest that rising incomes and poverty reduction in the s may have been accompanied by growing income inequality. However, other evidence suggests that income inequality declined during the seventies and eighties, but has since increased (see Tables  and ). Average inter-ethnic income disparities also declined during the New Economic Policy (NEP) period (), but have risen since the s. The apparently slightly greater decline of overall inequality in the s compared to the s (also see Hashim, ) may have been due to a change in the nature of the data (household income surveys only started in  and much of the earlier data are for household budgets or expenditure). It is also likely that the mid-s recession reduced inequality by limiting the incomes of the higher income groups. Partial economic liberalization and relatively less government interventions for redistribution since the late s appear to have contributed to increased overall as well as inter-ethnic inequality since the early s (see Tables  to ).
Table  shows income distribution trends for the whole country as well as by location in Malaysia. The first official Household Income Surveys for  and  suggested declining overall income inequality in the s. However, inequality between Bumiputeras and non-Bumiputeras as well as between town and country appear to have been falling fairly steadily since the seventies in Peninsular Malaysia. Inter-ethic and urban-rural disparities seem to have risen in the s except during the crisis. Evidence available for  and  suggests greater inequality in Sabah and Sarawak as compared to Peninsular Malaysia. The recession reduced all major income disparities in Sabah, Sarawak, and the peninsula by adversely affecting the wealthy while sparing the poor.
Poverty
Although there is some controversy over the reliability of official measures of poverty, it is generally agreed that there has been considerable reduction of absolute poverty in Malaysia, especially in Peninsular Malaysia, during the New Economic Policys first Outline Perspective Plan (OPP) period (-). Official statistics suggest impressive (by international standards) reductions of poverty in the s and early s (world_bank, ). The NEPs Outline Perspective Plan, (OPP) aimed to reduce the official poverty level from  per cent in Peninsular Malaysia in  to  per cent in .
Since the government views poverty in absolute, rather than relative terms, and claims to monitor the incidence of poverty in relation to a poverty line, income inequality can grow while the poverty rate declines if economic growth rates are sufficiently high. The disclosure of the official poverty line in  suggested that at least some of the poverty reduction, especially between  and , may have been due to the reduction of the per capita poverty line income from RM. in  to RM. in  in  prices (or from RM. in  to RM. in , in  prices). There is also no way of independently verifying the comparability of the official data, e.g. in terms of methods of measurement, since they are not publicly available. Also, the different nature of the three kinds of surveys involved means that they are not strictly comparable from a statistical point of view. It also seems likely that some methods of measurement may have changed.
Nevertheless, for want of more acceptable alternative data sources, official figures have to be used. The prevailing official poverty measures use a household, rather than a per capita poverty line income yardstick. Malaysia (: ) noted that if a per capita measure is used, instead of a household measure, the official poverty rate for households in  would have been . per cent, instead of . per cent,
in Peninsular Malaysia. However, according to Kharas and Bhalla (: Table a)who had access to the same official data, but used a  per cent sample to measure per capita income distribution. per cent of households, or . per cent of the population, were poor in , compared to . per cent of households, or . per cent of the population, in , and . per cent of households, or . per cent of the population, in .
Malaysia (: Box -) finally revised the poverty line income (PLI) upwards in  by . per cent, from RM using the  methodology to RM using the new  methodology and corresponding changes by region (Peninsular Malaysia, Sabah and Sarawak) as well as location (urban/rural). This increase is mainly due to a significant  per cent upward revision of the food PLI from RM using the  methodology to RM using the new  methodology. The food PLI is now the hardcore poverty line, i.e. much higher than the earlier definition of half the PLI. Not surprisingly, Malaysia () reports a higher incidence of poverty for  using the new methodology (. per cent) compared to the old methodology (. per cent), for  as well as .
Table  summarizes official data on the incidence of poverty by sector since . Poverty incidence has declined very significantly from . per cent (official estimate) or . per cent (Anand, ) in . Besides the considerable reduction in the incidence of poverty (officially estimated to have declined from . per cent in  to . per cent in  in Peninsular Malaysia), the ratio of the incomes of those still below the poverty line to the poverty line income (PLI) increased considerably from . to per cent.  In other words, the mean income of the poor was . per centinstead of . per centbelow the PLI (Kharas and Bhalla, : Table ).
Throughout Malaysia, the incidence of poverty is higher in rural areas and among the indigenous Bumiputeras. Progress in poverty reduction was brisk until the early s. The official data suggest that poverty reduction was not steadily achieved over the two decades, but largely achieved between  and . Table  suggests that much of the reduction in poverty incidence was achieved in the late s and early s, with slower progress since then. It is likely that higher prices contributed significantly to poverty reduction among rubber smallholders and rice farmers, two of the largest poverty groups, before farmers switched to other more remunerative occupations. Tables  and  survey recent poverty declines after the crisis by location and among the three major ethnic groups. Between  and , the incidence of overall poverty declined from . to . per cent (see Tables  and ).
Given the rapid growth of the Malaysian economy during this time period, poverty as defined by the government, could have been further reduced if more effective redistribution policies had been implemented and government waste minimized. The poor would have also benefited had government allocations been used more effectively for poverty reduction, instead of for enriching politicians, their clients, and for private contractors securing jobs for rural development projects. However, the significance, consistency and credibility of official poverty data have been challenged on several grounds. For instance, part of the decline in poverty may have been due to a lowering of the poverty line. Conversely, the Ninth Malaysia Plan, has announced a slightly higher poverty line based on recalculation of the costs of meeting food requirements, resulting in higher poverty figures for  compared to those previously announced in the Eighth Malaysia Plan, -.
Poverty and Policy
Despite the ostensible official concern about poverty and the strong correlation between growth and poverty reduction, after more than three decades of the NEP, there is still relatively little detailed information about the characteristics of the poor that could help explain the reasons and causes of poverty, as well as appropriate, effective and efficient measures and efforts to overcome it. Such careful analytical poverty profiles are especially urgent in view of the officially recognized phenomenon of hard-core poverty, that is said to be relatively unaffected by existing poverty eradication policies.
The absence of a clear official understanding of poverty has allowed eradication policies to go on regardless of their efficacy. This has led to suspicion that these policies are maintained to facilitate patronage by the ruling party and for the benefit of certain interest groups in the rural community, contractors, and other business interests, rather than for the purpose of genuinely improving the economic welfare of the poor. A great deal of what is officially categorized as spending on poverty eradication actually refers to expenditure on rural and agricultural development, much of which does not benefit the poor. Much expenditure for poverty eradication does not actually benefit those in need.
The evidence suggests that poverty reduction has been largely due to rising incomes due to structural transformation, employment changes (Table ), occupational mobility, higher commodity prices and increased productivity. In rural areas, especially among peasants, reduced poverty seems to be largely attributable to increased productivity (and prices) as well as out-migration and higher non-farm incomes. However, rising productivity mainly benefits those who own their own economic resources, especially land. Inequality in resource allocation, both in terms of ownership as well as access, has therefore meant that such productivity gains have tended to benefit the more well-to-do. Hence, expenditure ostensibly for poverty eradication has actually brought greater benefits to the relatively well endowed, not the poor.
That fewer people participate in activities associated with poverty, such as rice cultivation, rubber smallholdings, fishing and plantation labour, has helped decrease poverty. There has been a significant decline in the number of people working in most agricultural occupations. There has also been some abandonment of previously cultivated land, and population/land ratios have risen despite earlier increases in cultivated land. Furthermore, the migration of younger workers to urban centres has aged the remaining rural population. The economically active proportion of the population in agriculture has declined, which has left more land idle. This phenomenon is also exacerbated by the uneconomic size of the land involved.
China
Inequality
Over the past half century, inequality has peaked thrice in China; during the Great Famine, at the end of the Cultural Revolution, and most seriously, in the current era of globalization. In the early decades following the  liberation, land reform helped keep inequality relatively steady and low. With the Great Leap Forward and the ensuing Great Famine however, inequality reached an all time high by . It subsequently fell during the recovery from these events, until the Cultural Revolution, which began in . Inequality peaked again by . The post-Cultural Revolution period of rural reform improved the distribution of wealth until , after which China decentralized. As the Chinese opened their economy to more international trade and foreign direct investment, inequality rose steadily and sharply until . In fact, the Gini coefficient of regional inequality in China in  exceeded the peak of inequality reached in  (Kanbur and Zhang, ). Table  summarizes these economic indicators for China from  to , while Table  presents long-run inequality trends.
Chinese inequality is comprised of disparities between urban and rural areas as well as within urban and within rural centres (see Table ). A number of studies suggest that urban and rural income disparities explain per cent of overall Chinese inequality in the last two decades (e.g. Wei and Wu, ). The world_bank () estimated that inter-provincial inequality explained almost one-quarter of total inequality in , and a third of the increase in inequality since . Results show that inter-regional inequality accounted for over  per cent of inter-provincial inequality in , and all of the increase in inter-provincial inequality after  (Bhalla, Yao, and Zhang, ). In recent years, gaps among the Eastern, Central and Western provinces seem to have grown the most. Inter-regional disparities declined before the mid-s, but have since risen continuously. Chinas regional inequalities at the end of the s were much larger than at the beginning of s.
China has a huge population of almost . billion that increases by approximately million people each year (China SSB, ). From  to , the Chinese workingage population grew from  million to  million, an increase of no less than  million in under a decade. Almost  per cent of the population still lives in the countryside, and employment in agriculture is stagnant, if not declining ( million people in , falling to  million people in ). There may be as many as  million surplus farm workers constraining the growth of real incomes for low-skilled non-farm occupations.
Pressure on rural employment will probably intensify. The thousands of new township and village enterprises (TVEs) established in the early s faced increasing competition from greater market integration, both nationally and internationally. This meant that the main alternative source of rural labour absorption stagnated in terms of employment creation (at around  million employees) after the mids. The rapid growth of TVEs in the s and early s was mainly based on the rapid expansion of small businesses in labour-intensive activities, which used simple technologies. Now, to compete internationally, TVEs have to increase productivity quickly, often by shedding labour or by raising labour output. As a result, rural underemployment will most likely continue its rapid ascension.
The farm sector continues to grow at around five to six per cent per annum, and still invests on a large scale. The total power of agricultural machinery rose from  million kWh in  to  million kWh in  (China SSB, ). However, prices paid to farmers are estimated to have dropped by  per cent between  and , reducing the growth of farm incomes. According to official data, per capita farm income growth averaged about three per cent in the late s, but many observers insist that rural incomes have stagnated, or even declined since the mid-s. For example, Chen Xiwen estimated that Chinas farmers suffered an average decline in income in , ,  and  (Financial Times,  October, ). Rural income distribution has become much more unequal, with the Gini coefficient rising from . in  to . in  (Yao, ). Qu Hongbin () showed that the rural share of total consumption fell from around  per cent in the early s to  per cent in . The rural share of Chinas population still stands at  per cent, with grim prospects for most rural households in the years ahead.
Poverty
In the late s and early s, during the early years of Chinas rural reform, absolute poverty rapidly declined (Nolan, ). However, in terms of international poverty lines, many people still qualify as poor. In eight out of  provinces, the incidence of poverty rose significantly between  and  (Yao, ). In ,  million ( per cent of the population) made less than US $ per day, and  million lived on less than US $ per day (world_bank, : ). Most of them were rural dwellers or recent rural migrants to the cities. Official data for  showed that the average per capita income of Chinas  million rural residents was just US $ (RMB $,), or  cents per day (China SSB, : ). Of the total rural population, approximately  million in the countryside (. per cent of rural households) had less than US $ per year (China SSB, : ). In other words, the number of poor people remains huge, and may even be growing.
The substantial growth of rural underemployment encouraged rural-urban migration and depressing non-farm wages for unskilled and low-skilled occupations. By , around  million people, mainly with limited skills, worked in urban areas without permission for permanent urban residence. Even in the fastest growing region of China, the Pearl River Delta, real wages for unskilled labour during the s did not increase, suggesting a Lewisian labour market and a subsistence wage rate.
Meanwhile, Chinas state-owned sector was rapidly shrinking and reducing employment. It has been estimated that between  and , thirty million workers were laid off by state-owned enterprises (soe) (Financial Times,  November ). Some researchers estimate that more than  million people lost jobs due to the reform of soe. Thus, relatively large numbers of rural migrants struggle for survival on subsistence wages in Chinas urban areas. They have minimal social rights and after decades of an egalitarian social ethos, they observe the high-income lifestyles of privileged wage earners. Not surprisingly, urban social tensions have risen sharply.
In recent years, China began to overhaul its SOE sector while encouraging the emergence of a modern corporate sector. Since then, many loss-making soe have been shut down, merged, or sold, causing sharp decreases in state employment. As elsewhere, privatisation in China has been characterized by widespread insider dealing and corruption. As much as RMB trillion (around US$. trillion) in government assets may be privatized in the years ahead (Qu Hongbin, ). This has major implications for the distribution of wealth and income. Even a privatization enthusiast warns that the privileged classes are likely to find ways of further enriching themselves (Qu Hongbin, ). A recent study of mainland bank deposits estimates that only . per cent of the population owns  per cent of the nations US $. trillion liquid assets. China arguably has the highest concentration of wealth in Asia, with just two to three million people able to get rich quickly (South China Morning Post,  March ).
A further source of rising urban social tensions has been the rapid growth of FDI, with an accumulated stock of nearly US$ billion in  (UNCTAD, ). This FDI often created isolated clusters of modern businesses in Chinas cities, such as Beijings new financial district, Shanghais Pudong Development Zone and numerous high-technology parks across the country. These enclaves have considerable de facto autonomy. They provide pockets of relatively high-income employment for both Chinese and foreigners who then live in protected compounds, isolated from the rest of society.
The accelerated pace of reform and opening up since the mid-s has increased urban inequality. The Gini coefficient for urban income distribution using official data rose from . in  to . in  (China SSB, ). The income of the richest ten per cent of the urban population rose from . times that of the poorest ten per cent in  to . times in . Over the same period, the income of the poorest ten per cent fell from  per cent of the median income to  per cent. However, the official data do not include most of the  million unauthorized rural migrants that unofficially inhabit cities.
Unemployment and inequality appear to have been exacerbated by the s reforms, even though average living standards continue to rise, at least in urban areas. Furthermore, the data greatly underestimate the income of the richest urban Chinese and exclude the much larger incomes of foreign employees of multinationals, a fast growing segment of society. If all these factors were taken into account, the distribution of Chinas urban incomes is likely to approach those of the most inegalitarian countries in the world. Meanwhile, progressive income tax accounts for a mere  per cent of government income compared with  per cent in many parts of Asia.
With rapid growth for more than two decades, the Chinese urban middle class already appears to be quite large. Data for  (China SSB, ) show that the top decile of the urban income distribution (around  million people) had an average per capita income of US $,, while the following decile (another  million people) averaged around US $, per capita. Though we may conclude that the Chinese middle class is around million, this is misleading.
The average per capita income of Chinas  million officially registered urban residents in  was just US $, on par with the gross national product (GNP) per capita of low-income countries such as Albania, Uzbekistan, Sri Lanka and Cote dIvoire (world_bank, : -). If we include the unofficial urban population of around  million migrant workers, then the average income would be even lower. However, a recent study estimates that the average income of approximately  million urban Chinese householdsi.e. around twelve per cent of the total number of officially registered urban householdsis on par with the average for urban households in East Asias newly industrialized countries (Qu Hongbin, ).
According to Hu Angang (), the government reported a registered unemployment rate of . per cent in , while his own estimate was  per cent. In , new employment growth was . per cent, the lowest since , despite near double-digit growth. Overall unemployment, including layoffs and rural migrants who lose their jobs, remains higher. Hu () estimated urban unemployment at around  million and rural unemployment at  million, for a national total of  million. Not surprisingly, incomes for those who have lost their jobs have been low. According to Hu, a laid-off urban worker could get about  per cent of the average monthly wage of Chinese workers in -, while those laid off in remote regions and provinces hosting large soe received surprisingly little. As a result of increasing restructuring and massive layoffs, inequality in China rose sharply since . Starting in , China began to increase living allowances for laid off workers, however a  per cent across-the-board wage hike did not fully materialize in most Chinese regions because local governments could not afford to pay.
East Asian Contrasts
The World Banks East Asian Miracle volume created a myth of egalitarian export-oriented growth in the region by claiming that, The positive association between growth and low inequality in the HPAEs, and the contrast with other economies, is illustrated.... Forty economies are ranked by the ratio of the income share of the richest fifth of the population to the income share of the poorest fifth and per capita real GDP growth during -.... There are seven high growth, low inequality economies. All of them are in east_asia; only Malaysia, which has an index of inequality above , is excluded (world_bank, : -). However as Rao () notes, All that the data... can convey is that there are  (out of ) economies with low relative inequality and varying economic growth rates. Thus, the evidence is not strong enough to establish

a firm relationship between growth and relative inequality, notwithstanding the fact that seven high growth and low relative inequality economies are located in east_asia.
Hence, the available evidence suggests that Taiwan is almost unique in east_asia in having established and sustained an egalitarian income distribution. Its Gini coefficient remains close to the .-. level, with no significant decline after the late s. In the case of Korea, too, the Gini coefficient did not fall after . Indonesia showed some decline in the Gini coefficient for household expenditure, but there was no evidence that income inequality had declined. Reduction of inter-ethnic income differences has been the main factor behind the reduction of the Malaysian Gini coefficient from . to around . in the s and s, before rising again in the s. Meanwhile, the Thai Gini coefficient for income distribution rose from . in  to a little over . in .
Regardless of trends, income inequality in Southeast Asia seems to be significantly higher than in Taiwan and Korea, where significant asset redistribution took place with land reforms in the late forties and early fifties. Malaysia, Thailand and possibly Indonesia have income Gini coefficients of . or more. None of them had low Gini coefficients at the beginning of their rapid growth phases or have had sustained reductions in income inequality since then. Only in Korea and Taiwan did land reforms contribute to low initial levels of income inequality. The subsequent evidence suggests the maintenance of these relatively low levels of inequality, at best.
The evidence on income inequality in these five HPAEs does not support The East Asian Miracles claim of declining income inequality during the rapid growth phase after . Corroborating Rao (), You () also found that, among the World Banks eight HPAEs, only Japan, Korea and Taiwan have had unusually low inequality. He argues that they were able to combine low inequality with rapid growth because:
() they started rapid growth with an exceptionally egalitarian distribution of real and financial assets as a result of post-war, mainly agrarian, reforms;
() rapid income growth was based on capital accumulation as well as employment expansion;
() high profit shares were crucial for accumulation, by generating high savings rates and inducing high investment rates (though high profits are not sufficient for rapid growth, the three achieved rapid accumulation because effective institutions and policies translated large profits into high savings and investment rates);
() wealth distribution was relatively even due to the highly egalitarian post-war redistribution and the unusual savings behaviour of low-income households, especially in Japan and Taiwan;
() although wage distribution was not particularly egalitarian, rapid employment expansion and near full employment probably meant a wider and more even distribution of wage-earning opportunities among households.
For You (), the future prospects for income distribution in the relatively egalitarian, three Northeast Asian countries are not good. The favourable influence of the initially egalitarian wealth distribution will only continue to diminish over time, and little more can be achieved from further employment expansion. In fact, there is evidence of growing wealth concentration in all three relatively egalitarian HPAEs, especially with the recent asset-price bubbles from the late s. It appears that income inequality rose in Japan; Taiwan; and Korea during the s.
  
The World Banks generalization about income inequality reduction is erroneous. Gini coefficients in Korea and Taiwan have been low, and relatively the same, while inequality in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand has fluctuated from higher levels. Korea and Taiwan maintained relatively low Gini coefficients since the s, although there is evidence of increasing income inequality in recent years, as in Japan. Most of the data for Indonesia has been for consumption, and earlier declines in inequality have given way to more recent increases, as in Malaysia. Thai income inequality has declined less than in the other two Southeast Asian economies while progressive publicespecially socialexpenditure has been more recent in Thailand than in Malaysia and Indonesia.
The relatively low Gini coefficients for Korea, . in  and . in  have been attributed to a number of factors. The most important of these include the  and  land reforms (which reduced income inequality among farm households), asset destruction during the Korean War, and confiscation of illegally accumulated wealth (Choo, ). Rao () also notes no evidence of a continued decline in income inequality, as suggested by the world_bank ().
The available evidence suggests that the Gini coefficient for Taiwan declined from the s until the early s, and then stayed in the range of .-. during most of the s and in the early s. The measure has risen slightly since the mid-s. Land reform, labour-intensive industrialization, full employment, off-farm work, educational expansion and industrial organization (with large state-owned enterprises coexisting with small and medium-sized private firms) are believed to have contributed to the relatively egalitarian income distribution of Taiwan.
The world_bank and others have argued that, owing to the exceptional nature of Japan and the first generation newly industrialized economies (NIEs) of east_asia, the rest of the developing world should emulate the second-tier Southeast Asian newly industrializing countries (NICs) instead. While the more recent experiences of the second-tier Southeast Asian NICs may be more relevant to the rest of the South in some respects, such as resource wealth, the superior industrial policy as well as the more egalitarian initial conditions and development outcomes of Japan, Korea and Taiwan should not be overlooked.
Despite impressive gains in recent decades, Southeast Asian achievements in literacy, health and media access as well as HDI and HPI rankings have been modest and quite uneven, as reflected in Figures  and . Malaysia is generally ahead of Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia, with the Philippines still ahead of Indonesia on most indicators despite its dismal economic performance in recent decades. As Figures  and
 show, public spending on health in Korea was proportionately well ahead of its Southeast Asian counterparts. Surprisingly, this was not the case with education, where the figures reflect the much higher private spending on education in the peninsula.
Globalization, Growth and Inequality
It has been claimed that economic liberalization and globalization have helped spur economic growth throughout the world. However, according to Weisbrot, Naiman, and Kim (), the official data for the last two decades (-) suggest a different outcome. Economic growth has slowed dramatically, especially in the less developed countries, as compared with the previous two decades (-). For example, from -, output per person grew by an average, among countries, of  per cent, while average

growth was  per cent during -. Eighty-nine countries, or  per cent of all countries considered saw their per capita growth rate fall by at least five percentage points between  and  and the time periods. Only  countries, or  per cent, saw their per capita growth rate rise during this timeframe. In latin_america, GDP per capita grew by  per cent during -, but only by  per cent during -. GDP per capita for sub-Saharan Africa grew by  per cent in the first period, and has since fallen by  per cent.
Southeast Asia achieved high growth rates especially during -, but did not surpass its growth between  and . The only regional exception to this trend was east_asia, which grew faster from  to  than in the previous period. This anomaly however can be explained by the quadrupling of GDP, over the last two decades, in China, where  per cent of the population of east_asia resides. Hence, advocates of the Washington Consensus cannot point to any region in the world as having succeeded by adopting the neo-liberal policies they prescribedor, in many cases, imposedon borrowing countries. Understandably, they are reluctant to claim credit for China, which maintains a non-convertible currency, with state control over its banking system, and other major violations of Washington Consensus prescriptions.
Weisbrot, Naiman, and Kim () argue that if globalization and other policies promoted by the IMF and the world_bank have not led to increased growth, it becomes extremely difficult to defend these prescriptions. The costs of these changes such as the destruction of industries and the dislocation of people, the harsh austerity medicine often demanded by these institutions and by international financial markets, burden society without any clear countervailing benefit. Weisbrot, Naiman, and Kim () also note that the IMF promulgated policies that have undoubtedly reduced cumulative economic growth for hundreds of millions of people. In east_asia, IMF policies exacerbated the financial crises by requiring pro-cyclical macroeconomic responses, which deepened the crises in the region and delayed recovery. In Russia and Brazil in , the Funds support for overvalued exchange rates that ultimately collapsed caused serious economic damage. IMF policies in the economies of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have, over the last decade, contributed to one of the worst economic disaster in the history of the world. Russia lost more than half its national income, as transition economies accounted for  per cent of the economic stagnation in the s (Reddy and Minoiu, ). This is in sharp contrast to the East Asian transition economies of China and Vietnam.
Easterly (a, b) has argued that, The poor in developing countries are often better off when their governments ignore the policy advice of the International Monetary Fund and world_bank. IMF and world_bank policymakers claim that their reforms often require necessary short-term pain for the sake of long-term gain. Yet, as Easterly points out, during times of economic growth, the poor did not gain as much in countries in where the IMF lent money as they did in places with no programs. In countries without an IMF presence, the poor were also not hurt as badly by recessions. He also found that China, India and other countries that did not follow IMF and world_bank economic programs saw more poverty reduction in times of economic growth than nations that took the advice of Washington-based lenders.
Significant increases in inequality appear to have accompanied accelerating globalization. In the first ever study to calculate world income distribution from household income surveys, Milanovic () found that the distribution of individual incomes and expenditures were more unequal in  than in . His
  
study found world income inequality to be very high. The Gini coefficient for incomes in  was  adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), and almost  using current US$ incomes. Milanovic found income inequality increased during as the Gini for PPP-adjusted incomes in  was .. Depending on the measure used (Gini or Theil), inter-country inequality accounted for  to  per cent of total inequality. Interas well as intra-country inequality rose between  and , with the former rising much more when economic globalization was on the rise.
UNDP () offers evidence of growing global inequality. Government roles have also changed over the last two decades, and their impact has become more regressive. Tax systems have also become more regressive. In many countries, income tax rates have become less progressive, causing direct taxes to also become less progressive, if not regressive. Meanwhile, the share of direct taxes has tended to decline compared to the generally more regressive indirect taxes. All this has been accompanied by various efforts to reduce overall tax rates, in line with supply-side economic philosophy, which became especially influential during the s under the united_states President, Ronald Reagan.
Lower tax revenues and increasing insistence on balanced budgets or fiscal surpluses has generally constrained government spending, especially what is deemed as social expenditure, with some deflationary consequences. Privatisation in many countries has provisionally increased government revenues, enabling governments to temporarily balance budgets or have surpluses on the basis of one-off sales income. Such budgetary balances are clearly unsustainable, but have succeeded in, at least momentarily, obscuring the imminent fiscal crises such policies may cause.
Implications of Economic Liberalization for Equity in east_asia
The fiscal and foreign debt crises of the early and mid-s took a heavy toll on many countries in the region. Most governments emerged leaner by the late s, though not necessarily more effective, partly due to economic liberalization. Government expenditure as a percentage of total economic activity has been reduced, public sectors checked, state-owned enterprises constrained, and privatisation policies pursued. Government regulations have been reduced, mainly to induce greater private, especially foreign, investments. While economic welfare has often been adversely affected, some waste and undesirable regulation have also been eliminated in the process. Overall though, available information does not support the creation of meaningful welfare balance sheets.
The consequences of globalization and liberalization for growth, poverty and income inequality in east_asia are quite complicated and also quite contingent. The information available does not allow a carefully considered assessment of the welfare consequences of recent liberalization and globalization for different socio-economic groups, including those in poverty. Korea and Taiwan lacked natural resources, but have transformed their economies through interventionist industrial policies. Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia have relied more on resource rents to alleviate poverty, though growth has also been important. Export-oriented industrialization, driven primarily by foreign capital in Southeast Asia, has helped reduce unemployment and raise household incomes there.
Rapid growth has facilitated poverty alleviation. The East Asian economies reviewed here seem to have managed to grow quickly without seriously worsening income distribution. All these economies introduced policy instruments to alleviate poverty and, to a lesser extent, to improve income distribution. Poverty, both urban and rural, has generally continued to decline.
Income distribution in Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, and Indonesia has intermittently improved. Only Thailand, which has historically been the most liberal of the six main economies under consideration and the least committed to redistribution, experienced a long-term tendency toward greater income inequality. In fact, it was the only economy among the six that recorded increased poverty in the mid-s and greater urban poverty in .
Before the currency and financial crises of induced a regional recession in , liberalization had not significantly increased poverty in the region (except perhaps in Thailand), but seems to have by worsened inequality in Malaysia, Korea and Taiwana trend more consistently pronounced in Thailand from an earlier period. In other words, although poverty in these economies continued to fall with rapid growth, productivity gains and declining unemployment, income inequality has worsened in Korea, Taiwan, and Malaysia since the s.
After , liberalization seems to have adversely affected income distribution in the region. Rising income inequality under essentially laissez-faire conditions in the past have re-emerged as the economies of the region liberalized once again. Deregulation, reduced government intervention, declining commitment to earlier redistributive mechanisms, and greater government efforts to meet investor expectations probably all contributed to increased inequality in the region. Recent and current trends suggest the likelihood of worsening inequality in the future (see Ishak, ; Onchan, ). Liberalization and renewed commitments to protecting property rights have discouraged redistributive policies and aggravated social inequality in these countries. More liberalization will likely exacerbate these regressive trends.
Contrary to the claims of the world_bank, the East Asian economies do not demonstrate any clear relationship between export-oriented industrialization and better income distribution (see also Alarcon, ). Though export orientation can sustain long-term growth, effective mechanisms for redistribution usually implemented through government intervention are needed to improve equity. The world_bank recommends that other developing countries try to emulate the second-tier Southeast Asian NICs, especially their s liberalization policies. However, the evidence suggests that Korea and Taiwan had much more egalitarian growth when compared to Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, and that inequality has increased all-around since liberalization, especially in Southeast Asia.
The simplistic world_bank picture of East Asian growth with redistribution or egalitarian growth does not stand up to careful empirical scrutiny. Northeast Asia has been distinctly more egalitarian than Southeast Asia, and recent economic liberalization has exacerbated inequality in the region (see Table ). Interestingly, those economies with more elaborate, effective and successful industrial policies have also been more egalitarian, although available data does not allow a meaningful testing for correlation, let alone causality.
In light of these developments, it is important to consider possible measures to try to sustain declines in poverty and reductions in inequality despite continued pressures for trade, financial and investment liberalization. Poverty alleviation and redistribution policies are still needed, particularly in Thailand, where they have been absent and income distribution has deteriorated over the last few decades. Evidence from other countries in the region suggests that efforts targeting poor groups, such as land reform, subsidized housing, and subsidized access to education, have been successful and should be emulated.
Liberalization of agricultural, especially food, trade should be gradual to facilitate adjustment. With real wage increases in Korea and Taiwan from the late s, such agricultural trade liberalization allowed cheap food imports from abroad to destroy the livelihoods of many farmers in Korea, though the problem has been less significant in Taiwan due to greater agricultural productivity and the importance of off-farm work. Similarly, Malaysia, Indonesia and, to a lesser extent, Thailand too will face similar challenges as cheap rice imports from Vietnam and China enter their economies. The livelihoods of farmers would have been negatively affected, though the collapse of many Southeast Asian currencies since mid changed the terms of trade for agriculture once again, at least for the near future. Alternative employment sources such as the promotion of industrial dispersal to raise off-farm incomes, as in Japan and Taiwan, also need to be developed by the governments under consideration. The regional recession in  temporarily revived interest in questions such as food security, which had been largely forgotten with the enthusiasm for liberalization and globalization in the preceding decade.
While direct subsidies may be difficult to sustain, new forms of indirect subsidization may well compensate. For example, increased government education and training efforts can become an important means of advancing industrial and technological capabilities. Taiwan and Korea have successfully pursued such efforts for some time. While the demand for skilled labour has risen substantially in Malaysia and Thailand, earlier government efforts have been inadequate to meet these requirements. The improvement of the labour force should help raise the competitiveness of firms and economies, and narrow wage differentials and income inequality more generally.
The East Asian experience with labour market liberalization has therefore been quite complicated. Labour market liberalization has undoubtedly undermined labour market segmentation in significant ways, but such labour market rigidities still prevail. Some rigidities are becoming even more pronounced with more educational and skill specialization as well as greater use of foreign labour with reduced citizenship right sat both ends of the labour force. In most East Asian economies, except for the new democracies of Korea and Taiwan, labour regulations have not improved significantly in recent decades, resulting in more casualized and vulnerable labour relations. This has enhanced labour flexibility without a concomitant improvement in labour security. The significance of corporate savings in explaining the high savings rate associated with the East Asian region suggests that this may have been at the expense of labour incomes.
While changing production relations at the international level, variously described as international or global production networks or value chains, have brought about some of this greater flexibility, much of this has been promoted by governments trying to attract investments and thus enhance growth. However, there has been relatively little resistance to such casualization, as its negative consequences were partly offset by the post  boom (after the appreciation of the yen and the currencies of the first-tier East Asian NIEs), which has been accompanied by declining unemployment as well as improved labour remuneration to retain employees. However, such casualization negates the likelihood of corporatism, and hence, of greater commitment by workers as stakeholders, as in Japan, Korea, and Singapore. Weak institutional development governing labour relations exacerbated the welfare of workers in the region. Liberalization also weakened the bargaining power of workers in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, and may thus have worsened income distribution.
Unions could instead be encouraged to collaborate with management and the government to enhance social corporatism so that enhanced trust, commitment and efficiency from such partnerships can help raise competitiveness and workers remuneration. This would probably involve more multi-skilling, cross-skilling and institutionalization of the work process, including union participation in worker training to strengthen effective tripartism, i.e. institutionalized consultations involving labour, employers and the government. Such flexible work practices can also reduce occupational hierarchies, status differentials and income inequalities.
Technological development is essential for the success of such efforts. Growth should become a shared responsibility, with all parties benefiting. Commitment to technology development e.g., through subsidization of catching-up activities\0xF3will become increasingly crucial to sustaining industrialization, growth and improved living standards. However, technology development eff orts should not merely focus on fi rms alone. Th e broader institutional set-up for promoting a better national system of innovation, including upgrading labour force skills, will be critical. As traditional industrial policy measures are increasingly negated, there is likely to be greater interest in and attention to human resource development (HRD) eff orts, offering a rare window of opportunity for social development proponents to advance their agenda. However, there is also a danger that only social development measures considered supportive of economic growth and industrialization, especially in the short and medium term, will be adopted, as others are neglected and eventually quietly forgotten. In the long term, continued progress in health, education and labour productivity will be necessary to sustain economic growth and improve living standards. Economic growth and social development should increase in tandem. Ramirez, Ranis and Stewart (1997) postulate a cumulative cycle of economic growth and human development, based on two chains: one linking economic growth to human development, the other linking human development to economic growth. Th ey found that higher social expenditure improves human development, and that high investment rates and more equitable income distribution bolstered economic growth. Some East Asian economies seem to have such \0xEBvirtuous circlesi, with relatively high literacy rates and life expectancies, among other positive social indicators. Th ese countries may well be poised for further social development and economic growth. Yet, as the Korean experience suggests, institutional reforms to ensure such an outcome will only come about through public pressure for and government commitments to social development.
