Globalizing Inequality: Centrifugal and Centripetal Forces at Work
One of the main stylized facts of the era of globalization is that a remarkable increase in the levels of international trade has been associated in most countries with a significant deterioration of income distribution. This trend towards greater inequality at a time of a generalized increase in trade is far from the predictions of Samuelsons s trade-related factor-price-equalization theorem. For him, an increase in trade would improve both the national and international distributions of income. This should happen because export expansion would increase the relative income of the (cheap) abundant factor and reduce that of the (expensive) scarce factor in each country. In fact, of all Samuelsons economic hypotheses, there is probably none that influences the united_states of Americas foreign policy today as much as the one that postulates that increased trade between two countries should reduce the incentive for labour to move across frontiers. In the case of the US relationship with Mexico, for example, following the  debt crisis, the US always frightened that worsening economic problems in Mexico could turn the flow of Mexican immigrants into a tidal wave gave Mexican exports increasingly preferential access to its market, a process that led to the creation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Therefore, the issues addressed by Samuelson as far back as the s are still some of the most contested hypotheses in the debate on the effects that the globalization-induced increase in trade would have on national and international factor movements and income distribution. As is well known, one major problem with this (or any other) debate on income distribution has been the difficulty of testing alternative hypotheses, especially time series formulations, due to the low quality of available income distribution data. However, household survey data have recently substantially improved allowing at least some robust testing of cross-sectional hypotheses. At the same time, some institutions like the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the world_bank (WB)have made sustained efforts to collect and process these surveys. The relevant WB publication, for example, now provides a relatively homogeneous set of data on personal income distribution for  countries (world_bank, WDI, ). However, there are still some significant problems with the World Development Indicators data set. For example, although most data refer to income distribution, some still refer to consumption expenditure (particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa). This mix of data makes regional comparison more difficult, as the distribution of consumption tends to be more equal than the distribution of income (usually by a difference of about  percentage points on the Gini scale). The accuracy of these surveys is also still a problem.
Another problem is that, rather surprisingly, the WDI data set still reports income (or consumption) distribution only in terms of quintiles; for deciles, it only reports the shares of deciles  and . Although this is a marked improvement over the WBs earlier Deininger and Squire (D/S) data set (Deininger and Squire, )which does not report data for a single income decile it is clearly unsatisfactory. As will be discussed in detail below, crucial distributional information is lost when data are aggregated in quintiles (particularly in the top one). Meanwhile, the Research Department of the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) has constructed a slightly more up-to-date income distribution data set for several latin_american countries; it uses the same methodology (primary household survey data) and data aggregation (quintiles and deciles  and ) as the WDI (Szekely and Hilgert, b).
The main aim of this paper is to use these new WB and IADB data sets to take another look at national income inequalities in this era of globalization. Throughout this paper, unless otherwise stated, the IADB data set will be used for latin_america, and the WDI for the rest of the world. The total number of countries included in this study is .
Inequality ranking
Figure  illustrates how these  countries are ranked according to their Gini indices of inequality in the second half of the s. Of the many issues emerging from this graph, two stand out. First, in the second half of the s, there was a particularly wide range of inequality across countries from a very low Gini index of . per cent (Slovak Republic) to a high of . per cent (Paraguay). Second, all latin_american countries were clearly grouped at the very top end of the inequality ranking with a median Gini of . per cent and mean of . per cent. The degree of inequality in latin_america was well over half as much again as the median value for the rest of the sample ( countries), and more than  per cent higher than that for the non-latin_american developing countries ( countries, excluding OECD and transition economies). In addition, among the  countries studied, the median country-inequality ranking for the  latin_american countries was  (see also UNCTAD, ).
There also seemed to be an extraordinary difference between English-speaking and non-Englishspeaking OECD countries, with the latter including continental Europe and Japanwith median Ginis of . and ., respectively. The same contrast was found between the ex-communist countries of the former Soviet Union and those of Central Europewith median Ginis of . and ., respectively.
Figure  shows an equally important but surprisingly less well-known factthe contrasting shares of deciles  and . While the range for the income share of decile  in these  countries only extends across . percentage points (from . per cent in India to . per cent in South Africa), decile  has a range six times larger (from . per cent in the Slovak Republic to . per cent in Paraguay). This extraordinary difference between the dispersion of these two deciles is reflected in their standard deviation swhile that of decile  is just . percentage points (around a mean of . per cent), that of decile  is . percentage points (with a mean of . per cent); hence, relative to their own means, the standard deviation of decile  is more than four times larger than that of decile .
This phenomenon is also corroborated by the fact that while the median values for the share of decile  in the latin_american and non-latin_american groups are quite similar (. per cent and . per cent, respectively), those for decile  are very different, with the latin_american share more than half as much again as the median value for the rest of the sample (. per cent and . per cent, respectively). In other words, one of the key elements (if not the key one) needed to understand the effects of globalization on national income distribution is the impact it has on the share of decile .
Figures  and  indicate that the key characteristic of the income distribution of most latin_american countries is its shift towards a winner takes all pattern. In the case of Chile, for example, figure  already indicated that its decile  is ranked as the th most unequal among the  countries, while its decile  is only ranked th (its ranking is even better than South Koreas!). In turn, figures  and  illustrate the already mentioned shift in its pattern of distribution towards a winner takes all scenario: after the  coup detat (which also marked the beginning of trade liberalization and the rapid integration of Chile into the world economy), when income distribution had one of the fastest deteriorations ever recorded, only decile  benefited from it.
While the income share of decile  increased by nearly  per cent between  and  (from  per cent of national income to no less than  per cent), even that of decile  lost some relative ground. As a result of this increasing polarization, one way to highlight the extreme inequality found in latin_america is to look at the ratio of the income shares of deciles  and .
Figure  shows that there is a significant difference even between the ratios of deciles  to  and that of deciles  to . However, the huge difference is principally due to the last third of the samplemainly comprising latin_american and Sub-Saharan African countries. The resulting ranges for both rankings are very different: while the ratio of deciles  to  ranges from . to , that of deciles  to  only extends from . to ..
Of the more straightforward statistics for measuring inequality, this probably best reflects the degree of income inequality found in latin_america, and the extraordinary degree of income polarization in the region. At a median value of ., the latin_american ratio is . times the median value for the  non-Latin American developing countries, and more than  times the median value for the  non-latin_american countries in the sample (.). The statistics also differentiate most latin_american inequality from that of Sub-Saharan Africa (the latters median value, at ., is only one-third that for latin_america).
latin_americas greater inequality, vis-a-vis other regions of the world, decreases rapidly for income groups closer to the middle of the distribution, i.e., between deciles  and . Yet, many theories purporting to explain latin_americas greater inequality refer to phenomena in the middle of the distribution, e.g., the import-substituting, industrialization-related labour aristocracy hypothesis of the s, and the trade liberalization-related asymmetric demand for labour proposition of the s.
The first hypothesis, widely invoked during the s and s, particularly by those connected with the world_bank, argued that one of the main causes of inequality in latin_america during that period was the price distortions associated with import-substituting industrialization (ISI). These distorted the values of sectoral marginal productivities, causing artificially higher real wages in manufacturing, i.e., producing higher wage differentials than would otherwise exist in the economy (world_bank, ; Krueger, ). However, there was little then (as now) to differentiate latin_america from the rest of the worlddeveloping and developed, ISI and non-ISIin terms of the income distribution among groups that would include aristocratic and non-aristocratic labour (say, quintiles  to , or  to ).
The second proposition basically recycled the labour-aristocracy hypothesis to explain the increased inequality in many latin_american countries following trade and financial liberalization. This increase in inequality, following greater integration into the world economy, contrasts not only with Samuelsons original expectations but also with the predictions of the Washington Consensus before the implementation of these reforms (Lal, ). Hence, it is now argued that this previously unforeseen development took place because trade liberalization introduced new production techniques requiring more skilled workers, thus increasing wage differentials. However, as is obvious from the previous graphs and Table , latin_american income inequality has been distinguished at the poles of the income distribution hardly where either skilled or unskilled members of the formal labour force are located. Therefore, even if trade liberalization introduced new production techniques with asymmetrical labour demand, it is unlikely that this would account for much of the regions increased income inequality; the case of Chile provides a good example of this.
Even though Chile implemented one of the most radical trade liberalization policies in the developing world, and in spite of the fact that this policy has now been in place for more than three decades, it seems to have had little effect on the relative income distribution between skilled and unskilled members of the formal labour force (proxied in figure  by the ratio of deciles  to  and  to ). This graph suggests that massive political upheavals, radical economic reforms and greater integration into the world economy have had significant effects at the extreme ends of the income distribution, but little effect in between.
The Chilean experience also indicates that policy matters. Income distribution did improve significantly with the progressive distribution policies of the first post-Pinochet democratic government (), even though it continued the process of greater integration into the world economy. However, when the second democratic government (-), formed by the same political coalition, abandoned progressive distributional policies for more market-oriented ones, the ratio of deciles  to  returned to what it had been when President Pinochet left in .
Income inequality and income per capita
The most common way of comparing income distribution across countries has been in relation to the income per capita level. This approach was pioneered by Kuznets () and has dominated distributional debates ever since. Figure  shows the regional averages for the whole sample. The graph suggests four layers of inequality across countries. First, a more equal layer containing the ex-communist countries of Central Europe and the non-Anglophone OECD; a second layer containing a great variety of regions, with more than threequarters of the worlds population; a third one including only Sub-Saharan Africa and the second-tier newly industrialized countries (NICs) (east_asia ); and fourth, latin_america, with inequality well above every other region in the world, including those with similar income per capita, such as North Africa, east_asia  and the Caribbean.
However, as discussed above, it is also important to look inside the Gini ratio. As might have been expected, figure  shows a particularly close correlation between regional Ginis and the income shares of decile . Of course, this strong correlation is the result of the way the Gini index is calculated.
Figure  shows the regional distribution pattern for deciles  to  mirroring that for decile . Therefore, the Ginis for regional inequality are reflected both at the very top and at the bottom of the distribution of income for the regions. However, when one looks in figure  at the remaining  per cent of the population the middle classes (sometimes also called the administrative classes in institutional economics) located between deciles  to the regional distributional picture changes from one of huge variation to remarkable similarity. This similarity is even more surprising for the upper middle  per cent of the population (deciles ,  and ), as shown in figure .
Table  presents statistics for the whole sample, emphasizing the remarkable contrast between the distributional heterogeneity at the top and bottom of the income distribution and the homogeneity in the middle. Of all the statistics in table , the coefficient of variation best shows this distributional contrast the figures for both decile  and deciles  to  are nearly four times greater than those for deciles  to . Furthermore, they are nearly seven times larger than for deciles  to . The  per cent of the population located between deciles  to  seems to be able to count on about half the national income. This suggests that middle classes across the world, particularly the upper middle classes, seem to be able to benefit from a distributional safety net, i.e., regardless of the per capita income level of the country, the characteristics of the political regimes, the economic policies implemented, the structure of property rights, or whether or not they belong to countries that managed to get their prices right, their institutions right or their social capital right. In other words, regardless of the political institutional settlement, they are able to acquire a property right on half the national income.
The bottom  per cent of the population has no such luck. For them, such policy and institutional variations make the difference between getting as much as one-quarter of national income (as in the non-English speaking OECD or the ex-communist countries of Central Europe), or as little as  per cent (as in latin_america). As far as the top income decile is concerned, the sky is (almost) the limit.
In other words, the regional distributional pattern suggested by the Gini index only reflects the income disparities of half the worlds population, i.e., those at the very top and at the bottom of the distribution, and does not reflect the distributional homogeneity of the other half. This is a rather important phenomenon from a statistical point of view, raising serious questions about the usefulness of the Gini index as an indicator of overall income inequality. Analytically, economic reforms, trade and financial liberalization, globalization, changing property rights, as well as other recent economic and political developments, seem to have been associated with two very different distributional dynamics across regions in the world: a (better known) centrifugal one in the income shares of the top and bottom deciles (decile  and deciles  to ), and a (lesser known) centripetal movement in the income shares of deciles  to .
Regional distributional homogeneity in the middle (especially upper-middle) of the distribution casts doubts on the human capital theory of income distribution. According to this theory, the level of education is a crucial if not the most crucial variable in the determination of income inequality (Neal and Rosen, ). However, in all regions of the world (developed and developing, latin_american and non-latin_american), the top income decile is made up of individuals with relatively advanced levels of education, while those in the bottom four deciles have relatively low levels of formal education either relatively little schooling, or (in the more advanced countries), schooling of rather doubtful quality. So why do these two relatively homogeneously educated groups have such great distributional diversity? In turn, if significant educational diversity is found among the population in deciles  to e.g., in terms of the share of the population with secondary and (especially) tertiary education why does one find such extraordinary similarity in the shares of national income of this educationally highly heterogeneous group?
 Obviously, more research needs to be done on the forces shaping the national income shares of different deciles along such different paths (particularly in such opposite centrifugal and centripetal directions). Remarkably, this simple observation does not seem to have been emphasized before. Also, it seems odd that much of the recent literature on income polarization has produced indices to emphasize distributional changes around the middle of the distribution, where there has, in fact, been far greater distributional homogeneity. In fact, the higher degree of heterogeneity at the very top and bottom of the income distribution makes income ratios, such as those of deciles  to , highly sensitive statistical indicators of distributional disparities across the world, particularly highlighting latin_americas greater income polarization. From this perspective, figure  shows that latin_america seems to be living in a distributional world of its ownas if on a different planet!
 Wolfson (), for example, started the recent polarization literature by developing an index that cuts the Lorenz curve right in the middle! For a discussion of this point, see Palma (b).
Testing for regional effects in a cross-section framework
As is well known, the Kuznets inverted U framework is the most commonly used hypothesis for testing the relationship between income inequality and income per capita, both in a time series and in a cross-section framework. However, in doing so, one has to distinguish crucially between two factors: first, whether there is a statistical relationship of this kind between these two variables, and second, how to interpret this relationship analytically; i.e., if the test shows a significant relationship of this kind, the Kuznets structural change hypothesis is just one of several possible interpretations of the nature of this relationship.
Here, I am going to use the traditional econometric specification test for regional effects among these variables, though evidence of a statistically significant relationship between them will not be interpreted as evidence of a Kuznets-type relationship proper, due to the already extensive and persuasive literature arguing against this (Kanbur, ). In view of the above finding (of a homogeneous middle versus heterogeneous poles), I shall not test this relationship using the Gini average as a dependent inequality variable, as this statistic aggregates two very different distributional worlds. Therefore, the inverted U hypothesis will be tested using the income shares of different income groups as dependent variables, with the right-hand side variables being an intercept, the log of income per capita, and the square of the same variable. Also, as discussed in detail elsewhere (Palma, c), for statistical and analytical reasons, one should not yet include the ex-communist countries of Central Europe and the former Soviet Union in the sample to be tested for regional distributional effects. Hence, the sample used only contains  countries. Figure  shows the results of such a test for the income shares of the top decile.
Figure  indicates that there are no less than five statistically significant regional dummiesone dummy, latin_america, is significant at the  per cent level, and the other four at the  per cent level; all other parameters and the F test are significant at the  per cent level. The adjusted R is  per cent. In fact, the only regions where the dummies were not significant at the  per cent level were east_asia, the Caribbean and the English-speaking OECD ( countries in all); therefore, these countries are included in the base regression together with the eight countries not classified in any of these regions (see appendix ).
Figure  shows again the converse relationship between the share of the top decile and that of the bottom four deciles. This regression is also highly significant, with all eight parameters (including all five dummies) and the F test significant at the  per cent level. The R is  per cent.
However, not surprisingly, the regionally homogeneous middle (deciles  to ) shows no significant regional effects for this half of the population. Finally, strong regional effects are again found when an inverted U specification is tested with the ratio of deciles  to  as the dependent variable, as in figure .
Again, this regression is highly significant; four of the dummies are significant at a  per cent level, and all other parameters (except for the intercept) are significant at  per cent. The R is  per cent. This is the specification of the regional distributional effects, in which the excess degree of latin_american inequality is shown in more extreme form. In general, the latin_american intercept dummies are significant at the  per cent level in all three specifications of the dependent variable (decile , deciles  to , and the ratio of deciles  to ). There seems to be particularly strong statistical evidence that towards the end of the s, latin_american countries developed a higher degree of inequality vis-a-vis their middle-income level.
However, as there is no latin_american country with high income per capita, this sample provides no information as to what could happen to this higher inequality as such countries reach higher income levels. Furthermore, as figure  shows, towards the end of the s, as per capita income increased in latin_america, the distributional dispersion among countries in the region also increased rapidly.
The five countries with the highest per capita incomes in the regionUruguay, Chile, Brazil, Venezuela and Mexicohave a large range of income shares for decile . In fact, the two countries with the highest income per capita, Uruguay and Brazil, have the lowest and the second highest income shares for this decile: . per cent and . per cent, respectively. Also, at the end of the s, in Brazil, Chile and Mexico, income inequality was actually growing as per capita income increased, moving, therefore, in the opposite direction shown by the inverted U curve.
The Mexican experience
A brief analysis of Mexico could help us understand why increased integration into the world economy, after economic reform in general and trade and financial liberalization in particular, has increased the gap between the top and the bottom of the distribution. Although political reform began in Mexico during the presidency of Lopez Portillo (-), trade liberalization began with President de la Madrid, who took office in the midst of the  debt crisis. Mexico has never looked back in terms of growth of manufacturing exports in constant US dollar terms, manufactured exports (including those from so-called maquila enterprises) grew from US$ billion in  to US$ billion in  (in  US$ values)a figure similar to South Koreas manufacturing exports. This -fold increase (equivalent to an average annual growth rate of  per cent) increased the share of manufactures in the countrys total goods exports to  per cent from less than  per cent in .
Even though Mexican history shows that proximity to the US is a mixed blessing at best, as far as goods exports are concerned, few developing countries have such a geographical advantage, augmented by preferential access to the US market (via NAFTA). Nevertheless, even considering the help provided by the related flood of foreign direct investment (FDI), the growth of Mexican manufactured exports in this period has been truly exceptional. Yet, this export expansion has had a far more complex, and weaker, impact than expected on the Mexican economy as a whole, especially on growth, investment, productivity and wages. In particular, it has been associated with both a collapse of the export multiplier and the de-linking of the export sector from the rest of the economy; this has produced a situation in which increasing export competitiveness has had little effect on growth and living standards.
Figure  shows the trademark of the liberalization package in Mexico (as in the rest of latin_america): a fall in the share of wages and salaries in gross domestic product (GDP). In Mexico, over just two six-year presidential terms (-, -) and one economic crisis, the share of wages and salaries in GDP fell by no less than  percentage points. In the last presidency of the s (which saw yet another economic crisis), the share of wages in GDP fell by a further  percentage points. In all, the share of wages fell from  per cent of GDP in  to just . per cent in .
Figure  shows the root cause of this fall in the share of wages in GDP: the emergence of a new scissors effect between wages and productivity after political and economic reforms. One can identify three distinct periods over the second half of the th century. First, up to the Echeverria Government (-), one can see the essential characteristic of the traditional Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) distributive policy: wages were able to grow at a pace similar to productivity growth, i.e., increased bargaining power in a corporatist environment enabled labour to gain the property right to share in the benefits of economic growth.
In the second period, during Lopez Portillos term of office (between  and ), marking the beginning of political-ideological change in Mexico, economic policy led to progressive stagnation of wages, despite massive new oil riches. Then, when economic crisis struck Mexico in , and with the ascendance to power of President de la Madrid and his economic reform team, a third period started, characterized by a rapidly growing gap between productivity and wages. By , two presidents and another economic crisis later, this gap had reached approximately  percentage points. Figures  and  show that the gap between productivity and wages took a different form for manufacturing than for non-tradables.
Prior to , there was a relatively stable relationship between productivity growth and wage growth in manufacturing; this pattern subsequently changed due to a sharp break in the trend of wage growth. In fact, by the end of the s, the average wage was only just recovering to its  level, while productivity had increased by about  per cent in the mean time a clear case of a shift towards a new winner takes all pattern of distribution with greatly increased profit margins.
As Kalecki would have predicted, the two crises ( and ) also contributed to the new distributional environment, by drastically weakening the bargaining power of labour. However, as Prebisch and Singer would have predicted, as soon as manufacturing became export-oriented particularly with capital increasingly mobile and labour relatively immobile it began to behave as if it were a traditional primary commodity sector: wages immediately stagnated, and all productivity growth was either captured by capital or transferred to consumers in the North (in this case, to the US) via lower prices. In fact, wages were not able to grow in any significant way even in the motorcar industry which was the most successful activity within manufacturing during this period despite a  per cent productivity growth (Palma, ). Mexicos experience, in this respect, is certainly closer to the predictions of Prebisch and Singer than to those based on Samuelsons theorem of trade-related wage equalization across the world.
What about the relationship between wages and productivity in a sector unable to deliver productivity growth? Figure  indicates a similar gap between productivity growth and wage growth in non-tradables, but one moving in a different direction i.e., a similar scissors pattern, but this time with a downward trend. Here, given productivity stagnation, wages had to fall substantially for the gap to emerge and for profit margins to increase as in the rest of the economy.
This decline in wages in non-tradable sectors (services, utilities and construction, accounting for about two-thirds of GDP) contrasts sharply with the situation before , when there was another gap (then in favour of labour), with wages growing faster than productivity. This was one characteristic of the previous corporatist structure of property rights in the labour market: wages in manufacturing (which grew at a rate roughly similar to productivity growth) set the pace for wage growth in the non-manufacturing sector of the economy, even in sectors where productivity growth was slower than in manufacturing.
In this way, a new pattern of accumulation emerged with economic reform in Mexico (as in the rest of latin_america). If there is productivity growth, the new pattern is one of a shift towards a winner takes all scenario (increasing profit margins a la Prebisch-Singer); if there is none, capital can still increase its profit margins, via the contraction of wages (a la Arthur Lewis, because institutional changes in the labour market allow capital to squeeze wages towards their subsistence level). In this way, even if productivity growth is disappointing (mainly as a result of particularly poor investment effort), the stagnation of wages in some activities, and their decline in others, have proved to be an effective compensatory mechanism for capital to increase profit margins in this era of globalization.
Conclusions
Although the (average) Gini picture of the income distribution for different regions of the world clearly shows four layers of distribution across the world, this phenomenon only reflects what happens to half the worlds population those at the very top and those at the bottom of the distribution. The other half in the middle and upper-middle deciles ( to ) of the distribution offers a rather different picture, of extraordinary homogeneity. This is a truly remarkable fact that has not been properly emphasized in the literature so far. Clearly, more research is needed on the forces behind these opposite centrifugal and centripetal movements.
The similar income shares of the middle and upper-middle deciles across regions raise some doubts about distributional theories that give pride of place either to education or to trade-related wage differentials as the main determinants of income distribution. Groups with the highest degree of heterogeneity in distributional terms are more likely to have higher degrees of homogeneity in educational terms, and vice versa. Looking at trade-related wage differentials, there does not seem to be much distributional variance in the middle part of the distribution where skilled and unskilled labour are most likely to be found. In general, political-institutional factors seem to have greater influence on the determination of income distribution than purely economic ones.
The sample also shows a significant distributional difference between English-speaking and non English-speaking OECD countries; the same phenomenon is found among the ex-communist countries (the difference between those countries that used to belong to the Soviet Union and those in Central, formerly Eastern, Europe).
Finally, in terms of the relationship between income distribution and income per capita in the era of globalization and taking into account all the necessary econometric caveats on cross-sectional regressions of this nature, problems with the quality of the data, and the fact that, in many countries (especially in Sub-Saharan Africa), the data refer to expenditure, not income the relevant regressions seem to support the following three hypotheses:
 first, statistically, the inverted U and U cross-section relationship still applies in the case of the distributional diversity at the very top and at the bottom of the income distribution;
 second (and in analytical terms, far more important), within these relationships, (much more homogeneous) regional effects clearly dominate; and
 third, latin_america has, so far, had the largest excess inequality of any region in the world vis-a vis its income per capita.
In fact, latin_america seems to be in a distributional league of its own. While political oligarchies all over the Third World would be very happy to appropriate such high shares of national income, the question remains why only in latin_america they manage to get away with it!

