The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate Change Related Technologies to Developing Countries
Executive Summary
Technology transfer to developing countries is crucial to their economic growth and competitiveness in world markets. There are also environmental benefits to technology transfer. Climate-change-related technologies assist countries, firms, and individuals in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and coping with the adverse consequences of climate_change. Their transfer to developing countries is a crucial element of efforts to meet the challenges posed by climate_change. However, despite numerous commitments by the international community over the past generation, technology transfer is not happening quickly enough.
There are many reasons for this delay, one of which is global intellectual property rights (IPR) protection. IPRs are designed to foster innovation by protecting assets and rewarding innovators, but they do so at a cost of delayed access, reduced competition and higher prices. These problems are particularly acute in developing nations. Many climate-change-related technologies are unavailable in developing countries at reasonable prices, meaning that these technologies cannot be employed in parts of the world where they may be needed most.
There is an intense empirical debate as to whether, on balance, strong IPR protection helps or hinders technology transfer to developing countries. Leaving this question aside, it is clear that certain components of the present IPR regime tilt in favor of innovator protections and profits at the expense of the economic and environmental benefits that flow from climate-change-related technology transfer.
The WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), passed in  at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, is the primary global IPR treaty. The TRIPS Agreement mandates strong patent protections for nearly all inventions and effectively limits opportunities to contest IPR abuses. There are few clear restrictions on anti-competitive practices, and transition periods for developing countries are set to expire. With the threat of trade sanctions behind it, TRIPS poses a formidable barrier to diffusion of critical technologies.
On the other hand, the TRIPS Agreement contains several principles and provisions that are potential motivators of climate-change-related technology transfer. The Agreement explicitly promotes environmental, public health, and development goals and gives Members some discretion to determine when those goals should override the normal TRIPS restrictions. These flexibilities have already been employed to promote affordable essential medicine availability in the developing world.
There are three ways to remedy the problems that TRIPS creates for climate-change-related technology transfer. First, the TRIPS flexibilities just mentioned must be exploited in favor of technology transfer. The Agreement must be viewed as a unified document, guided by concerns of public health and economic development. Developed-country obligations to promote technology transfer must be enforced. And the public health exemptions granted during the Doha Round of WTO negotiations must be construed broadly so as to include some technologies that guard against climate_change.
The second approach is to modify the TRIPS Agreement in order to propel technology transfer. Developing countries could be given increased discretion in adapting IPR laws to their economic, social and environmental needs. Climate-friendly technologies could receive special treatments like those afforded to essential medicines. And pro-competition provisions in TRIPS could be strengthened.
iv
Finally, institutions unrelated to TRIPS could take the lead in encouraging technology transfer. An agreement on information access and benefit sharing could curtail excessive patenting and improve prospects for innovation in both developed and developing countries. A world competition agreement could limit abusive IPR practices and lower prices for developing country consumers. Individual government or intergovernmental funding sources could provide financial incentives for both technological innovation and its diffusion. Technology needs assessments conducted in developing countries could be matched with specific R&D projects. Each of these mechanisms could be set up so as to favour the climate-change-related technology sector.
Concurrent policies will also be needed to ensure that climate-change-related technologies are not only available to developing countries, but also that they are used effectively to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, to adapt to the negative effects of climate_change, and to stimulate domestic innovation. Bilateral and regional free trade agreements should protect the existing TRIPS flexibilities and avoid unduly burdensome TRIPS-plus provisions. Investment in education, training, and management in both developed and developing countries should increase the capacities of developing countries to employ technologies effectively.
Attempts to rebalance the global IPR regime face many of the same political challenges that have doomed past efforts. However, there is heightened awareness of the dangers climate_change poses and an accompanying sense of urgency among politicians, as well as scientists, to address the problem. Climatechange-related technologies can be viewed as public goods that are essential for developing countries to fend off a climate crisis precipitated principally by their industrialized neighbours. Now is the time to call for firm commitments to minimize barriers to climate-change-related technology transfer, including barriers posed by unduly stringent IPR protection. Developed and developing nations share the obligation to find solutions to this problem, both within and outside the context of the TRIPS Agreement.
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to Developing Countries
Matthew Littleton Introduction
Modification of the global intellectual property regime is vital to climate_change mitigation and adaptation efforts in developing countries. Intellectual property rights (IPRs) have significant effects on economic development and the environment, largely through their impact on the availability and deployment of technologies in the developing world. Many of these are climate-change-related technologies that limit greenhouse gas emissions by reducing pollution, increasing efficiency of production and energy usage, or facilitating the capture and storage of carbon. These technologies are sorely needed to support sustainable_development.
Yet, most climate-change-related technologies are concentrated in industrialized countries, and technology transfer to the developing world is not happening fast enough (world_bank, ).
The WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS, or the Agreement) is the most significant global IPR treaty (WTO, d). While there are other forums in which to pursue IPR reform, the TRIPS Agreement has become the focal point for debate on intellectual propertys impact on economic development, technology transfer, and public health. Despite significant attention, the impact of policy discussions within and outside the WTO has been minimal in the case of climate-friendly technology transfer.
This paper surveys the relationship between IPRs and technology transfer, examines the relevant provisions of TRIPS, and discusses prospects for motivating climate-change related technology transfer through exploitation, modification, or circumvention of the Agreement. Part II defines relevant terminology, lists the benefits from and barriers to climate-friendly technology transfer, and summarizes past commitments and failed efforts for IPR reform. Part III consists of a detailed examination of the TRIPS principles and provisions relevant to technology transfer. Part IV discusses the flexibilities inherent in TRIPS, potential modifications of the Agreement, and alternative regimes, both pre-existing and hypothetical, which could be used to promote technology transfer in concert with, or in spite of, TRIPS. Finally, Part V discusses concurrent economic policies necessary to ensure sufficient climate-friendly technology transfer.
The conclusion of this paper is that climate-change-related technology transfer is insufficiently stimulated under the current IPR regime. Industrialized and developing countries share responsibility for overhauling TRIPS and domestic IPR laws to address climate_change, following in the footsteps of recent public health exceptions to IPR regulations. Achievement of this goal will require simultaneous actions within and outside the WTO. Firm, measurable, and verifiable commitments are needed to ensure that environmentally-friendly technology transfer to developing countries moves past rhetoric and into reality.
 This paper was written during an internship with the Policy Integration and Analysis Branch of the Division for sustainable_development, UN desa. Extensive and thoughtful comments were provided by David OConnor and Chantal Line Carpentier.
 Several other multilateral, regional and bilateral intellectual property and free trade agreements exist but will not be addressed here.
  
Background
This Part provides working definitions for the terms technology transfer and environmentally sound technology, outlines the economic and environmental benefits of technology transfer, and discusses potential barriers to technology transfer. It then summarizes the various commitments and actions promoting technology transfer already agreed to by intergovernmental bodies and parties to several international environmental agreements. Two failed attempts at IPR reform favouring technology transfer are also reviewed.
Definitions
Technology Transfer
Technology transfer is problematic to define, since it can happen in many different ways. For the sake of simplicity, however, this paper will adopt the definition of the Intergovernmental Panel on climate_change (IPCC):
the broad set of processes covering the flows of knowledge, experience and equipment amongst different stakeholders such as governments, private sector entities, financial institutions, NGOs and research/educational institutions (IPCC, ).
Technology transfer occurs predominantly in the private marketplace and takes a number of forms. Intra-firm transfers take place between headquarters and subsidiaries of a trans-national corporation, ei-
ther through direct product or process transfer, training, or information sharing. Inter-firm transfers occur through joint ventures between foreign and domestic companies, sales or management contracts that transfer products and personnel, or licensing agreements. Foreign direct investment is a prime source of technology transfer. Finally, unsanctioned technology transfers take place through imitation, which may take the form of simple product inspection, trial-and-error, or complex reverse engineering.
Climate-Change-Related Technologies
A key issue in defining the set of technologies that combat climate_change is whether technologies relating to adaptation should be treated on an equal footing with those relating to mitigation. If so, the range of technologies becomes very broad and includes any technology that helps individuals or firms deal with the negative results of climate_change. This paper will deal mainly with mitigation technologies but highlight areas where adaptation technology transfer could also be encouraged.
Climate-change-related technologies are a subset of so-called environmentally sound technologies (ESTs). For present purposes, the two terms will be used interchangeably. Environmentally sound technologies are defined primarily by their functions:
Environmentally sound technologies protect the environment, are less polluting, use all resources in a more sustainable manner, recycle more of their wastes and products, and handle residual wastes in a more acceptable manner than the technologies for which they were substitutes.... Environmentally sound technologies in the context of pollution are process and product technologies that generate low or no waste, for the prevention of pollution. They also cover end of the pipe technologies for treatment of pollution after it has been generated (united_nations, b).
 This investment might take the form of turn-key packages, where the transnational corporation supplies equipment, infrastructure, and management and production plans; or build-operate-transfer (BOT) agreements, where a private company builds a factory, operates it until the desired return is achieved, and then turns it over to a government or domestic firm (Verhoosel, ).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
Classifying technologies in this manner makes it difficult to define clear boundaries. A major problem is that this definition depends on the temporal and geographic setting. An EST in rural Chad, for example, might not be considered as such in Belgium, and the same technology might not be environmentally sound anywhere ten years later. It is also unclear how ESTs relate to or overlap with environmental goods and services. Finally, some argue that traditional knowledge and technology should be placed on an equal footing with cutting-edge ESTs.
Benefits of Climate-Change-Related Technology Transfer
Environmentally-sound technology transfer to developing countries has both economic and environmental benefits. In many developing countries, domestic industry is far from the technology frontier, and adoption of existing technologies has a higher return than innovation. Technology transfers can also increase domestic industrial competitiveness and have spillover effects through learning-by-doing and learning-by-watching (Juma, ).
Transfers of climate-change-related technologies have environmental benefits as well. In addition to the immediate reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, these technologies represent a positive step toward sustainable consumption and production in the longer term. More difficult to measure, but arguably as important, is the impact they have on changing industry and consumer attitudes toward environmental protection. Finally, these transfers have the potential to promote voluntary standardization of cleaner process and production methods, which could eventually facilitate stricter environmental regulations (Matsushita, ).
Barriers to Technology Transfer
The barriers to EST transfer vary by the product, process, or information concerned, but they can generally be broken down into supply-side and demand-side barriers. On the supply side, the basic problem is that the vast majority of technologies are held by a handful of firms in industrialized countries. Trade and investment policy barriers, limited market size, high transaction costs, and fear of losing control over proprietary technologies can discourage firms in these countries from making their technologies available abroad.
On the demand side, the barriers are just as daunting. Developing country firms often have little to offer financially or otherwise in exchange for new technologies. In addition, low human capital, lack of physical capital, and poor credit access hamper the prospects for EST transfer. Finally, domestic laws and policies can deter demand for ESTs. For example, weak environmental protection standards will eliminate firms incentives to switch to more environmentally-friendly technologies.
One barrier that can affect EST transfer on both the supply and demand sides is the intellectual property regime. One could think of IPRs as affecting technology supply (firms may refuse to transfer without asset protection) or technology demand (one of the domestic policies that can affect technology demand, as mentioned above). There is vigorous debate over whether IPRs, on balance, help or hinder technology transfer.
 This problem is particularly acute in the climate_change context, since [t]he technology to be transferred under the climate_change conventions is, by and large, much less specific [than that, say, under the Montreal Protocol] and is, in fact, virtually boundless (Verhoosel, ).
 This de facto standardization is often followed in time by official standardization (i.e., under the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)).
 Lack of highly skilled workers (i.e., engineers, technicians, and managers) in high-technology sectors is particularly damaging.
  
The empirical evidence is mixed on this question. There is clearly variation by industry, as characteristics like market dynamism, technological sophistication, importance of research and development (R&D), and ease of imitation come into play. The evidence suggests that increased technology transfer can be induced by stronger IPR protection in large economies and economies in transition (Branstetter, ; Hoekman, ).
On the other hand, small developing countries and least-developed countries (LDCs) do not appear to receive such benefits (Blyde and Acea, ; Smith, ). This trend is likely due to reduced incentives for technology transfer on the part of firms due to lesser economies of scale in small countries and poor governance in LDCs. Clearly, strong IPR protection is neither necessary nor sufficient for extensive foreign investment, as the cases of China and Brazil demonstrate. However, there could conceivably be threshold effects, where strong IPR protection in developing countries only promotes technology transfer under certain conditions (Reichman and Maskus, ). While not the focus of this paper, further empirical studies must be conducted in order to determine the IPR regime that would achieve optimal balance between IPR holder protection and diffusion of technology to developing countries.
Past Commitments to Encourage Technology Transfer
The role of technology transfer in development has been recognized for several decades (Menescal, ). The need for improved technology transfer and the recognition of the role IPRs play in the process have been clearly stated by the WTO, various UN agencies, multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), and several nongovernmental organizations. However, this rhetoric has not been followed up sufficiently by concrete action. This section summarizes past commitments in order to emphasize that progress in this area is long overdue. A comprehensive list of these commitments, including relevant language, is provided in Annex A.
Early Commitments
An obligation to share technologies vital to environmental protection and, therefore, public health could be implied from the duty to cooperate under the UN Charter, Articles -. The earliest explicit language referring to the importance of technology transfer for environmental and developmental goals occurred in the Stockholm Declaration of the UN Conference on the Human Environment in  (united_nations ). Two subsequent MEAs, the Montreal Protocol and the Basel Convention, also included language to encourage technology transfer (Montreal Protocol, ; Basel Convention, ).
Rio Conventions
The commitment to EST transfer took on new urgency during the united_nations Conference on Environment and Development in . The UN Framework Convention on climate_change, in particular, emphasized the importance of technology as a route to climate_change mitigation (UNFCCC, ). Subsequent developments in the UNFCCC related to technology transfer include:
 endorsement of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, which requests that developed countries take all practicable steps to promote, facilitate and finance EST access and transfer to developing countries (UNFCCC, a). In particular, the plan envisions an enabling environment ... to stimulate private sector investment in EST transfer (UNFCCC, b);
 However, at least one investigator finds positive associations between strong IPR protection and economic growth for low-income, but not middle-income, countries (Falvey, ).
 The Montreal Protocol is still thought of as a successful model for EST transfer (WTO, ).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
 creation of a technology transfer clearinghouse, termed TT:CLEAR, which inventories ESTs to improve access to knowledge and stimulate transfers;
 Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects under the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC which transfer energy-efficiency and renewable energy technologies;
 a possible commitment under the Bali Road Map to measurable, reportable and verifiable technology transfer and financing to developing countries (UNFCCC, a); and
 passage of numerous decisions targeted towards technology transfer. These decisions typically provide for country-based technology needs assessments as well as the identification and removal of barriers at each stage of the process (UNFCCC, ). These include encouraging Parties to avoid ... [IPR] policies, or lack thereof, restricting transfer of technology (UNFCCC, b). A specialized Expert Group on Technology Transfer has been formed in order to carry out these functions.
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD, ), while espousing consistency with strong IPR protection, has committed financial resources to promote technology transfer and promulgated voluntary guidelines for access and benefit sharing (ABS) in relation to plant varieties (CBD, ). Like the UNFCCC, the CBD has passed decisions emphasizing the creation of enabling environments, improvement in information systems, and completion of needs-based technology assessments (CBD, ).
Building on the CBD work, the International Seed Treaty has established a Multilateral System (MLS) of free ABS of certain plant genetic resources (FAO, ). Under the MLS terms, new materials developed with the resources must be shared or a share of the profits contributed to a fund used to promote conservation and sustainable use of the resources in developing countries. While many key genetic resources are excluded, the MLS could serve as a prototype for an ABS treaty for climate-change-related technologies, as discussed in Part IV (Barton and Maskus, ).
World Intellectual Property Organization
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), a UN agency, sets international norms for IPR rights. While it has traditionally focused on strengthening IPRs, WIPO also has responsibility for facilitating the transfer of technology related to industrial property to the developing countries (united_nations, ).
Unfortunately, WIPO has struggled to carry out this mandate. Instead, attempts to harmonize IPR laws have resulted in coerced conformity with the strictest IPR regulations of industrialized countries. Prospects for a reversal of this trend have improved recently, with the initiation of the so-called WIPO Development Agenda. On the heels of WIPO General Assembly approval (WIPO, ), the Committee on Development and Intellectual Property is currently negotiating action on a number of development-friendly proposals for modification of IPR law (WIPO, ). In addition, WIPO has begun to provide information to developing countries about their range of options for domestic IPR regimes under current international laws.
 However, the vast majority of these projects are concentrated in a few large developing countries; few are in LDCs.
 In fact, decisions on Development and transfer of technologies have been passed at  of the  sessions of the
UNFCCC Conference of the Parties.
 Begun in , this initiative was spearheaded by the Group of Friends of Development, led by Argentina and Brazil
(WIPO, ). A long list of academics, businesspeople, and other civil_society members endorsed this initiative and pressed WIPO to formally embrace the notions of balance, appropriateness, and the stimulation of both competitive and collaborative models of creative activity (Geneva Declaration, ).
 This information is provided through the WIPO Cooperation for Development Programme.
  
world_trade_organization
The world_trade_organization (WTO) is most closely involved with IPRs and technology transfer through the TRIPS Agreement, which is treated extensively in Part III. However, other WTO Agreements also impact EST transfer. The General Agreement on Trade and Services (GATS) regulates trade in technology services and environmental services, as well as labour mobility (WTO, f). Standards promulgated under the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, a) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (WTO, c) shape markets by determining which products may be transferred. The commitments to technology transfer in these agreements are generally best endeavor clauses that lack firm, measurable commitments by either developed or developing countries.
The WTO has assigned responsibility for negotiations on technology transfer to subsidiary bodies. The Ministerial Decision on Trade and Environment created the Committee on Trade and Environment to deal with, inter alia, issues of technology transfer (WTO, g), but the group has been largely impotent. More recently, the Doha Ministerial Declaration prompted the creation of the Working Group on Trade and Technology Transfer (WGTTT) (WTO, c). Despite the specificity of its mandate, the WGTTT has made no progress in developing concrete and practical recommendations (South Centre, ).
The  Doha Declarations had a number of important references to technology transfer and,
as will be discussed in Part IV, may represent a breakthrough in WTO negotiations on IPRs. The Doha Ministerial Declaration underscored that countries are able to take measures acting for the protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or of the environment (WTO, c). However, such measures must be compatible with WTO agreements, and they cannot be arbitrary or disguised restrictions on international trade (WTO, c). This statement might be read narrowly as simply reiterating that countries have flexibilities to take such measures under current WTO law. However, it also suggests that WTO agreements ought to be read with a sympathetic eye toward countries acting in the interest of environmental protection.
The Doha Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health lends credence to that interpretation. It states that the TRIPS Agreement can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of WTO Members right to protect public health (WTO, a). Finally, the Doha Implementation Declaration obligates developed countries to submit detailed reports on the functioning in practice of the incentives provided to their enterprises for the transfer of technology (emphasis added) to LDCs (WTO, b). The texts of the Doha Declarations will be further examined later in the paper.
Failed Negotiations on Technology Transfer
In the s, the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) began to coordinate work on a Draft International Code of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology. The initial focus of negotiations was a rebalancing of technology licensing regulations to be more favourable to developing countries. In particular, the code would have affirmed the right of nations to review technology transfer contracts and object to
 Labor mobility effects technology absorption through its effects on human capital.
 Best endeavor clauses simply require parties to make a good faith effort to achieve the goals at issue, with no clear consequences if the goals are not achieved.
 This progress could help to motivate developing countries to revive the now-floundering Doha talks.
 This directive, echoed in the Doha Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health (WTO, a) was intended to help developed countries fulfill their obligations under TRIPS Article ..
 These negotiations were a subset of a larger project, termed the New International Economic Order, which aimed to realign the global balance of power to allow developing countries to compete economically with the industrial world.
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
restrictive clauses favouring transnational foreign companies (Matsushita, ). After protracted negotiations began to consider the wider framework of competition law, the process collapsed, leaving no affirmative commitments (Ullrich, ).
Another failed attempt to reach common ground on technology transfer was the short-lived InterSessional Ad Hoc Open-Ended Working Group on Technology Transfer and Cooperation, created by the first session of the UN Commission on sustainable_development. The group could not overcome ideological differences and was quickly disbanded (Verhoosel, ). Like the Draft Code of Conduct, this effort was started in a spirit of cooperation and ended in failure. In some respects, it is hard to see what has changed diplomatically since the failure of these two efforts that would increase the likelihood of success for negotiations today (Faundez, ). In any case, it is important to consider this history when discussing politically feasible avenues for strengthening commitments to technology transfer.
The Trips Agreement and Technology Transfer
This Part examines the principles and provisions in TRIPS that affect climate-change-related technol-
ogy transfer. It begins by looking at the Preamble to the Agreement and three TRIPS principles that merit consideration in interpreting the provisions of the Agreement. The discussion then moves to protection of patents, which are the most common type of IPR for ESTs. After a brief treatment of TRIPS protections for trade secrets, measures to promote competition are discussed. Next, the flexibilities allowed for developing countries are addressed. This Part concludes by summarizing the strengths and weaknesses of TRIPS as a motivator of technology transfer. Annex B provides the full texts of the TRIPS Articles discussed here.
Preamble and Principles
Principles play an important role in interpreting substantive provisions of international treaties as they apply to specific cases (united_nations, ). As mentioned previously, the Doha Declarations have emphasized the importance of the TRIPS principles. While ministerial declarations may not carry the same weight as the formal agreement, they do indicate that Members consider the guiding principles to be crucial to TRIPS interpretation.
The Preamble to the TRIPS Agreement contains two references to promotion of technology transfer to developing countries. The Members recognize:
the underlying public policy objectives of national systems for the protection of intellectual property, including developmental and technological objectives and the special needs of the least-developed country Members in respect of maximum flexibility in the domestic implementation of laws and regulations in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base (WTO, d).
 Restrictive business conditions are discussed further in Parts III and IV.
 Both the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism and Member legislatures need to interpret the TRIPS Agreement.
 The precise legal status of Declarations is unclear, and it may be different depending on declaration (Charnovitz, ;
Gathii, ).
  
These statements, in the tradition of the commitments to technology transfer discussed in Part II, help to set the tone for the Agreement. The objectives of the IPR system include promoting development goals, and this can only be done if protected assets are transferred to developing countries. It is also important to note that LDCs are entitled to maximum flexibility in TRIPS implementation.
After the Preamble, there are three principles that are particularly relevant for technology transfer. The first is stated in Article , which deals with exhaustion. Exhaustion is the legal term of art referring to the expiration of patent protection for a specific item (not the expiration of general patent rights) once that item has been sold by or under the authority of the IPR holder. Article  explicitly leaves the determination of exhaustion rules in the hands of individual Members.
There are generally two ways that countries deal with exhaustion. Under universal exhaustion, the patent holder on a particular item cannot limit that items distribution once it has been initially sold by or under authority of the IPR holder. In other words, parallel or gray market importing is permitted, wherein competitors may buy products from the IPR holder and compete directly with that right holder in other countries. Territorial exhaustion, on the other hand, requires that a patent be sold domestically by or under authority of the IPR holder in order to exhaust patent rights. In this case, no parallel importing can occur without the patent owners consent. Because parallel importing cuts into IPR holders profits, patent owners generally favour territorial exhaustion. On the other side, universal exhaustion may be in the best interest of developing country consumers.
Depending upon the incentives different exhaustion systems create, they may aid or hinder technology transfer to developing countries. Parallel imports increase competition, which lowers prices and makes technologies more accessible in developing countries. However, by the same reasoning, they limit IPR holder profits and may discourage innovation and thus, ultimately, technology transfer. A novel possibility, which has been suggested as a compromise for small developing countries, is regional exhaustion (Maskus, ). Here, parallel importing would only be allowed when the product was sold within the region at issue. By creating geographic buffer zones for patent protection, yet at the same time allowing for parallel importing, regional exhaustion might properly balance technology transfer with incentives to innovate.
Article , entitled Objectives, presents the clearest statement in TRIPS regarding the importance of technology transfer:
The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations (WTO, d).
This Article is treated only as a goal without specific obligations imposed. However, its importance as a guiding principle of the agreement was supported by both the Doha Ministerial Declaration and the Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health (WTO, c; a).
Finally, Article  establishes the rights of Members to protect public health and the public interest. The TRIPS Agreement specifically recognizes the potential for abuse of IPRs and states unambiguously that Members have a right to defend themselves against such abuses.
 Licensees are considered to be under the authority of the IPR holder with respect to the protected asset. Subsidiaries and affiliated firms are also considered to be authorized.
 This interpretation was confirmed in the Doha Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health (WTO, a).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
Members may ... adopt [TRIPS-consistent] measures necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance to their socio-economic and technological development.... Appropriate [TRIPS-consistent] measures ... may be needed to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by right holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology (WTO, d).
The potential for corrective action remains constrained by the requirement that such measures be consistent with the provisions (rather than the principles) of TRIPS. Thus, while providing some ammunition for Members who wish to oppose IPR abuses, Article  could be read as subordinating the TRIPS principles to the subsequent provisions. However, the Doha Ministerial Declaration and the Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health singled out Article  for consideration in its own right (WTO, c; a).
Patent Protection
The TRIPS Agreement dictates the length, breadth and exclusive rights awarded under patents, while carving out exceptions to IPR protection under limited circumstances. Patents are typically awarded for twenty-year periods, with shorter terms granted for particular categories of patents. Right holders can prevent unauthorized third-party use or initial sale of the protected matter. They may also assign, transfer, or license their rights to other parties (WTO, d).
Coverage
TRIPS provides coverage for a wide range of inventions, irrespective of where they are invented or initially patented. In addition, any inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology are eligible for patent protection (WTO, d). This could make it difficult to single out ESTs for patent exceptions. However, certain pharmaceutical products have been exempted, as discussed previously, and the WTO Appellate Body has interpreted this non-discrimination provision leniently (Abbott, ), so this language may not pose a problem for countries wishing to isolate ESTs for special treatment.
Article  enumerates a few exceptions to this otherwise broad coverage. Most notably, Members may refuse to patent technologies if necessary to protect ordre public or morality (WTO, d). Such exemptions may be required to protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment (WTO, d). It is certainly possible that ESTs could be construed to fall under this exception, although this extension might be difficult politically. The other two exceptions relate to medical techniques and plants and animals.
One ambiguity in TRIPS that might limit patent coverage is that standard patentability criteria are not defined. Typically, such criteria include novelty of the invention, the inventive step requirement, and industrial applicability. Without uniform criteria, Members may be able to exclude some inventions from patentability based on particularly stringent patentability criteria (ITCSD, ). However, fine-tuning patent rules to this end would be difficult in practice, and negotiations are now underway at WIPO on a Substantive Patent Law Treaty that would eliminate this loophole (WIPO, a).
 Abbott cites a WTO Appellate Body Report (WTO Appellate Body, ) which found that the plain language of TRIPS, as interpreted under Article  of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (united_nations, ), indicated a right to compulsory licensing in certain cases.
  
Unauthorized Use Exceptions
Once a patent is awarded, TRIPS allows for unauthorized use by third parties (typically in the form of compulsory licensing) under certain conditions. There are three categories of such exceptions. The first, stated in Article , grants exemptions provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties (WTO, d). It is unlikely that these criteria would be met in the case of an EST, unless the legitimate interests of third parties in mitigating or adapting to climate_change are given tremendous weight.
The second category of unauthorized use exceptions is the security exception. TRIPS may not prevent a Member from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests or prevent a Member from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the united_nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security (WTO, d). Barring an imminent global climate catastrophe, it is difficult to imagine these conditions being met by EST patents.
More promising are exceptions granted on a case-by-case basis under Article . Several criteria must be met to qualify as an Article  exception. First, reasonable efforts must be made to gain appropriate authorization from the IPR holder. This negotiation requirement is waived when the Member determines (using its own judgment) that a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency demand unauthorized use without delay (WTO, d). The IPR holder must still be notified immediately.
Discussions on public health exceptions have echoed countries flexibility to determine what constitute exigent circumstances, opening the door to potential use of these exceptions in the climate_change context. The negotiation prerequisite may also be waived in cases where a government or its contractor aims to engage in non-commercial use of the patent (e.g., use for national defence purposes). It should be emphasized that a finding of exigency is only required to waive the negotiation requirement for an Article  exception; compulsory licensing may still be permissible in the absence of exigent circumstances.
Sales of protected assets must occur predominantly in the domestic market for the firm granted the exception. This presents a number of problems for technology transfer. Exceptions must be sought by firms in multiple developing countries in order to diffuse technologies rapidly. In addition, economies of scale may foreclose domestic distribution as a viable economic activity.
In recognition of this problem, the domestic market requirement has been temporarily waived for public health emergencies in countries with insufficient domestic production (WTO, ). The WTO has adopted an amendment to Article  that would create a permanent waiver of the domestic market restriction for certain pharmaceuticals and open up the possibility of regional markets for these products (WTO, a). Again, this waiver could theoretically be extended to ESTs, particularly in light of the Declaration on TRIPS & Public Healths pronouncement that [e]ach Member has the right to grant compulsory
 Each Member has the right to determine what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, it being understood that public health crises ... can represent a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency (WTO, a).
 This problem would not be applicable in the case of large developing country economies like China or Brazil, however.
 Proposed Article bis and its accompanying Annex are not yet in force, since two-thirds of WTO Members have not ratified the amendments. It is likely that the number of ratifications will increase as the developing-country transition periods, discussed in Section E below, near their expiration date.
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
licences and the freedom to determine the grounds upon which such licences are granted (WTO, a). On the other hand, such a concession would meet with strong resistance from IPR holders and several industrialized countries.
The requirements for good faith negotiation and predominantly domestic production are both waived in cases where anti-competitive IPR abuse has been determined by a judicial or administrative body. This provision is discussed in Section D below.
Article  exceptions are limited in scope and duration to the original motivation for the exception. Patent licensing is non-exclusive and cannot be reassigned without the right holders consent. Finally, and crucially, the right holder must be compensated, with the amount subject to domestic judicial review. For many developing country firms, even a small level of compensation may doom efforts to market protected ESTs.
Trade Secret Protection
Protection for undisclosed information, or trade secrets, is required under Article . Health and safety data are particularly relevant for ESTs, as they often need to be submitted for government approval. However, governments may not circulate these data except where necessary to protect the public or where steps are taken to ensure that the data are protected against unfair commercial use (WTO, d). Even if patents are transferred, the absence of this data may make it practically difficult to use them, presenting a further obstacle for many developing countries (Verma, ; Heald, ). This topic is explored further in Part IV.
Pro-Competition Measures
Competition laws promote consumer welfare and a healthy commercial life by restricting monopolistic and abusive firm behaviours. There is no global competition pact analogous to TRIPS, but the Agreement does contain several competition-related provisions.
As mentioned in Section A, Article  authorizes Members to take measures to prevent abuse of IPRs and promote trade and technology transfer. The scope of this provision could be interpreted in vastly different ways. For one thing, unreasonable practices are in the eye of the beholder. Nor is it clear what measures are appropriate. Finally, Article  does not address other restrictions on technology transfer that are not anti-competitive. However, this Article still has the potential to motivate technology transfer in some cases, if developing countries are able to enforce it.
Article  allows Members to designate particular licensing practices as anti-competitive and adopt TRIPS-consistent policies to prevent or control these practices (WTO, d). Three practices are listed as examples: exclusive grant-back conditions, where rights to new inventions stemming from the patented asset must be turned over to the initial IPR holder; conditions preventing challenges to patent validity; and coercive package licensing, where licensees must purchase the rights to use several patents at once.
While Article  may be helpful in controlling certain anti-competitive practices, its practical importance is limited for technology transfer. Most importantly, it only addresses licensing practices and thus fails to control a major part of technology transfer transactions (joint ventures, subcontracting, patent
 [R]efusal to deal to a competitor on commercial terms, thus adversely affecting the international transfer of technology, is an abuse under Article . which Members may address in their legislation (Hutchison, ).
 Other potentially anti-competitive licensing practices include exclusive dealing, tying, and resale price maintenance.
  
assignment to another party, etc.) (Ullrich, ). Article  focuses squarely on practices that hurt competition, not on those that harm the environment or hamper economic development. Any overlap is incidental.
The three example conditions listed in Article  may constitute an exhaustive list in a practical sense. The potential for anti-competitive practices is difficult to determine ex ante, meaning that Member complaints would have to be brought post facto in the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism. It is hard to imagine many developing countries willing to invest significant resources in this process when the charges are not easy to define, and the lack of WTO disputes over Article  supports this contention.
The final competition-related provision in TRIPS occurs in the context of Article  unauthorized use exceptions, discussed in Section B. Compulsory licensing may proceed without efforts at negotiation and without regard to the location of the predominant market when licensing is permitted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be anti-competitive (WTO, d). The requirements for making the determination of anti-competitiveness are unclear. Both the text and subsequent practice are ambiguous about whether such a license is temporary or indefinite, but a reasonable reading is that compulsory licensing could persist at least until the anti-competitive practice has ceased.
In general, anti-competitive provisions in the TRIPS Agreement are vague and limited. Both Article  and Article  require that any remedies must be consistent with the remainder of the TRIPS Agreement. Consistency could be read so broadly as to render these Articles practically useless (Ullrich, ). Leaving these issues up to domestic law would appear to grant developing countries more freedom to regulate, but political realities make it difficult for most developing countries to unilaterally interpret the consistency requirement narrowly. Seeking a source for technology transfer, most developing countries cannot afford to be selective and may find themselves forced to accept anti-competitive terms.
Flexibilities for Developing Countries
Developing country Members are allowed additional time to comply with the TRIPS Agreement after joining the WTO. They are given five years before the provisions come into effect (as opposed to one year for other Members) and an additional five years with respect to technologies that were not patentable under domestic laws prior to the date that TRIPS applied to that Member. Least-developed countries are given ten years to comply with all provisions of the Agreement other than national treatment and most-favoured nation principles. These transition periods have been further eased in the context of public health, with a series of waivers culminating in a developing country extension of compliance with respect to essential medicines until .
 In TRIPS negotiations, the competition test favored by industrialized countries during the negotiations of the Draft Code of Conduct, discussed in Part II, won out over the development test preferred by developing countries.
 The list may actually make it easier for challenged IPR holders to deny wrongdoing, as they can point out that none of the three stated conditions was violated. It may also stunt negotiations of stronger competition laws. [T]he very existence of Article () and Article  may serve as an excuse for firms not to re-enter into new discussions (Ullrich, ).
 The national treatment principle requires that foreign firms receive the same treatment as domestic firms, and the most-favored nation principle requires that firms from one country receive the same treatment as firms from another country, ceteris paribus.
 A proposed permanent waiver on this front has been adopted by the WTO General Council but not ratified by many countries (WTO, a). This may be due to the fact that  is sufficiently far in the future to make the political risks of ratification not worthwhile.
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
Developed country Members are required to provide technical and financial cooperation for TRIPS implementation to all developing countries and incentives to enterprises and institutions in their territories to promote technology transfer to least-developed countries (WTO, d). Cooperative measures include, inter alia, assistance in the preparation of laws and regulations on the protection and enforcement of [IPRs] as well as on the prevention of their abuse (WTO, d). The level of cooperation required is not defined, nor are rubrics provided for evaluating compliance with this provision by developed countries.
The Doha Declaration on TRIPS & Public Health reiterated developed countries obligation to provide incentives to domestic businesses and institutions to promote technology transfer to LDCs (WTO, a). The Doha Implementation Declaration mandated annual reports to the WTO from developed countries summarizing their efforts in this area (WTO, b). While these reports have been submitted since , the initiatives described tend to be small, focused on specific projects, and not specific to the needs of the [LDCs] (Barton and Maskus, ). There is considerable room for expansion of these reports and their importance, as will be discussed in Part IV.
Evaluation of the TRIPS Agreement as a Motivator of Technology Transfer
Strengths
TRIPS provides a comprehensive, enforceable private IPR regime that reduces uncertainty about IPR protection and may encourage innovation of new ESTs and their transfer to some developing countries. The Agreement also promotes domestic innovation in developing countries and provides some protection for traditional knowledge, both of which can improve environmental outcomes in the absence of technology transfer. The national treatment and most-favoured nation principles of TRIPS encourage free trade, which can promote technology transfer. The Agreement also includes a number of flexibilities, described above and elaborated in Part IV, which favour developing countries.
Weaknesses
On the whole, TRIPS is more concerned with how developing countries can provide an appropriate environment for technology transfer than how developed countries can actively propel technology transfer. In other words, TRIPS favours pull factors over push factors (Hutchison, ). The demands on developed countries are vaguely worded, subject to numerous loopholes, and largely unenforceable.
TRIPS, unlike most WTO Agreements, is legislatively proscriptive, meaning that countries must enact affirmative policies to implement the Agreement (rather than simply repealing tariffs or other trade barriers). Given that developed countries have expertise on IPR legislation, and developing countries may want guidance, there is a strong possibility of foreign pressure on developing countries to strengthen IPR laws beyond the TRIPS requirements. So-called TRIPS-plus requirements are discussed more extensively in Part V.
For reasons outlined in Section B, firms in the poorest countries may not be able to take advantage of compulsory licensing exceptions. Even if granted licenses, domestic companies may not be able to afford to compensate IPR holders. Temporal and geographic limitations on licenses can prevent firms from recouping their investment. And competition from a more sophisticated foreign competitor with economies of scale
 These reports are available at  (search for Report on the Implementation of Article . of the TRIPS Agreement).
  
may drive licensees out of business. While proposed amendments to TRIPS would lessen these problems for essential medicines, EST seekers may not be able to take advantage of the amendments in their current form.
Finally, developing countries face several challenges when contesting violations of the pro-technology transfer obligations of TRIPS. In addition to political difficulties, the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism (DSM) requires large financial and human capital expenditures. While the DSM may be more favourable to developing countries than bilateral dispute resolution bodies, it does not go far enough in levelling the playing field.
Options for Dealing With TRIPS Deficiencies
There are three ways in which insufficient technology transfer under the TRIPS Agreement can be addressed. First, the existing flexibilities within TRIPS can be exploited. Second, developing countries can push for formal modification of TRIPS. Third, other instruments can be brought to bear on the problem. These outside regimes could work in conjunction with TRIPS, in opposition to the Agreement, or in a completely separate arena. It is not clear which of these strategies is most promising, meaning that each should be encouraged in its own right and pursued by a combination of governmental, NGO and private actors. This Part concludes by providing a rationale for customizing domestic IPR laws to specific developing country circumstances.
Exploiting Existing Flexibilities within the TRIPS Agreement
Part III pointed out a number of ways in which TRIPS could allow both developing and developed countries to encourage technology transfer. Working within TRIPS is likely to be easier than modifying or abandoning the Agreement, so it would behove developing countries to test its limits.
First, developing countries should demand accountability from developed countries regarding their incentive and reporting obligations vis-a-vis technology transfer. These obligations must be met in spite of the recent deadlock in Doha Round negotiations. A united group of developing country Members could put significant pressure on the WTO to monitor the fulfilment of these obligations. Nongovernmental organizations with access to reports could pursue a policy of naming and shaming. While results are not assured, heightened awareness of unmet obligations by developed nations should at least place developing countries in a stronger negotiating position.
Second, developing countries should stress the stated goals of TRIPS regarding technology transfer. Given these guiding principles, actions to exempt certain technologies from patentability and restrict anticompetitive measures ought to be viewed as TRIPS-consistent. The provisions discussed in Part III should be read as a unified document, not in isolation (WTO, ). The manner in which provisions are interpreted should be consistent with the principles, and not only the other way around.
Third, EST transfer should be connected in the minds of Members with recent allowances made for pharmaceutical products. The Doha Declarations were a watershed in WTO negotiations concerning the importance of outside factors in interpreting TRIPS. While EST transfer may not currently address a public health emergency, the anticipated consequences of climate_change could plausibly create an urgent situation that would justify compulsory licensing exceptions under Article . The issues are undoubtedly more
 An impending lawsuit to be filed by the State of California and others against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regarding regulation of greenhouse gases will make the argument that public health concerns justify immediate actions on climate_change (Brown, Jr., ).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
complex in the EST context than for essential medicines, given the murky definition of terms discussed in Part II and the less visible nature of the problem. However, developing countries might well choose to advocate broadening the conception of current licensing exceptions beyond essential medicines.
Potential Modifications of the TRIPS Agreement
[T]o benefit from [TRIPS] flexibilities requires a degree of legal and regulatory expertise that may exceed the capacity of many countries for the foreseeable future (Reichman and Maskus, ). If efforts to work within the existing Agreement fail, there are a number of tacks that WTO negotiators could take to make TRIPS more EST transfer-friendly.
Climate-change-related technology exceptions could be sought along the lines of essential medicines exceptions, discussed previously. Perhaps a new Declaration on TRIPS and climate_change could clarify existing flexibilities and offer new incentives for EST transfer. In particular, exceptions for small island LDCs could be pursued, given that trade and investment flows are not as responsive to IPR protections in these countries and the dangers posed by climate_change are particularly acute. As suggested earlier, such a modification would have to take into account the uncertain and ever-changing nature of the climate_change problem and address adaptation as well as mitigation technologies.
Strong, integrated pro-competition provisions would also promote technology transfer. The class of restrictive business conditions in Article  could be expanded, and compulsory licensing under Article  could be facilitated for ESTs. [M]any developing countries take the view that compulsory licensing should be required if the public interest is injured due to an abuse of patent monopoly (Matsushita, ). With their growing clout in the WTO, these Members could redefine abuse in this context to extend beyond licensing restrictions and into other IPR-related practices which present barriers to EST transfer (Hutchison, forthcoming). Developed countries could also take the lead here by mandating compulsory licensing for climate-change-related IPRs held domestically, a strategy that has yet to be tried. Pro-competition provisions would, however, meet with strong resistance from IPR holders who exert great influence with several WTO Members.
Procedures for challenging patents could be made less cumbersome in order to lower costs for developing countries (Stiglitz, ). Creation of a straightforward pre-patent opposition process could further reduce costs and prevent abuses. On a related note, patentability criteria should be strengthened to minimize fraudulent and frivolous patents.
Licensing guidelines might be promulgated which provide for fixed, moderate fees for EST patent licensees. In cases where the protected asset clearly has environmental benefits, the IPR holder would bear the burden of proof in demonstrating why compulsory licensing would be unwarranted (Scherer, ; Stiglitz, ). A tiered application fee system for IPRs could waive payments for patent holders who authorize ESTs for transfer to developing countries (Barton and Maskus, ; Maskus, ). These proposals would constitute a major shift in the WTOs approach to IPRs, however, and would require protracted negotiations.
 On the other hand, too much fear of increased competition might hinder technology transfer on balance.
 For example, the united_states could mandate that EST patent holders license their technologies abroad under specified terms. Admittedly, this proposal would be quite difficult politically.
  
If full licenses are unrealistic, temporary licenses could be granted along the lines of plant breeders exemptions and farmers privileges under the International Seed Treaty. For example, IPR holders could provide developing country users with technologies for a limited period, with the expectation of receiving payment once the technology was tropicalized, i.e., adapted to local requirements. This proposal would work with climate-change adaptation technologies as well as mitigation technologies.
As mentioned earlier, evaluation mechanisms for progress on technology transfer could stand to be strengthened. Such a mechanism might be TRIPS-based or involve multiple WTO Agreements (Maskus, ). The problem with current evaluation is twofold: non-transparency and lack of a viable enforcement mechanism. In the absence of formal enforcement, naming and shaming would at least provide some measure of accountability.
There are, of course, great political difficulties involved in modifying any WTO Agreement. Technology transfer often disadvantages IPR holders, who have great political influence in developed countries. And despite the recognition of development goals, equal treatment of nations is at the heart of TRIPS. However, equal treatment of technologies may not be as crucial, as evidenced by the progress on essential medicines. Global environmental progress is certainly not a zero-sum game, and the best hope for any WTO Member interested in TRIPS modification in this area will be to stress common interests in advancing environmental aims.
Regimes Outside of TRIPS Related to Intellectual Property Rights
There are a number of options for promoting technology transfer through IPRs outside of the TRIPS context. These include an open-source approach to technological information, a formal global competition agreement, fiscal subsidies or international funding mechanisms, and an organization devoted to matching technology needs to existing and prospective innovations.
Open-source Information Access
Access to information is a key barrier to technology transfer, even when licensing or other options are available. The seriousness of this problem is growing, as increasing intellectual property privatization is stunting even basic research. Joint university ventures, which are often conducted largely with public funding, present fundamental problems of fairness when the fruits of research are protected. Compounding the problem, patentability criteria are becoming increasingly lax in industrialized countries, opening the door for overpatenting.
One solution to this problem would be an information access agreement. As far back as , there have been calls for an information clearinghouse of ESTs (united_nations, b). However, these efforts
 Breeders exemptions allow breeders of plant varieties to use protected plant varieties for experimental purposes to create new varieties. Farmers privileges permit farmers to save and re-use protected seed varieties for subsequent harvests.
 One avenue for compromise might be to stress and strengthen other incentives for innovation in lieu of IPR rights. These include reputation advantage and innovation lag (the first mover has a head start).
 [G]overnments are increasingly imposing restraints on the use of knowledge generated by public research or through public funding.... This protection is expanding beyond products and applied technologies to basic ideas, procedures, and materials.... Increasing privatization of basic data by entities in the developed countries threatens to retard the diffusion of such knowledge into science and competition in developing countries (Barton and Maskus, ). This basic scientific research is the bedrock for most innovation at the technology frontier (David, ).
 For example, the united_states utility standard for patents has been weakened in recent years, as has the EUs standard for patenting research databases (Barton and Maskus, ).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
tend to be too supply-oriented and lack needs-based assessments to match appropriate technologies to different circumstances.
The International Seed Treatys Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-Sharing, discussed in Part II, could be a model for an agreement on access to ESTs (Halewood and Nnadozie, ). Along these lines, John Barton and Keith Maskus have proposed a formal Agreement on Access to Basic Science and Technology (ABST) to ensure widespread access to essential scientific results and to enhance the transfer of basic technological information to the developing world at reasonable cost (Barton and Maskus, ). As a WTO Agreement, the ABST could take advantage of the DSM and other institutional structures.
Such an agreement would encounter some difficulties. Drawing a satisfactory line between basic and applied research would be a challenge. In order to favour ESTs, the definition of basic could be construed more broadly in the context of global public goods (Barton and Maskus, ). In borderline cases, there would need to be guidelines about which research results were confidential and which were made public.
Another option for promoting information access related to EST patents is a private voluntary system. Such an effort is currently underway, led by the World Business Council for sustainable_development and IBM Corporation. The Eco-Patent Commons, a database of freely available EST patents, operates on the principle of share one, take one. While the initiative has promise, there has been little activity after six months. Without a more coercive approach, it is difficult to see a useful system of information access emerging from a voluntary effort. Naming and shaming has limitations, particularly when no one is paying much attention.
World Competition Agreement
As discussed in Part III, the lack of a unified pro-competition agreement may be hindering EST transfer to developing countries. A competitive marketplace can be thought of as a type of public good. This good cannot be provided adequately through a piecemeal process, particularly when the source of pro-competition rules is an agreement designed to protect intellectual property rights (Ullrich, ; Guasch and Rajapatirana, ). IPRs are fundamentally opposed to free competition; they can only be justified in light of the dynamic incentives for innovation which they create. And, as discussed above, the current TRIPS provisions focus on post-grant intervention (after patents are awarded) and fail to address the competition problem at its formative stages by preventing opportunistic behaviour of IPR-holding firms (Biadgleng, ).
The details of a comprehensive competition agreement are beyond the scope of this paper, but possible provisions include outlawing consensus wrongs like price-fixing, bid-rigging, and boycotts (Ullrich, ); agreement by developed countries to prosecute competition cases against domestic firms engaging in abusive practices abroad (Maskus, ); and pre-emption clauses which supersede regional and bilateral trade and investment agreements (Biadgleng, ).
A potential world competition agreement would face a number of challenges. First, domestic competition laws of different countries are currently very dissimilar. Many industrialized countries have
 Only  patents were available as of August , ,  of which were issued by IBM. A complete list is available at wbcsd.org/.
 A preemption clause would make other trade and competition agreements subservient to the provisions of the world competition agreement.
  
extremely complex competition law regimes that would be difficult to mesh. Prior to serious negotiations, some informal headway must be made toward harmonization of these laws, at least on the theoretical level. Second, it would be politically difficult to engage in extraterritorial enforcement of anti-competition laws which harmed domestic firms. Finally, a balance would need to be struck between promoting competition and providing a degree of IPR protection adequate to recoup investments (Ullrich, ).
Just as TRIPS may be a poor forum for reforming competition laws, a global competition agreement might not be appropriate to address many IPR issues. The Doha Ministerial Declaration has already suggested that negotiations begin on a world competition pact, but little progress has been made (WTO, c).
Funding Mechanisms
Governments can subsidize technology development and transfer, either individually or in concert. Individual countries subsidies, tax breaks and other fiscal incentives are the most straightforward method of funding. They can focus private firms on particular sectors like climate-change-related technologies by reducing the risk level of R&D projects (Stiglitz, ). However, individual governments are limited in their financial impact, and such expenditures are subject to a free rider problem on the global level (Barton and Maskus, ).
A coordinated international funding mechanism would help solve the free rider problem. Possibilities for such a fund include a trust fund encouraging R&D directly in developing countries (Roffe, ), a patent acquisition fund to buy IPRs from patent holders (united_nations, ), and a fund which covered the difference in cost between the EST and the business-as-usual technology for developing country firms.
Another possibility is an advance purchase commitment, also known as a guaranteed purchase fund. Under this scheme, an organization, government, or consortium promises to buy a certain amount of a product from the innovator. Such a system has been used to stimulate R&D for orphan drugs and for other public health initiatives. A guaranteed purchase fund would improve incentives to innovate, but it would not address the other problems with IPRs.
A prize system, on the other hand, would eliminate many of these problems. A contest is pre-announced and a one-time prize is awarded to the successful innovator in exchange for the IPR. Prizes help to reduce wasteful spending on marketing and lower incentives for anti-competitive behaviours (Stiglitz, ). On the other hand, prizes, like guaranteed purchase funds, work best with a specific objective. Once again, essential medicines are much more amenable to this requirement (find a cure for breast cancer) than are climate-change-related technologies (find a viable alternative to fossil fuel consumption).
Technology-Matching Organization
A new public institution could be created, or an existing one given the responsibility, for actively matching specific EST needs of developing countries to innovators in developed countries. This organization could also be responsible for monitoring patent protection on ESTs, alerting key players in developing countries when patents are about to expire, and brokering licensing agreements. This matching, which could be done at the target project level rather than the early-stage R&D level, has the potential to create value for the in-
 This system is used by the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol.
 Examples include the Orphan Drug Act in the united_states, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI), and the AIDS vaccine fund in the U.S. State of California.
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
novator, through diminished demand uncertainty, and for the buyer, through lowered prices. However, a pilot project run by UNDP along these lines failed in the late s (Verhoosel, ).
Customizing Domestic Intellectual Property Laws
For developing countries, tailoring IPR protections to national circumstances is a difficult balancing act. As discussed in Part II, the effects of IPR laws on technology transfer vary with country characteristics. Thus, the one size fits all model of TRIPS is insufficient to deal with the diverse economic needs of developing countries and the vastly different levels of EST technology present in different countries (Hoekman, ; Chang, ). Flexibility is needed to allow countries to set their own IPR practices, within reasonable boundaries, to meet their economic, social and environmental needs.
The principle of common but differentiated country responsibilities is well-established in international law (united_nations, a). When judging IPR regimes, it is important to take account of the historical context of IPRs in development. Modern industrialized countries routinely violated IPRs of foreign citizens and firms well into the twentieth century (Chang, ). In this context, asking developing countries to adhere to a stricter standard at this point in time seems unreasonable. Add to this the fact that developed countries are responsible for the majority of the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and the case for differential treatment for ESTs looks even stronger. Developing countries should be permitted to consider this historical backdrop when tailoring domestic IPR laws.
Concurrent Policies Promoting Climate-Change-Related Technology Transfer
Given the broad definition of technology transfer stated in Part II, it comes as no surprise that IPR laws are only one of a host of legal, institutional and other factors that affect transfer of climate-change-related technologies. Concurrent trade and economic policies will be needed to complement TRIPS and other intellectual property agreements in order to promote EST transfer. At the national, regional and global levels, effective technology transfer must come from a holistic approach. Rather than a uniform policy strategy, a heterogeneous solution that integrates technology transfer concerns at all levels of public policy is required (WTO, ).
Trade Policies
The united_states and the european_union, among others, are steadily strengthening IPRs and eroding the TRIPS flexibilities by including more stringent TRIPS-plus provisions in regional and bilateral free trade agreements (world_bank, ). Examples include:
 extended patent protection periods;
 broadened patentability coverage (e.g., life forms);
 evergreening, or patent re-registration for different uses of a single innovation;
 regulatory linkage, which effectively prevents licensees from entering the market;
 India has proposed a project-based approach similar to that described here (WTO, b).
 The IPCC has termed this the National System of Innovation approach (IPCC, ).
 An example of regulatory linkage would be a requirement that safety product manufacturers submit extensive test data before they can sell products, even if such data has already been submitted by the IPR holder. Without gaining access to the protected data through further negotiations with the IPR holder, the licensee will not be able to enter the market.
  
 enhanced data exclusivity provisions (e.g., clinical trial data);
 treatment of IPRs as investments, which opens them up to extensive investor protections;
 greater deference allowed to individual private contracts in addressing access and benefit sharing; and
 creation of dispute settlement mechanisms less receptive to developing countries than that of the WTO.
The bulk of the responsibility here lies with developed country trade negotiators and the political leaders they serve. Developed countries could adopt a Domestic Doha Agenda agreeing not to undermine developing country rights under TRIPS, but this seems politically unrealistic (Fink, ). In any case, developing countries are advised to resist these provisions and try to maintain TRIPS as a ceiling on IPR protections (Barton, ).
Conversely, regional and bilateral trade agreements offer an opportunity to encourage provisions that go beyond TRIPS in encouraging technology transfer. These TRIPS-minus provisions might include reduction of tariff barriers for ESTs, prohibition of certain anti-competitive contractual provisions, and several other potential TRIPS modifications suggested in Part IV. Developing countries should also be allowed and empowered to play a greater role in other trade-related negotiations (e.g., those involving technical standards) (Maskus, ).
Other Policies
Technology absorption is at least as important as technology transfer. Once technologies are transferred,
they must be adopted and used effectively. The most important element of technology absorption is human capital (Hoekman, ). Particularly with cutting-edge technologies, well-educated engineers and managers are essential. In addition to making improvements in domestic education, developing countries should offer incentives to students to guard against a brain drain. Developed countries, for their part, should subsidize offshore training, conference attendance and, in some cases, temporary employment for graduates from developing countries. Grant proposals for EST research involving developing country teams should also receive special consideration (Maskus, ).
Working within the boundaries of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) (WTO, e) and other WTO Agreements, developed country governments can provide incentives for R&D and technology diffusion in the climate_change context. For example, equal or better tax treatment could be awarded to R&D performed in developing countries (Maskus, ). Tax credits could also be awarded to companies that transfer ESTs or make them publicly available. Developing country governments can reduce
 Technologies can be separated into two general categories: hard technologies, which are not necessarily physical objects but can be codified in some way using detailed instructions; and soft technologies, which consist of know-how or training. Both are ultimately necessary to successful technology deployment, but either one could be the binding constraint in a given circumstance.
This is an empirical question whose answer cannot be generalized, but it is worthwhile to point out that proponents of strong IPRs typically argue that soft technologies are the binding constraint. The implication, of course, is that stricter IPR protections for hard technologies are not slowing technology transfer. It would also suggest, though, that transfer agreements ought to include provisions for training and management exchange to increase absorption.
 One advantage of traditional knowledge and technology, on the other hand, is that sufficient human capital is probably already in place in developing countries.
 However, this proposal may run into problems with the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (WTO, b; Verhoosel, ).
The TRIPS Agreement and Transfer of Climate-Change-Related Technologies to DCs 
entry barriers in supplier industries to make FDI and R&D more attractive to multinational corporations (Maskus, ). They can also pass stricter environmental legislation in order to increase the market for ESTs. Infrastructure improvements can improve domestic capacity for EST utilization. Finally, unprotected pre-commercial ESTs could be incubated with government funds in exchange for public access for domestic firms (Ockwell, ).
Conclusion
The need for IPR protection as a stimulant for innovation needs to be properly balanced with the growing need for climate-change-related technology transfer to developing countries. Despite the developmentfriendly language in the TRIPS Agreement, economic and sustainable_development goals of developing countries are currently subsidiary to IPR privileges. The TRIPS Agreement should not focus solely on protecting IPRs; its goal is to create an IPR regime that provides incentives for technological innovation and its global diffusion and usage. The climate_change problem may soon approach the status of a global emergency, in the vein of current epidemics, and IPR protections cannot be allowed unduly to hinder EST transfer.
At the heart of this issue is a fundamental question: to what extent is knowledge a public good? The recent trend has been to privatize many forms of knowledge, which has created an anti-commons that stifles both innovation and technology diffusion (Barton and Maskus, ; Heller, ; Boyle, ). Intellectual property rights are not primarily a means to ensure competition, as many IPR holders argue. Rather, IPRs are a barrier to free competition that must be tolerated only to the extent necessary to encourage technological progress (Ullrich, ). To emphasize this view and reverse the privatization of knowledge, open-source models must be used and public innovation encouraged through financial and policy incentives. Technologies that supply a global public good, as climate-change -related technologies do, merit special treatment under TRIPS and other trade agreements. In this regard, further examination of the similarities and differences between the cases of essential medicines and ESTs is warranted.
This debate must also be viewed as an ethical one. Intellectual property rights are held overwhelmingly by firms in countries which are the most responsible for the climate_change problem, yet those who will suffer most from climate_change are located in developing countries that lack access to ESTs. In addition to the economic and environmental reasons for encouraging EST transfer, there is a moral imperative to do so (Haugen, ; Chapman, ).
Many avenues for moving toward an IPR regime favouring EST transfer have been discussed in this paper. None of them alone will be up to the task. Developing countries must use TRIPS to their full advantage, amendments of TRIPS must be pursued, and other methods of encouraging technology transfer must be generated.
Intellectual property rights are not the only barrier to technology transfer, and they may not be the binding constraint in many cases. To make this determination, further empirical analysis of the role they play in EST transfer is needed (Musungu, ). Setting strict rules for IPRs without knowing more about how they affect technology transfer would be counterproductive (Reichman and Maskus, ).
At the present moment, there are reasons to be concerned about IPR effects on technology transfer. For instance, TRIPS-plus agreements continue to proliferate, undermining some of the flexibilities in the initial Agreement. Still, there are also reasons for optimism. The developing worldis increasing economic and political influence is sure to change negotiation dynamics in the WTO. A \0xECsecond enclosure movement threatens to overrun key scientific research and technologies (Boyle, 2003),52 but the profound threat posed by climate change is increasingly being recognized and addressed by the policy makers. The TRIPS Agreement, in its current form, does not provide an appropriate environment for large-scale climate change related technology transfer to developing countries. However, whether through reinterpretation, modification, or circumvention of the Agreement, a number of promising avenues exist for strengthening the global framework for transfer of climate-change-related technologies to developing countries.    The TRIPS Agreements Preamble and Article  language strongly support this view.

