G. Disarmament  Context112. With protracted conflicts causing large-scale human suffering, the international security environment continues to deteriorate. Armed groups are proliferating, equipped with a vast array of weapons. Global military spending and arms competition are increasing, and the tensions of the cold war have returned to a world that has grown more complex. New threats are beginning to shape the lives of future generations, including the possible weaponization of artificial intelligence, cyberspace and outer space. In today’s multipolar environment, the mechanisms for contact and dialogue between super-Powers that once helped to defuse tensions are eroding. This new reality demands that disarmament and non-proliferation be put at the centre of the work of the United Nations.  Key objectives113. In that context, the United Nations strives to help Member States to reconcile disparate positions on disarmament, share expertise, create space for dialogue and advance solutions. The Organization’s disarmament programme focuses on supporting multilateral negotiations, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, other weapons of mass destruction and conventional weapons, regional disarmament efforts and public awareness efforts.   Key outcomes and resultsHighlight: United Nations agenda for disarmament. In 2018, the Secretary-General launched Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament to better integrate disarmament into the priorities of the United Nations system, build better partnerships in support of disarmament, peace and security, and the 2030 Agenda, and advance more practical measures for better Member State support.114. In 2018, the United Nations supported the ongoing preparations for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, a framework that has become vital in the light of increased competition between nuclear-armed States and the erosion of the nuclear arms control regime. 115. The United Nations also provided substantive and procedural support to the Conference on Disarmament. Despite heightened tensions at the international level, the Conference was able to establish five subsidiary bodies on all substantive agenda items and issued four reports.116. In the area of conventional arms, the United Nations continued to support Member States in developing a political declaration and practical measures to mitigate the humanitarian harm and devastation caused by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. It also assisted in preparing the successful outcome of the Third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. For the first time, Member States reached a consensus to recognize ammunition as part of the challenge.Highlight: reaching out to young people. In 2018, the United Nations stepped up its outreach regarding how disarmament affects ordinary citizens, especially young people. The High Representative spoke to students, delivered video messages to young disarmament advocates and released opinion pieces in several prominent publications to advocate a renewed push on disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.117. To advance the dialogue on the security impact of new science and technology, the United Nations issued a report on current developments in science and technology and their potential impact on international security and disarmament, including artificial intelligence, biotechnology, space-based and electromagnetic technologies (A/73/177). To ensure human control over the use of force, the Organization also assisted an expert group, which adopted a set of proposed guiding principles. 118. In support of regional disarmament, the United Nations accelerated its work with partners. In 2018, more than 25 cooperation projects were active. For example, the Organization helped countries in the Sahel region in reducing the risk that small arms, light weapons and ammunition would be diverted. As a result, six countries in the region now have legislative norms on arms security and stockpile management.119. As in previous years, the United Nations fostered the accumulation of knowledge on disarmament. For example, it published a new handbook entitled Effective Weapons and Ammunition Management in a Changing Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Context. In addition, the Organization adopted an internal action plan to better align its activities with the Sustainable Development Goals.  Outlook120. Reinvigorated disarmament dialogue can help to advance many global objectives, including sustainable development, humanitarian action, human rights, gender equality and peace and security. In the year ahead, disarmament solutions that carry wide and consensual support will likely remain difficult to find. New threats and weaponry, however, will make the disarmament dialogue more urgent than ever.G.	Disarmament On 24 May, I announced my agenda for disarmament, which sets out concrete actions in three areas. The first, disarmament to save humanity, includes returning to a common vision for the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction. As nuclear disarmament is vital for national, regional and international security, I will work to facilitate dialogue on further negotiations to reduce and eliminate nuclear weapons. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. I will work with all States parties to ensure the Treaty’s continuing health and vitality, especially in the lead-up to the 2020 Review Conference, the fiftieth anniversary of its entry into force. I also welcome the historic adoption on 7 July 2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which demonstrated the strong and legitimate international support that exists for a permanent end to the threat posed by nuclear arms.I am concerned about the uncertain future of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, through which robust verification measures ensured the peaceful nature of the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Every effort should be made to preserve these verification gains. I am encouraged by recent developments in the Korean peninsula, including the announced moratoriums by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on its longer-range ballistic missile launches and the reported closure of its nuclear test site. I welcome the historic summits between the two Koreas and between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United States. I encourage the parties to continue their dialogue towards complete and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.The continuing use of chemical weapons is deeply troubling. The repeated breach of this taboo is exacerbated by the environment of impunity, following the termination of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in November 2017. I have repeatedly advocated for the establishment of an independent, impartial and professional attribution mechanism. Those who use chemical weapons must be held accountable and the damage inflicted on the non-proliferation architecture must be repaired. The second area of my agenda, disarmament that saves lives, places humans at the centre of our collective efforts to control arms and seeks to mobilize new partnerships, generating momentum for sustainable security by addressing the devastating impact of explosive weapons and small arms on civilians. As a practical step, the United Nations will promote the collection of data on civilian casualties and the exchange of policies and practice by armed forces and United Nations peacekeeping operations. I support efforts of Member States to develop a political declaration, as well as limitations relating to the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. The United Nations will also establish a dedicated funding facility to enable coordinated and sustainable small arms control measures in countries most affected by armed violence.The third agenda area is disarmament for future generations. Developments in science and technology bring clear benefits but we also see the risks and challenges posed by autonomous weapons, artificial intelligence and cyberthreats. At the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, I will report on current developments in science and technology and their potential impact on international security and disarmament efforts. I foresee a spectrum of responses and multi-stakeholder coalitions being required to meet these potential challenges. Regarding cybersecurity, considerable progress has been made on the issue by several groups of governmental experts with respect to the application of international law, cybernorms, rules and principles of responsible State behaviour, and confidence-building and capacity-building measures. To enhance understanding of frontier technology issues, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been developing an online training course for diplomats and all interested stakeholders which will be released in October 2018.Longstanding divisions in the Conference on Disarmament have impeded its mandate as the world’s negotiating forum for multilateral disarmament. Nonetheless, after 22 years of stymied action, some encouraging signs were seen when, in February 2018, the Conference established five subsidiary bodies to deepen technical discussions and broaden areas of agreement in all disarmament fields. I am also encouraged by signs of revival in the Disarmament Commission, which after nearly two decades took up a new agenda item: transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities to prevent an arms race in outer space, an essential global security initiative. G.	DisarmamentDisarmament and arms control have played an intrinsic role in easing international tensions and maintaining peace and security, and the Organization’s advocacy for disarmament is more vital than ever. Conventional arms are the predominant means of killing and destructionWhile we rightly fear the use of weapons of mass destruction, conventional arms are the predominant means of killing and destruction. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects remains the leading instrument for facilitating cooperation between States to prevent the diversion and proliferation of these weapons. As an example of collective action, in April 2017, after nearly two decades of inaction, the Disarmament Commission adopted recommendations on practical confidence-building measures in the field of conventional weapons. Through its regional centres for peace and disarmament, the United Nations continues to build the capacity of States to tackle illicit arms trade through practical measures, such as stockpile management and legal assistance. Since February 2017, the regional centre in Latin America and the Caribbean has provided technical and logistical planning assistance for the laying down of arms in Colombia, including methods and techniques for their deactivation.The past months show increased use of weapons against civilian populationsAn upsurge in the use of weapons against civilian populations includes horrific reports of chemical weapon attacks. Through the Joint Investigative Mechanism, the United Nations and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons were able to reach conclusions on four of the chemical attacks. I welcome the Security Council decision to renew the mandate of the Mechanism and fully support the continuation of its impartial, independent and professional work.Negotiations on a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons were held at Headquarters in July 2017, with my full support, as a step towards the universally desired goal of a nuclear weapon-free world. The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted on 7 July 2017 (see A/CONF.229/2017/8), will be open for signature by States on 20 September and must be ratified by at least 50 countries before it can enter into force. The Treaty requires its parties to maintain their safeguard arrangements with the International Atomic Energy Agency or to accept Agency safeguards if they have not already done so.The growing tensions over nuclear testing and ballistic missile activities undertaken by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea undermine global and regional security and underscore the need for a robust international disarmament and non-proliferation regime. I welcome the united commitment to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as preparations begin for the 2020 Review Conference of Parties to the Treaty.The United Nations now faces the additional challenges of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence and the potential harmful use of outer space. In an age of technical revolution, it is vital that the international community stay ahead of the curve to ensure that technology is not used for malicious purposes. G.	DisarmamentThe elimination of nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction remains a central but elusive objective of the United Nations. Despite commitments from Member States, there has been limited progress on this long-standing goal. For nuclear weapons, this is largely due to growing tensions between nuclear-armed States and sclerotic disarmament machinery. I am deeply disappointed that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is not yet in force 20 years after it was negotiated and that a fissile material treaty has not been negotiated. The fourth nuclear test by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in January 2016 and its ballistic missile launches remain a source of serious international concern.The inability of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reach a substantive outcome created significant uncertainty over prospects for nuclear disarmament as well as for a Middle East zone free of nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction. I have made clear my readiness to support efforts to promote the inclusive regional dialogue necessary to achieve the goal of a Middle East zone.I was particularly pleased to welcome the adoption on 14 July 2015 of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the EU 3+3 (China, France, Germany, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America) and the Islamic Republic of Iran. This historic accomplishment — a testament to the value of diplomacy — marks an important turning point in the international community’s relationship with the Islamic Republic of Iran and benefits nuclear nonproliferation. I am confident that this agreement will lead to greater mutual understanding and cooperation on the many serious security challenges in the region and beyond.I appreciate the efforts of the Open-ended Working Group on nuclear disarmament in taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations and hope that those will produce an outcome that is inclusive and forward-looking.I have condemned any use of chemical weapons and remain fully committed to their elimination. The Security Council demonstrated its resolve in this matter, adopting in August resolution 2235 (2015), by which it established an Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to identify those involved in the use of chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations will continue to support the Mechanism so that it can finish its task in an impartial, professional and timely manner. Accountability matters not only to this case but as a future deterrent to the use of these inhumane weapons. The taboo against the use of chemical weapons has been broken and accountability is required to repair it. Protecting civilians and combatants from indiscriminate weapons is a fundamental mission for the United Nations. Humanitarian disarmament thus continues to be a priority. I am encouraged by the interest in the challenges posed by lethal autonomous weapons systems. I welcome the engagement by the General Assembly and the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons on the urgent humanitarian challenge posed by improvised explosive devices, and the growing support for a political commitment to reduce the devastating impact posed by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to support the universalization of and adherence to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster Munitions. I welcome the Dubrovnik Action Plan adopted in 2015 by the First Review Conference of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions. These conventions are an example of partnership between States, the United Nations and civil society. Their implementation continues to be affected by donor resources, however.I am deeply concerned by irresponsible arms transfers and the continued large-scale illicit trafficking of weapons. Some States made important decisions to deny arms exports, including decisions based on the formulation in the Arms Trade Treaty of an “overriding risk” that the export would contribute to undermining peace and security or be used to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-based violence or violence against women and children. I am pleased that 2015 saw further growth in the number of ratifications of the Treaty.The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was a defining moment for global efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit arms trade: the Agenda included a specific target to significantly reduce illicit arms flows by 2030.As our world becomes increasingly dependent on information and communications technology, the potential security implications continue to grow. In 2015, a group of governmental experts, as mandated in General Assembly resolution 68/243, produced a report on norms, rules and principles of responsible State behaviour in the cybersphere. The next group of governmental experts will meet late in 2016 and should enhance this baseline framework.Similarly, the importance of outer space means we must ensure that its benefits can be enjoyed by all States. I am encouraged by efforts to implement transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space, including through enhanced cooperation between the First and Fourth Committees of the General Assembly.I remain particularly concerned by the growing nexus between terrorism and chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear security. The Nuclear Security Summit in Washington in 2016 endorsed a United Nations Action Plan, focused on two relevant United Nations instruments: Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The United Nations can play a key role in advancing this issue, including by engaging all Member States.I am pleased to note that the United Nations has provided capacity-building assistance to Member States upon request to, inter alia, improve the control of small arms and light weapons and promote the effective implementation of both Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and the Arms Trade Treaty. Outreach to civil society has been intensified. We also commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the first General Assembly resolution, which established the goal of eliminating atomic weapons.G.	DisarmamentMultilateral disarmament forums continued to struggle in this reporting period to deliver results, although there were some breakthroughs and reasons for optimism.The international community came together to ensure the rapid and verified elimination of Syrian chemical weapons. The Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations for the Elimination of the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab Republic completed its mandate and drew to a close on 30 September 2014. This effort was, in many ways, a bright spot amid truly dark circumstances. Challenges remain on some outstanding issues, which need to be addressed by the Syrian authorities in cooperation with OPCW. The Office for Disarmament Affairs continues to engage with OPCW and the Syrian authorities on the remaining work, and to keep the Security Council briefed, on issues relating to the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The OPCW fact-finding mission on allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic also continued its work. Concerns regarding the increasing number of such allegations were reflected in resolution 2209 (2015), in which the Security Council expressed support for the continuing work of the OPCW fact-finding mission and, inter alia, stressed that those responsible for any use of chemicals as weapons must be held accountable.Humanitarian approaches to disarmament saw momentum in the reporting period. I am particularly encouraged by the growing interest in addressing the humanitarian, legal, military and ethical dimensions of autonomous weapon systems and other emerging technologies under the auspices of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. I commissioned a study on armed unmanned aerial vehicles, which included a focus on humanitarian and human rights issues related to their use. The Vienna Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, held in December 2014, contributed to growing awareness of the risks posed by nuclear weapons. Such conferences deepen our knowledge of the risks of use and the fundamental challenges to our emergency response capability. The more we understand about the humanitarian impacts, the more it becomes clear that we must pursue disarmament as an urgent imperative. The United Nations also continued to support the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster Munitions.I deeply regret the inability of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reach consensus on a substantive outcome. While increasing international tension demonstrates the need for tangible progress in nuclear disarmament, a wide gap persists on how to move this agenda forward. States must not let this setback stop the momentum they have built in recent years for new initiatives in the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and continuing efforts to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation.In the field of conventional arms regulation, we saw the rapid entry into force of the landmark Arms Trade Treaty, on 24 December 2014. This is a testament to the collective will of the international community to put an end to the irresponsible transfers of conventional arms and their diversion. Unregulated arms transfers to conflict zones, terrorists and organized crime groups should be a thing of the past. For the Arms Trade Treaty to be truly effective, universal participation in the treaty — as well as rigorous implementation by all — are essential.More sobering was the continuing inability — after 19 years — of the Conference on Disarmament to overcome its differences and agree on a programme of work that would allow for the resumption of substantive negotiations. I call again on the Conference on Disarmament to rise to the challenge and live up to its mandate as the world’s single negotiating forum for multilateral disarmament.As a concrete first step towards revalidating its relevance, the Conference should start to conduct substantive work on the basis of an agreed programme of work, including by heeding the recommendations of the group of governmental experts with respect to a ban on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices. I look forward to an early beginning of negotiations on this ban, which is an important step towards a world free of nuclear weapons.I regret to see that, despite tireless efforts by the facilitator, little progress was made on bringing the States of the Middle East together to find agreement on how to free the region of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction. I continue to stand ready to support efforts to promote and sustain the inclusive regional dialogue necessary to achieve this goal.Finally, the United Nations responded to an increasing number of requests from Member States to support strengthening of national capacities to fulfil their obligations under multilateral disarmament treaties and other instruments.G.	DisarmamentThe elimination of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction remains a high priority. Ahead of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, however, there has been only limited progress by the nuclear-weapon States, and strong concern voiced over continuing efforts by those States to modernize their nuclear arsenals and related infrastructure.I remain fully committed to convening a conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, which is of utmost importance for the integrity of the Treaty. Nuclear-weapon-free zones contribute greatly to strengthening nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regimes and to enhancing regional and international security. I am concerned that the events in Ukraine have cast considerable doubt on the relevance of the security assurances provided by the permanent members of the Security Council in connection with the conclusion and indefinite extension of the Treaty, as well as by the nuclear-weapon States in connection with the various treaties on nuclear-weapon-free zones.In 2013, I established a United Nations mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which concluded that chemical weapons had been used on a relatively large scale on 21 August 2013 in the Ghouta area of Damascus, resulting in numerous casualties. Since then, I have been encouraged to see the international community come together to ensure the rapid and verified elimination of the chemical weapons of the Syrian Arab Republic. I commend the efforts of the Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations for the Elimination of the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab Republic and the material support provided by Member States, which has resulted in the removal and destruction of 100 per cent of Syrian chemical weapons materials, in addition to progress in the destruction of equipment and buildings relating to the storage and production of such materials. It is of the utmost importance that the Syrian Arab Republic implement all its disarmament obligations faithfully.The persisting deadlock in the Conference on Disarmament remains of great concern. No negotiations towards new legally binding instruments have been conducted for 18 years. In my address to the Conference in January 2014, I encouraged its members to live up to the international community’s expectations. A more constructive spirit appears to have prevailed, with structured substantive discussions that will hopefully lay a foundation for negotiations. In the face of the perceived failure of the existing disarmament machinery to deliver results, humanitarian disarmament has been gaining momentum. The United Nations has supported the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the Convention on Cluster Munitions. I am particularly encouraged by the growing interest of the States parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in addressing the humanitarian, legal, military and ethical dimensions of emerging weapon systems and technologies. The humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and international humanitarian law have also gained prominence in the past 12 months, with two conferences on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons held, one in Oslo in 2013 and the other in Nayarit, Mexico, in 2014.The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty in 2013 marked a turning point in the international community’s efforts to regulate the trade in conventional arms. Unregulated, this trade has fuelled conflict, fostered regional instability, abetted violations of Security Council arms embargoes and undermined efforts to promote socioeconomic development. Within less than a year following its opening for signature, more than half of the States Members of the United Nations had signed the Treaty, suggesting that an early entry into force might be feasible. The implementation of the Treaty will contribute to a more conducive environment for monitoring sanctions and arms embargoes, humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the promotion of durable development.In response to increased requests from Member States, the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat and its three regional centres have continued to provide training, technical and legal assistance and other capacity-building measures to improve the control of small arms and light weapons, combat the spread of illicit arms and promote the effective implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors. The United Nations has played an important role in promoting dialogue among Member States on security in the use of information and communications technology and in further developing international cooperation in this field, especially the current efforts to tackle existing and potential threats from States, their proxies or non-State actors through the use of such technology. G. 	Disarmament Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation remain high priorities. Yet there are no disarmament negotiations, no fissile material treaty, no entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. While parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are emphasizing the humanitarian dimensions of nuclear disarmament, the conference mandated for 2012 on establishing a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction was not held. In addition, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea announced its third nuclear test in February 2013. Talks are also continuing over the need for the Islamic Republic of Iran to fulfil its obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions.Our greatest institutional challenge is the deadlock in the Conference on Disarmament. This Organization cannot meaningfully advance the rule of law in disarmament when the world’s single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum is unable to adopt even a substantive programme of work. I continue to urge its members to end this stalemate and avoid any further erosion of its capability to fulfil its mandate. The General Assembly established an open-ended working group, which met in 2013, to examine ways of taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations. A group of governmental experts will soon focus on a fissile material cut-off treaty. The work of these groups may give the Conference new impetus. I remain gravely concerned over allegations of chemical weapons use in the Syrian Arab Republic. I established a United Nations mission to investigate those allegations. Upon the acceptance by the Syrian Government of the modalities essential for the conduct of the mission, the team travelled to the Syrian Arab Republic to investigate three of the reported incidents, including Khan al-Assal. Other allegations and their related sites were discussed. I have also emphasized the responsibility of the Syrian Government to ensure the safety and security of any chemical weapons and related materials.The effects of the unregulated trade in conventional arms are tragic: brutal crackdowns, armed conflict, rampant crime or violence and resulting human suffering. On 2 April 2013, the General Assembly voted overwhelmingly to adopt the Arms Trade Treaty, a historic diplomatic achievement. The Treaty will make it more difficult for weapons to be diverted into the illicit market. It will be a powerful new tool for preventing human rights abuses or violations of international humanitarian law. The United Nations is responding to requests from Member States for assistance in implementing disarmament treaties. Its regional centres for peace and disarmament help with capacity-building measures for preventing the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, while also assisting Member States and key stakeholders in implementing Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) concerning the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their acquisition by non-State actors. G.	DisarmamentLack of progress on the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda within the United Nations arena is troubling. While the international community in 2011 worked to implement the new nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation commitments and agreements reached at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as in other forums such as the Washington and the Seoul Nuclear Security Summits, the United Nations bodies responsible for advancing those recommendations faced protracted deadlocks and were unable to reach consensus in 2012. Progress in the nuclear field continues to be impeded in particular by the inability of the Conference on Disarmament to overcome its differences and agree on a programme of work that would allow for the resumption of substantive work, including negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty, which is a priority for the international community. I urge the Conference to demonstrate to the world the urgency of its work.The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran should fully comply with relevant Security Council resolutions as they relate to nuclear programmes and associated concerns about means of delivery.Poor regulation of the global trade in arms continues to present a significant challenge. Although there is no single-cause relationship between the poorly regulated arms trade on the one hand, and conflict, armed violence and substantive human rights abuses on the other, there are often obvious connections between the misuse of Government-owned arms and the questionable legitimacy or responsibility displayed by their original provider, or between massive quantities of illicit arms and ammunition in circulation and lax national controls. Working to improve lives and livelihoods around the world, the Organization is directly confronted with the consequences of the arms flow: brutal crackdowns, armed conflict, rampant crime or violence and the widespread human suffering that they cause. It is therefore very disappointing that at the end of its four-week-long session (from 2 to 27 July 2012) the United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty failed to agree on the text of a treaty that would have set common standards to regulate the international trade in conventional arms. The Conference’s failure is not only a setback to many Governments, but it also deals a blow to large sectors of civil society who will undoubtedly feel disillusioned after six years of tireless work to make the arms trade treaty a reality. It also frustrates the hopes of the millions of people all over the world who bear the brunt of the negative consequences of armed conflict and violence fuelled by the poorly regulated international arms trade. It is encouraging, however, that States have agreed to continue pursuing the adoption of a treaty building upon the common ground reached during the negotiations. The United Nations remains steadfast in unwavering support of a robust arms trade treaty.Nuclear safety and security is an issue that was unfortunately brought to the forefront of the international agenda by the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in 2011. The Organization is supporting the International Atomic Energy Agency in leading international efforts to enhance nuclear safety and security, as well as international emergency preparedness and response. The international community must give more attention to nuclear security. To this end, in September 2012, I will convene a high-level event aimed at strengthening the legal framework on preventing nuclear terrorism.