H. Drug control, crime prevention and combating terrorism  Context 121. Transnational organized crime, corruption and terrorism continue to pose major threats to security, development and good governance around the world. Drugs create risks for millions of people, lead to the loss of life and seriously deplete social cohesion and capital. According to the United Nations World Drug Report 2018, more than 31 million people suffer from drug-use disorders. 122. Organized crime, including cybercrime, trafficking in persons, the smuggling of migrants and environmental crime, undermine the rule of law. Cybercrime is estimated to generate some $1.5 trillion in revenue each year. Profits accruing to globally operating migrant-smuggling networks total at least $5.5 billion. Moreover, homicides and other types of organized crime-related violence remain high across many regions of the world. Corruption adversely affects the rule of law, security and governance, denying many people access to adequate services and opportunities.  Key objectives 123. In this context, the work of the United Nations is grounded in a series of international instruments: the 3 international drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the 19 international conventions and protocols against terrorism and the United Nations standards and norms on crime prevention and criminal justice. The United Nations works to support Member States in their efforts to make the world safer from drugs, crime and terrorism, while promoting security and justice for all. It provides advice and technical assistance in areas ranging from transnational organized crime to illicit trafficking, from drug prevention and treatment and alternative development to corruption, from criminal justice reform to terrorism prevention and from research to policy support.   Key outcomes and results  Drug control124. To assist Member States in implementing international drug control treaties and the operational recommendations of the 2016 special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, the United Nations undertook several initiatives in 2018. For example, the Organization helped to develop drug abuse prevention programmes focused on strengthening families and social structures, which supported more than 38,000 parents and children in 23 countries in East Africa, Central Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin America and the Caribbean. It also supported 58 high-priority countries in developing and implementing comprehensive evidence-based gender- and age-responsive policies on HIV prevention and treatment of and care for people who inject drugs. 125. The United Nations supported Member States in their implementation of sustainable strategies for controlling illicit crops and fostering alternative livelihoods, as well as in enhancing law enforcement capacity. United Nations assistance resulted in seizures of heroin, opium and other illicit substances, including in challenging regions where capacity is inadequate and the trafficking of such commodities fuels regional instability. Most notably, in Afghanistan, mobile detection teams supported by the United Nations conducted more than 3,500 operations, resulting in significant seizures of heroin, opium and other illicit substances, as well as the arrest of nearly 1,000 suspects in those cases.  Crime prevention126. In assisting Member States with the development of crime prevention policies, the United Nations promoted the use of such tools as the International Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes and integrated monitoring systems, which help countries to collect information and produce high-quality data on such topics as illicit crops, emerging crime dynamics and victimization.127. The United Nations provided capacity-building assistance to law enforcement agencies in Africa, Latin America and Asia and the Pacific and enhanced the capacity of more than 30 countries to effectively address wildlife, forest and fisheries crime. In the area of human trafficking, Member States received support in better understanding “dark figures” on trafficking in persons. The United Nations “multiple systems estimation methodology” makes it possible to calculate overall as well as disaggregated victimization rates, giving a clearer indication of where national victim identification efforts might need to be stepped up. In addition, the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2018 provided evidence of how armed conflict contributes directly to trafficking in persons, increasing the vulnerability of displaced persons and providing greater opportunities for criminal activity.128. A landmark achievement in the area of crime prevention in 2018 was the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime at its ninth session of a mechanism for the review of the implementation of the Convention, in which Member States are encouraged to share experiences and lessons learned. The United Nations will support those exchange efforts and provide expert support on crime prevention matters. Furthermore, the Organization contributed to target 16.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals by helping Member States to counter illicit financial and arms flows through such evidence-based approaches as criminal intelligence-led policing, profiling and the use of special investigative techniques, cross-border cooperation on judicial and financial intelligence matters and the identification and monitoring of illicit trafficking in firearms.  Combating terrorism129. The threat of terrorism remained acute and was exacerbated by such emerging challenges as suspected foreign terrorist fighters returning or relocating, as well as the growing nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime.130. The United Nations helped to convene the first High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States to promote and enhance international counter-terrorism cooperation. It also launched the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact and its first consolidated multi-year donor appeal to improve system-wide coordination, resource mobilization and assistance delivery. Those efforts enhanced practical cooperation between the Secretariat and Security Council-mandated bodies in line with Council resolution 2395 (2017). 131. The United Nations also supported Member States in implementing counter-terrorism strategies in Central Asia, East Africa, Southern Africa and West Africa. More than 90 countries received support for their efforts to prevent and counter violent extremism where it could be conducive to terrorism. 132. The Organization strengthened its efforts to address the situation of women and children having links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups and to provide guidance to Member States with regard to the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters. In addition, the United Nations enhanced its support for Member States in financing counter-terrorism activities and its assistance to victims of terrorism, including by commemorating the first International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism.   Outlook133. Looking ahead, the United Nations will continue to provide multidimensional assistance in response to General Assembly and Security Council calls for strengthening international cooperation on countering terrorism. The Organization will also seek to strengthen its projects and programmes on drugs and crime as part of its efforts to change people’s lives for the better. This will include strengthening support for farmers seeking to escape illicit economies, assisting countries in combating piracy, illegal fishing and smuggling, supporting efforts to combat wildlife crime and protect precious flora and fauna and supporting improved safety and governance in urban areas. In that context, the fourteenth session of the United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in 2020, and the special session of the General Assembly against corruption, scheduled for 2021, will help to enhance the work of the United Nations and Member States.H.	Drug control, crime prevention and combating terrorism 1.	Drug controlThe World Drug Report for 2018 indicates that more than 31 million people suffer from drug use disorders and that opioids continue to pose the most serious challenge. The United Nations provides support to Governments on the basis of the outcome document of the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, held in 2016, prioritizing evidence-based policies to promote public health, human rights and development. Partnerships are key and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the World Health Organization launched a joint publication on the treatment of people with drug use disorders as alternatives to conviction. I believe that efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and effectively address the world drug problem are mutually reinforcing, as illustrated in the report “Evidence for enhancing resilience to opium poppy cultivation in Shan State, Myanmar” comparing 600 opium- and non-opium-growing villages. 2.	Crime preventionPreventing conflict and violence is one of my top priorities. Large-scale conflicts as well as intra-community violence and tensions are frequently fuelled by various forms of crime. The incidence of homicides and violence relating to organized crime remains high in many regions in the world and, when linked to the illicit trafficking of arms and commodities, can derail efforts towards peace, human rights protection and sustainable development.Women and children remain particularly vulnerable to all forms of crime, including cybercrime such as online sexual exploitation and abuse, which is estimated to generate some $1.5 trillion in revenue per year. We are increasing our efforts to address these crimes. For example, in a particular case a paedophile who used the dark web to access and abuse more than 80 children in three countries was arrested and convicted as a result of support provided by the United Nations.Finding solutions to cross-border challenges remains one of my greatest concerns, including the challenge of curbing illicit financial flows. In 2017, UNODC and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development made significant progress in developing a methodology to track these flows, which is currently being piloted in several locations with potential for scaling-up. I hope that in the near future we will find a solid basis for tackling the diversion of public resources away from the common good. Consequently, we have strengthened our partnerships with the World Bank and the review mechanism of the United Nations Convention against Corruption to provide a more comprehensive support to Governments that are committed to tackling corruption. Corruption is an increasingly destructive practice, leading to serious political consequences as it hollows out State structures and erodes trust between a Government and its people.In June 2018, we launched the first Global Study on Smuggling of Migrants, in which key smuggling patterns and routes across the world were examined, and, in May 2018, we expanded the number of memberships in mechanisms such as the InterAgency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons. This enables the United Nations to implement more holistic solutions to this problem and to related human rights abuses, such as sexual slavery and other forms of bonded labour. 3.	Combating international terrorismThere is no doubt that the transnational nature of terrorism requires a multidimensional international response. The General Assembly and the Security Council have repeatedly called for the strengthening of international cooperation on counter-terrorism and in 2017 they authorized the establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism. In the current year, the Office has been enhanced to ensure greater coherence and complementarity in United Nations programmes and technical assistance to Member States towards implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. This is based on a variety of criteria, including the assessments and analysis of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate as well as requests from Member States. Strategic partnerships are key to providing comprehensive responses to prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism. In May 2018, the Office of Counter-Terrorism partnered with the United Nations Development Programme to develop and implement national and regional plans of action to prevent violent extremism. Currently, over two thirds of all United Nations projects dedicated to curbing acts of terrorism and violent extremism have a focus on the preventive pillar of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. These involve 16 United Nations and other international entities that implement some 260 projects in more than 80 countries. Over 1,000 participants attended the first-ever United Nations High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States on 28 and 29 June 2018. The Conference helped to strengthen multilateral counter-terrorism cooperation, break down silos and build new partnerships.H.	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorismThe globalized movement of people and trade in goods, both legal and illegal, continues to expand faster than the international community can track, let alone regulate. The large movement of refugees and migrants, often triggered by conflict, has exposed more people to trafficking, with the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 showing an alarmingly high proportion of children among the victims. Smuggled wildlife and antiquities are also caught up in this nightmare. Drawing on the first global database of seizures, the World Wildlife Crime Report: Trafficking in Protected Species, 2016 documented the trafficking of almost 7,000 wildlife species. In addition, technological advances are exploited for criminal purposes and cybercrime remains a global challenge. The United Nations is also addressing crime issues through the development of a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration and a global compact for refugees (see para. 52 above). 1.	Drug controlThe world drug problem remains a looming concern. According to the World Drug Report 2017, 29.5 million people suffer from drug use disorders, and markets are characterized by the fast-evolving nature of abused substances. Drug users are often trapped in a cycle of marginalization, making their recovery and social integration difficult. The United Nations continues to support human rights-based drug policies and capacity-building in public health, criminal justice, prison administration and civil society in support of increased access to services, including HIV services, for people who use drugs and people in prisons. In the field of alternative development to replace drug crops, the United Nations supports rural communities by providing legitimate income-earning opportunities that focus on cash crops with sustainable markets.At the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, held in 2016, Member States reaffirmed a comprehensive approach that places public health, development and human rights concerns alongside law enforcement concerns. Nations reaffirmed the centrality of the three international drug conventions and other relevant instruments. The outcome document (resolution S-30/1) includes more than 100 operational recommendations which countries are translating into action under the lead of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs.2.	Crime preventionTwo of my highest priorities are the elimination of all forms of violence against women and against childrenIn line with United Nations support for Member States in responding to crime, two of my highest priorities are the elimination of all forms of violence against women and against children. Rape, as a war crime, is a frequent occurrence during times of violence. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict highlighted the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism. This culminated in the adoption of Security Council resolution 2331 (2016) on human trafficking, in which the Council stresses the risk of trafficking in persons in conflict situations and recognizes the protection and empowerment of women and girls as a central consideration in counter-terrorism and obstructing violent extremist strategies. Children have also been targets of abuse, and killing and maiming remain the most frequent and horrific violations against children. For example, in Afghanistan, the United Nations verified 3,512 child casualties in 2016, a 24 per cent increase over 2015 and the highest level ever recorded. Thanks to advocacy by my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, however, this year 110 children detained in Somalia were released by May. The United Nations must continue such efforts to eliminate this scourge.Corruption has a deleterious effect on development because precious resources are siphoned off for personal gain. This year marked the beginning of the second implementation review cycle of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which focuses on preventive measures and asset recovery.3.	Combating international terrorismThe General Assembly recently approved my proposal to create a new Office of Counter-TerrorismWe are spearheading a new agenda for counter-terrorism through three strategic measures: (a)	The General Assembly recently approved my proposal to create a new Office of Counter-Terrorism headed by an Under-Secretary-General in order to provide stronger leadership and coherence across the United Nations system while strengthening the delivery to Member States of United Nations capacity-building for counter-terrorism. The new Office will improve visibility, advocacy and resource mobilization to broaden efforts to promote conflict prevention, build sustainable peace and address the root causes that enable terrorist recruitment;(b)	A reinvigorated “all United Nations” approach will continue to assist in the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the international legal and normative framework, including a plan to stem the flow of terrorist fighters;(c)	The High-Level Preventing Violent Extremism Action Group will play a key role in the prevention of violent extremism. H.	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestationsConfronting transnational threats, organized crime, terrorism, violent extremism and asymmetric violence has become an everyday matter for many United Nations personnel working in mission and non-mission settings around the world. These issues force the United Nations to redirect attention and resources at the expense of other fundamental priorities. In many contexts, the United Nations is challenged to “stay and deliver” in some of the most non-permissive and unstable environments, while ensuring the safety and security of personnel. This is not an easy task. Eight out of the 11 countries that face the highest levels of threat from AlQaida-affiliated terrorist groups host United Nations peace operations; seven of those eight missions are political missions, which do not have peacekeeping troops at their disposal and therefore face distinctive security challenges. Violence threatens more than the physical security of United Nations personnel. When staff are unable to operate or forced to leave, we cannot continue to deliver on our core mandate, the search for long-term, sustainable and inclusive political solutions which address the root causes of violence.Underscoring how terrorists have taken advantage of political, social and economic cleavages in society to establish and advance their cause, most terrorist activities during the reporting period occurred in countries mired in new or old conflicts. A rising number of conflicts saw terrorism result in large-scale humanitarian crises and refugee flows. The rise of terrorist groups fuelled by violent extremist ideologies is also a growing concern. Focusing on short-term law enforcement and security measures without addressing the drivers of violent extremism will not, by itself, be successful. For this reason, I presented a Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which contained more than 70 recommendations to Member States and the United Nations system. The Plan proposes the development of national plans of action that identify context-specific drivers of violent extremism to more effectively address them. In addition, an agenda of forward-looking recommendations to strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation was presented in my biennial report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/70/826 and Corr.1), marking its tenth anniversary. The report aimed to inform Member State consultations ahead of the General Assembly’s fifth review of the Strategy, which was conducted on 30 June and 1 July, just after the submission of the report. Those consultations are expected to produce a resolution adopted by consensus that will chart the work of the Organization on counter-terrorism and preventing violent extremism for years to come.Pending the review, work continued during the reporting period on the implementation of all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Many United Nations entities assisted Member States in enhancing their capacities to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism through a strengthened and coherent, “all-of-United Nations”, approach, including through the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism initiative and the capacity-building implementation plan for countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. Support was also provided to Member States in building the capacity of their criminal justice, border control and law enforcement systems, in particular to more effectively address the newly emerging challenges relating to terrorism, such as the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, the growing nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime and the financing of terrorism, including through trafficking in cultural property.While significant progress in countering piracy off the coast of Somalia has been made, it remains fragile and reversible as credible reports suggest that commercial ships remain a target of Somali pirates and smaller vessels remain vulnerable. Long-term security off the coast of Somalia needs to be built up first on shore, where capacity-building efforts have yet to produce lasting and sustainable results in tackling the root causes of piracy such as a fragile economy, youth unemployment, weak judicial capacity and weak governance structures. The United Nations has been providing support to Somalia and the region through a Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.The General Assembly held a special session on the world drug problem in April. In the lead-up, many United Nations entities supported Member States with evidence and analysis of the impact of the world drug problem. In the resulting outcome document (resolution S-30/1), the Assembly recognized the need for a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach to addressing the multifaceted challenges presented by drugs around the world. In doing so, it emphasized the importance of scientific and evidence-based approaches to supply and demand reduction, while addressing cross-cutting themes such as the protection of human rights, health, mainstreaming gender and age perspectives in drug-related policies and identifying new and emerging threats posed by new psychoactive substances. At the special session, the General Assembly laid the groundwork for the 10-year review of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action of 2009 relating to the world drug problem, the main policy document guiding international action in this area. I look forward to an inclusive dialogue that is open to new ideas and approaches in the lead-up to that review. The United Nations continued to support Member States in preventing crime and reforming their criminal justice systems in line with international standards and norms. The first United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit reiterated the importance of United Nations policing in building and strengthening the capacities of host-State institutions to prevent and address transnational organized crime as well as situating policing in broader legal and security sector reform. Having supported the revision and adoption of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules) and other instruments, the Organization is providing technical assistance to address the global prison crisis, promote justice for children and enhance police and justice responses to violence against women and girls. The United Nations Joint Global Programme on Essential Services for Women and Girls Subject to Violence is supporting countries in providing greater access to a coordinated set of essential and quality multisectoral services for all women and girls who have experienced gender-based violence. The Global Programme on Violence against Children is assisting countries in implementing their international commitments.In support of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 69/314 and in line with its mandate the United Nations conducted the first global wildlife crime threat assessment, highlighting the vulnerability to organized crime of protected species of wild fauna and flora. United Nations entities continue to work together towards a common strategy on combating this illicit and tragic trade by addressing issues relating to demand and supply, creation of robust legal frameworks and effective international cooperation. My report to Member States on the implementation of resolution 69/314 (A/70/951) is available.Ten additional States ratified the United Nations Convention against Corruption during the current biennium, bringing the number of States parties to 178. The implementation review mechanism completed more than 100 reviews and in November 2015 States parties launched the second cycle of the review mechanism.The Organization continued to support the implementation by States of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto by providing enhanced technical assistance to counter all forms of organized crime, including the smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons, especially in the context of conflict areas and the Mediterranean. The Security Council called on all Member States to do everything in their power to combat human trafficking, especially for sexual purposes, citing the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Lord’s Resistance Army and Boko Haram as prime perpetrators. Efforts were also stepped up to ensure policy coherence while addressing illicit financial flows, issues relating to foreign fighters, and the recovery of stolen assets. The latter are an important part of the discussion on financing for development as the international community embarks upon implementing the 2030 Agenda, which explicitly recognizes the links between governance, the rule of law, justice, security and sustainable and equitable development for all.H.	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestationsInternational terrorism rose to the top of the international agenda in the past year, consuming a greater portion of Security Council attention and world headlines and, most tragically, affecting a larger number of lives than in the past. I found myself having to repeatedly condemn brutal acts perpetrated against innocent civilians by a new generation of transnational terrorist groups. Too often, though, I also found it necessary to recall that failure to address conditions conducive to terrorism produces environments in which extremist groups prove alluring, while responses that are not human rights compliant undermine the very values we hold most dear and can inadvertently fuel radicalization. I continued to advocate counter-terrorism activities that respect all their obligations under international law.Failure to resolve the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic produced an enabling environment for ISIL and Al-Qaida-affiliated groups. The former has spread outwards from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic to pose a threat to regional and international peace and security. Meanwhile, in Libya, prolonged chaos and conflict provided fertile ground for violent extremist groups to organize and carry out attacks and local radical groups increasingly pledged allegiance to international terrorist networks. In Somalia, despite continued progress in joint Somali/African Union military operations supported by the United Nations, the Al-Shabaab group poses a growing threat to the wider region, demonstrated by the egregious killing of 147 students at Garissa University College in Kenya on 2 April.These developments reveal the limits of conventional approaches to counter-terrorism, which have been reactive and focused on security and military operations, and reminded us afresh of the need to focus on pillar I of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), which pertains to addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism, as well as the broader challenge of violent extremism at the local, national, regional and global levels. The United Nations took steps in the reporting period to address these new challenges through a number of landmark resolutions, such as Security Council resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters and countering violent extremism; the revitalized working groups of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force; and a newly resourced Counter-Terrorism Centre that is stepping up capacity-building. Work has begun on a plan of action on preventing violent extremism, which I will present to the General Assembly at its seventieth session.United Nations presences in the field also played a part in tackling the cross-border nature of terrorism, organized crime and corruption. Our regional offices in Central and West Africa have supported Governments and subregional organizations affected by the Boko Haram insurgency in countries of the Lake Chad Basin region. In Central Africa, we supported the development of strategies for counter-terrorism and small arms and light weapon control and, in the light of the role poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking have played in financing the activities of armed groups such as the Lord’s Resistance Army, the ex-Séléka in the Central African Republic, and Janjaweed groups from the Sudan, supported the Economic Community of Central African States in developing a regional emergency anti-poaching action plan. We also assisted with the development of a comprehensive regional anti-piracy strategy for the Gulf of Guinea — the region of Africa now most affected by piracy and armed robbery at sea. We also continued to address piracy off the coast of Somalia to achieve the objective “zero ship, zero seafarer” in the hands of Somali pirates. In Tunisia, we supported reforms to strengthen border security to prevent transnational crime along porous borders. In the Asia-Pacific region, United Nations support was provided to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on issues including maritime security, countering violent extremism and transnational crime, while two high-level counter-terrorism political dialogues were held with the European Union.The United Nations also continued to assist Member States in building their response capacities through the ratification and implementation of international legal instruments. These include the 19 international legal instruments against terrorism, as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which now has 175 States parties. Ten additional countries and territories became parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in the past year. Specialized technical assistance and capacity-building was also available to criminal justice and law enforcement officials on issues related to criminal justice reform in general and in specialized areas of counter-terrorism, including on illicit financial flows, the financing of terrorism and the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, foreign terrorist fighters, kidnapping for ransom, the recovery of stolen assets and human rights-compliant responses to terrorism.The connections between drug trafficking, organized crime, corruption and terrorism are becoming more diverse and sophisticated, and fuel insecurity and political instability globally. From Afghanistan to West and Central Africa, and more recently in the Middle East, North Africa and East Africa, these links have become increasingly apparent. The recent tragic events resulting from migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean and Andaman Seas have further highlighted the shared responsibility of States in addressing these issues. The Organization provided evidence-based knowledge on the evolution of drug markets, organized crime dynamics and the nature and magnitude of violence, informing Governments and providing actionable information to assist in designing appropriate and effective responses.At the global level, flagship reports on the world drug problem, human trafficking, homicide and synthetic drugs helped to shape policy discussions. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), each year, some 200,000 people die from the use of drugs and approximately 27 million people in the world suffer from drug use disorders. According to the estimates of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, WHO, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and the World Bank, 1.7 million and 6.6 million people who inject drugs are infected with HIV and hepatitis C, respectively. Many more die as a result of the violence that permeates the illicit drug trade. The Organization, including through the United Nations system task force on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, has continued to support Member States in the lead-up to the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem to be held in 2016, including in ensuring that it would consider the issue from a perspective that is grounded in a concern for health and well-being while continuing to provide an effective multilateral space to address the root causes of drug production, trafficking and related transnational organized crime. The session will provide a valuable opportunity for a comprehensive and inclusive exchange of ideas and lessons on what has and has not worked in addressing the world drug problem. The United Nations advocates a rebalancing of the international policy on drugs, to increase the focus on public health, human rights, prevention, treatment and care, and economic, social and cultural measures.The Organization continued efforts to mainstream issues related to drug abuse prevention, drug dependence treatment, HIV prevention, treatment and care and, in close coordination with WHO, piloted programmes to ensure the availability of pain medication in countries with low levels of access.H. 	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestationsAround the world, drug demand, supply, production and trafficking continue to have profound impacts on health and security, undermining respect for the rule of law and jeopardizing peace, development and stability. Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan reached a record high in 2013, while cocaine transiting through West Africa is now estimated to be worth $1.25 billion per year. The number of users of illicit drugs is also reportedly on the rise in the subregion. Accordingly, the United Nations has provided assistance to transnational crime units in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone and has made formal commitments to establishing such units in Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea.To support Member States in tackling issues relating to the world drug problem, the United Nations actively promoted a health-centred approach to drug control in more than 100 countries, an increase from 65 in 2012, by supporting sustainable livelihoods, drug prevention, treatment and rehabilitation services; HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care among drug users and in prison settings; and accessibility to controlled medications while preventing diversion. In addition, an early warning advisory on new psychoactive substances was set up.The Organization has continued to assist Member States in taking on issues of crime prevention, criminal justice, good governance and terrorism prevention by building institutions that strengthen accountability and transparency and by assisting in the ratification and implementation of international legal instruments. A total of 179 Member States have now ratified the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and adopted national legislation for its effective implementation, while 171 have ratified the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Assistance has also been provided to States parties to the drug control conventions in redrafting their national legislation.In March 2014, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs evaluated progress in the implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem. It agreed on a joint ministerial statement in which it recognized the importance of promoting a comprehensive and balanced approach, including adequate health measures. The meeting was an important step towards the special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem, scheduled to be held in 2016, and will be a milestone on the way to 2019, the target date for the goals in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action. The Organization, including the United Nations system task force on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking as threats to security and stability, stands ready to support Member States in their deliberations.Terrorism continues to be a factor in many regions, as evidenced in the Sahel, East Africa, West Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic and Afghanistan, where groups claiming allegiance to terrorist organizations have continued to inflict violence. To build the capacity of Member States to counter terrorism, the Organization provided support in areas covering all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The General Assembly reviewed the Strategy in June 2014 and endorsed my approach to renew efforts to address conditions conducive to terrorism while assisting in the comprehensive and balanced implementation of all pillars of the Strategy. It also recognized the important work being carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre. In June 2014, I launched a support portal for victims of terrorism, intended to serve as a resource hub for victims, their families and communities worldwide. Further progress was achieved on the international conventions and protocols relating to the prevention and suppression of terrorism, with additional new ratifications. H. 	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestationsEvents of the past year shed additional light on the corrosive impact of organized crime and drug trafficking on peace, security and development and on the inherent difficulties the United Nations and its partners face in effectively responding to such threats. In West Africa, Central Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean there has been a profound shift in the nature of the threat and a growing recognition of its impact. Other regions, such as Europe, are affected by these developments also. They continue to face challenges stemming from the demand, supply, production and trafficking of drugs. Member States have increasingly turned to the United Nations to exert its leadership in combating these challenges. In the past year, the Organization took several steps to improve its response, taking a balanced and integrated approach to controlling drugs and combating crime while assisting Member States in fulfilling the need for justice, human rights protection, development, health, peace and security. Initiatives were taken to prevent illicit trafficking, for example, cooperation across shared borders and measures that address trafficking through sea ports, dry ports and air routes, and to provide regional threat assessments as the basis for crime-sensitive development programming in relevant regions. The special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem to be held in 2016 is an opportunity to explore new ways to address the increasingly problematic issue of drug trafficking. We should not wait until 2016, however. While international drug control policy remains a matter for Member States, the United Nations can provide an important venue for ensuring that these issues are not neglected in related discussions. For instance, issues relating to security and justice have emerged in the post-2015 consultations as a major concern for many middle-income countries, a concern not only of Governments but of great numbers of citizens. The United Nations continued to assist Member States in building their response capacities, including through the ratification and implementation of international legal instruments. These include the 18 international legal instruments against terrorism, as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, which now has 166 States parties. Ten additional countries and territories became parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in the past year. Work also continued to build the capacity of Member States to implement all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In September 2012, I chaired a high-level meeting on countering nuclear terrorism, with a specific focus on strengthening the legal framework, in which more than 130 Member States participated. The aim was to assist Member States in implementing their international obligations as they relate to countering the threat of nuclear terrorism and strengthening nuclear security. United Nations entities also focused on preventing the misuse of the Internet for terrorism purposes, examining ways that the Organization can support Member States in the legal, technical and counter-narrative aspects. The magnitude of the existing and emerging global threats of organized crime, drug trafficking and terrorism means that there is a need for more concerted efforts. Such issues require an integrated and multidisciplinary response encompassing security, development, good governance, human rights and the rule of law. H.	Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestationsIn recent years, the international community has become aware of the rising threat to peace and security posed by organized crime and drug trafficking. As a step towards addressing these challenges, I created in 2011 a Task Force on Transnational Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking to develop comprehensive and effective United Nations responses and mobilize collective action against this threat. Among the key initiatives the Task Force set in motion is the development of regional threat assessments, which will provide a basis for crime-sensitive development programming in relevant regions. The Organization and INTERPOL have joined forces to assist West African countries (Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone) to establish transnational crime units — which will help ECOWAS to combat drug trafficking and organized crime in the subregion.The Organization and its Member States made important progress in the past year in strengthening the United Nations response to the terrorism threat. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre was established in support of the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to help Member States implement the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Symposium on International Counter-Terrorism Cooperation I hosted in September 2011 underlined the importance of the Strategy and the wide range of efforts and activities, including resolutions of the Security Council, to strengthen international cooperation among States. The third biennial review of the Strategy concluded in June 2012 with an agreement to develop national and regional strategy implementation plans, enhance capacity-building efforts, including the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative or I-ACT, carried forward by the Task Force, promote international cooperation, and strengthen support for victims of terrorism.The I-ACT initiative, which serves as a coordination platform for United Nations capacity-building activities, has doubled its efforts to provide assistance to the institutions of the Government of Nigeria following increasing terrorist activity in the country. In Central Asia, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force has helped the five States in the region to adopt their regional action plan to implement the Strategy, which provides a comprehensive framework for stepped up counter-terrorism efforts in the region.