A. Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development   Context28. As the world faces mounting challenges, including protracted conflicts, inequality, persistent pockets of poverty and hunger and a fast-changing climate, international cooperation is essential if no one is to be left behind. The work of the United Nations is focused increasingly on prevention and on taking an integrated approach to development, peace and security and human rights. The United Nations system continues to support the efforts of Member States to implement transformative agendas and fulfil the promises made under the Sustainable Development Goals, including by addressing cross-sectoral and cross-border issues and leveraging innovative multi-stakeholder partnerships.29. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development represents a blueprint for action for Member States and all stakeholders in areas of critical importance for humanity. Significant progress has been made. Extreme poverty and maternal and child mortality rates continue to fall, and the prevalence of HIV has been reduced. Several countries have made significant gains in advancing women’s political representation and have continued to strengthen laws and policies to address discrimination. Millions more people in the poorest countries have access to electricity. Globally, labour productivity has increased, and unemployment is back to pre-financial crisis levels. 30. But much more remains to be done. While global poverty rates have decreased by more than half since 2000, more than 731 million people – 10 per cent of the world’s population – still live in extreme poverty and struggle to meet their most essential needs, such as health care, education, water and sanitation. The population of the working poor has increased, with the precariousness of their condition leaving them vulnerable to shocks. Global unemployment levels have dropped since 2015, yet wage growth has stagnated. Some 30 per cent of young women and 13 per cent of young men are not in education, employment or training. Alarmingly, in 2018, world hunger rose after a prolonged decline. No country has yet achieved gender equality. 31. Today, 55 per cent of the world’s population lives in urban areas, a proportion that is expected to increase to 68 per cent by 2050. Sustainable development will depend increasingly on the successful management of urban growth, especially in low- and lower-middle-income countries, where the pace of urbanization is projected to be the fastest. With rapid population growth in cities and continuing vulnerability in rural areas, some 60 million people were directly affected by extreme weather and climate events around the globe in 2018. Earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanos took thousands of lives, and millions more people were displaced by floods, droughts and storms. People living in extreme poverty are often those who are the most exposed to climate shocks and the least able to manage them. Without drastic action to reduce risk today, global warming will lead to unprecedented economic and social destabilization. 32. Addressing poverty, vulnerability and inequality under the framework of the 2030 Agenda contributes to reducing human suffering and sustaining peace. In countries where conflict has resulted in dire humanitarian and human rights situations, sustaining peace depends on sustainable development but, equally, progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals requires lasting peace.33. The United Nations is working to promote greater coherence of humanitarian and development action, both in crises and in the transition to sustainable development, as well as to build the resilience of communities and institutions. The Organization is developing a new generation of partnerships – one that truly enables all relevant stakeholders to engage in meaningful participation and strategically leverages the collective insights, networks, resources and capacities of the global community – to implement transformative agendas. Only through collective action and a global movement can the ambitions of leaving no one behind and a ensuring a healthy planet for all be realized.  Key objectives34. The United Nations provides a range of solutions to help foster international cooperation and partnerships in the follow-up to transformative agendas, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the New Urban Agenda. Member States with specific needs receive support in accordance with the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway. Various units of the Organization provide strategy, policy and operational support on many issues, including multidimensional poverty and inequality, social cohesion, demographics, economic governance and planning, international trade, fiscal and macroeconomic sustainability and transitioning from situations of instability to long-term sustainable development. 35. The Organization’s regional engagement is spearheaded by the regional commissions in Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, Europe and Western Asia. They provide normative, analytical, planning and capacity support to national Governments, regional organizations and other stakeholders, with a focus on macroeconomics; financing for development; social policy; regional integration and connectivity, including trade, transport and energy; innovation; technology; management of natural resources; disaster risk reduction; statistics; gender, women and development; institution-building; and development policy.  Key global outcomes  Stocktaking and acceleration of the Sustainable Development Goals36. Four years into the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, countries have created a global movement for action and a learning and sharing platform for the Goals. As the main platform for taking stock of progress on the 2030 Agenda and the Goals, the high-level political forum on sustainable development meets yearly under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council and every four years under the auspices of the General Assembly. In July 2018, with the support of the United Nations, more than 125 Heads and Deputy Heads of State and Government, ministers, vice-ministers and other ministerial-level officials and more than 2,000 representatives of Governments, international organizations, civil society and the private sector gathered to discuss the transformation towards sustainable and resilient societies. 37. At the 2018 meeting, 46 countries presented voluntary national reviews on their respective efforts in pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals, an increase from 43 reviews in 2017 and 22 in 2016. Some 47 voluntary national reviews are scheduled for 2019. With the theme “Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”, the 2019 forum will conclude the first review cycle. By then, 142 countries will have presented their first set of progress reports on all 17 Goals.  Global climate action38. Through multilateral efforts, a “rulebook” on how to implement the Paris Agreement was adopted at the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in December 2018 in Katowice, Poland, accompanied by initiatives from the private sector and local governments and actors. The Paris Agreement is aimed at maintaining the average global temperature rise to well below 2°C in this century and limiting the rise to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. 39. Supported by the Climate Change secretariat, the rulebook, known as the Katowice climate package, establishes how Member States will provide information on their nationally determined contributions, including how they will measure, report and verify their emissions reductions. One of the key components is a detailed transparency framework to promote trust among nations on their actions to address climate change.40. In 2018, the United Nations also introduced the online Sendai Framework monitor, which allows Member States to track progress towards achieving the Sendai Framework targets for disaster risk reduction. The entire United Nations system is supporting many countries in the development of disaster risk reduction strategies in alignment with their climate change adaptation plans.   Other results highlights  Scaling up financing for development41. In 2018, the United Nations continued to help advance progress on financing for the sustainable development agenda. Facilitated by the Organization, the 2018 Development Cooperation Forum produced concrete policy guidance on the strategic role of development cooperation in achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda. Drawing on recommendations set out in the report entitled Financing for Development: Progress and Prospects 2018, the United Nations also participated in designing an agenda for global action. 42. In addition, the Secretary-General launched his Strategy for Financing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in which he sets out actions to better align global economic policies and financial systems and to enhance sustainable financing strategies at the regional and national levels. Looking ahead, the United Nations will help build consensus on defining sustainable investing and measuring its impact. 43. The United Nations intensified its partnership with the World Bank Group in 2018, signing a Strategic Partnership Framework for the 2030 Agenda to consolidate joint commitments on cooperation in four key areas: finance and implementation support for the Sustainable Development Goals; decisive global action on climate change; joint work in post-crisis and humanitarian settings; and the harnessing of data to improve development outcomes.  Enabling sustainable development and sustaining peace 44. Member States approved a landmark decision to reposition the United Nations development system to enhance support for the 2030 Agenda through more effective, accountable and cohesive country teams, as well as empowered resident coordinators. Working hand in hand, the United Nations development system entities laid the groundwork in 2018 to ensure the successful transition of the resident coordinator system and the establishment of a new stand-alone Development Coordination Office within the United Nations Secretariat. Institutional partnerships for implementing the 2030 Agenda and supporting Member States have been prioritized through the formation of strategic partnership frameworks with key development actors, including the African Union, the European Commission and others. 45. The repositioning of the development system will reduce the fragmentation of the United Nations system response on the ground. It will strengthen accountability and foster coherence. Improved context-specific coordination in peacebuilding, development and humanitarian actions presents opportunities to better mitigate risk, foster more sustainable outcomes and ensure that no one is left behind. 46. The Organization is driving a shift in mindset, working across and dismantling silos to address the humanitarian-development nexus and its linkages to peace in a synergetic way through a coherent whole-of-system approach. The Joint Steering Committee to Advance Humanitarian and Development Collaboration was established as a critical problem-solving mechanism in support of field efforts and to strengthen coordination across humanitarian, development and peace activities.  Ensuring availability of data on the Sustainable Development Goals47. In close collaboration with development partners, regional development banks and the private sector, the United Nations strengthened its advocacy for the use of new data sources and innovative technologies to improve the availability of high-quality statistics, geospatial data and evidence to inform decision-making and enhance collective accountability for results in accordance with the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data.48. The Organization also established a coordinated and coherent approach to ensuring legal identities for all to help close the global identity gap affecting an estimated 1 billion people. Through this unified approach, the United Nations is supporting Member States in building holistic, country-owned and sustainable civil registration, vital statistics and identity management systems, and is able to also provide the information and data needed to enhance socioeconomic gains, improve public administration, strengthen the planning and targeting of development support and monitor its progress and impact. 49. In addition, the United Nations Expert Group on Migration Statistics is working to build and enhance national capacities for the collection, analysis and dissemination of migration data in support of countries’ efforts to implement the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.   Addressing climate change with United Nations support 50. Solving climate change is fundamental for achieving sustainable development and realizing the 2030 Agenda. The world is far off track to reach the Paris Agreement targets, careening towards an increase of 3–5°C in global temperatures compared with pre-industrial levels, which is potentially catastrophic for any development gains achieved thus far.51. Throughout 2018, the United Nations system came together to highlight the impending climate crisis. It collaborated with the United Nations-affiliated Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on a groundbreaking special report outlining the pathways to limiting the global temperature rise to no more than 1.5°C. In response, the United Nations system prioritized support for Member States in developing ambitious national plans and long-term decarbonization strategies. United Nations entities responded to the Secretary-General’s call for a climate summit to be held in September 2019 to help enhance national commitments on greenhouse gas reductions and strengthen adaptation measures, while showcasing transformations in the most high-emitting industries.  Leaving no one behind, inclusion and empowerment 52. To assist Member States in “leaving no one behind”, work on a United Nations system-wide plan of action for the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) was focused on accelerating global actions for a world without poverty. The United Nations supported legal reforms and gender-responsive planning and budgeting and, in partnership with the European Union, launched an unprecedented initiative to end violence against women and girls. The United Nations Youth Strategy was designed to scale up global, regional and national actions to realize the rights of the 1.8 billion young people worldwide and tap into their potential as agents of change. The first-ever flagship Disability and Development Report described progress made with respect to disability in the context of the 2030 Agenda and found that much more needed to be done to empower the 1 billion people with disabilities worldwide.   Supporting small island developing States53. In 2018, the United Nations provided support to small island developing States in preparing a high-level midterm review of the SAMOA Pathway, to be convened by the General Assembly in September 2019. The Organization also advised small island developing States on how to meet their obligations under the Paris Agreement, including by designing strategies for lowering greenhouse gas emissions, building capacity for adaptation, gaining access to climate finance and enhancing resilience.  Assessing sustainable development trends and harnessing technology and data54. To strengthen the science-policy interface, the United Nations began to work in 2018 with an independent group of scientists that will prepare the first global sustainable development report. The report, to be launched at the high-level political forum on sustainable development in September 2019, will provide an analysis of progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and identify key areas in which policy interventions can set the world on a more sustainable path. 55. In response to the unprecedented change brought about by digital technologies and their potential impact on the 2030 Agenda, the Secretary-General convened a High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation in 2018. The Panel’s report includes pragmatic proposals on how to strengthen cooperation in the digital space. Stronger global cooperation will be critical in realizing the full potential of digital technologies, mitigating risks and curtailing unintended consequences.56. In addition, the Organization advanced a broad range of technology initiatives related to sustainable development. This included facilitating the annual multistakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation; the Access to Space for All initiative; a public-private partnership on the open data hub for the Sustainable Development Goals; and collaborative data projects under the Global Working Group on Big Data for Official Statistics.   Outlook57. Building on its work in 2018, the Organization will continue to enhance its strategic and substantive support for the reinvigorated resident coordinator system and the new generation of United Nations country teams to maximize impact on the ground. 58. The repositioning of the United Nations development system will strengthen accountability for results and increase coherence within the United Nations system. To help sustain peace, accompany transitions from instability and establish environments conducive to sustainable development, the United Nations will continue to prioritize prevention and focus on the root causes of vulnerability. The Organization is committed to shedding new light on frontier and emerging topics and to taking an approach that brings the benefits of digital progress to sustainable development, while countering the pitfalls.A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development 1.	Review of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable DevelopmentMany people around the world are living better lives than they did a decade ago. Globally, the under-5 mortality rate dropped to 41 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2016 from 78 in 2000 — a 47 per cent decline. In the least developed countries, the proportion of the population with access to electricity has more than doubled since 2000. Labour productivity has increased worldwide, the unemployment rate has decreased and Governments have been actively putting in place the institutions and frameworks necessary to implement the Sustainable Development Goals. There are several examples of recent actions taken. In collaboration with the United Nations country teams, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific supported countries in strengthening national statistical systems, including the identification and addressing of gaps in data and statistics for the Sustainable Development Goals and identifying policy priorities. The Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia and the League of Arab States concluded the joint 2020 Arab Internet Governance Forum initiative, which led to the creation and adoption of the Second Arab Roadmap on Internet Governance. In Santiago, in April, some 1,000 participants gathered for the forum of countries of Latin America and the Caribbean to share progress and experiences in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.Progress has been uneven, however, and not rapid enough to meet all the Agenda’s Goals and targets in every country by 2030. While extreme poverty has been reduced considerably, it stubbornly persists in some parts of the world. For example, in 2015, 3 in 10 people did not have access to safely managed drinking water services, and 6 in 10 people did not use safely managed sanitation services.We see that conflicts, disasters and the effects of climate change have also adversely affected populations. The past 5-year average global temperature was the highest on record, and in 2017 the world experienced the costliest North Atlantic hurricane season in history, with damages conservatively estimated at $229 billion, highlighting exposure and vulnerabilities which must be systematically and preemptively addressed. World hunger appears to be on the rise after a prolonged decline, mainly because of conflicts, drought and disasters linked to weather- and water-related hazards. The number of undernourished people rose from 777 million in 2015 to 815 million in 2016. Through its special meeting on the “Aftermath of recent hurricanes: achieving a risk-informed and resilient 2030 Agenda”, the Economic and Social Council demonstrated the disproportionate impact on countries with a high level of exposure and vulnerability to climate change, many of which were small island developing States, and the need to increase their access to concessional finance given their high level of indebtedness. We need to take concerted action to address countries’ vulnerability to climate change to ensure that no one is left behind. Although the high-level political forum on sustainable development of 2018, with a focus on making societies sustainable and resilient, reflected some very positive initiatives, it also showed that we urgently need to step up efforts to implement the Sustainable Development Goals in areas such as energy, water and terrestrial ecosystems. An integrated approach to the implementation of sustainable development, climate change and disaster risk reduction policies remains pivotal. Countries — including some of the richest ones — are well behind in embarking on sustainable consumption and production pathways. The voluntary national reviews presented at the high-level forum are a powerful way for countries to exchange lessons and experiences in implementing the Goals. In 2018, 47 countries carried out such reviews. I encourage all countries to conduct a voluntary national review between now and September 2020.Recent improvements in global macroeconomic conditions, with International Monetary Fund (IMF) predictions of 3.9 per cent growth in 2018/19, may offer policymakers greater opportunity to address some of the deep-rooted barriers that continue to hamper progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals. A stronger and more stable economic outlook should allow a shift from crisis management and short-term stabilization to longer-term policies that are crucial to the success of the 2030 Agenda. This includes rehabilitating and protecting the environment, making investments disaster-risk-informed, making economic growth more inclusive and tackling institutional barriers to development. For example, in commodity-exporting countries in Africa, Latin America and Western Asia, the recent recovery of commodity prices, coupled with largely stable global financial conditions, has eased fiscal and external pressures, creating room for much-needed investment in resilient infrastructure and social services. Against a backdrop of stronger economic activity, GDP per capita growth in most developing regions is projected to improve. In tandem with recent improvements in global economic growth, downside risks to the global economy have also been building, including a rise in trade tensions and an increasing tendency to move away from the multilateral framework. In many countries, economic performance is expected to be slow and fragile, given significant country-specific vulnerabilities, for example, the need to strengthen institutions, human resources, finance and infrastructure. Among the least developed countries, only a handful are expected to reach the Sustainable Development Goal target of “at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum” by 2019. There was also good news for least developed countries, however. The Committee for Development Policy undertook its triennial review of the list of least developed countries and four countries — Bhutan, Kiribati, São Tomé and Principe and Solomon Islands — were recommended for graduation from the least developed country category. The Committee’s recommendations follow increases in the national income in all countries, as well as improved education and health outcomes. Government development policies, as well as an improved global economic environment and the coordinated efforts of the international community have driven the progress. Never have so many countries been identified at a single review of the Committee. If the recommendations are endorsed by the Economic and Social Council, 2018 has the potential to be a momentous year, significantly increasing the total number of least developed country graduates. 2.	PartnershipsPartnerships are key to achieving the 2030 Agenda and the United Nations has actively facilitated the engagement of all stakeholders through the Partnerships for the Sustainable Development Goals online platform. As of June 2018, 3,834 partnerships have been registered by stakeholders from different sectors across all 17 Sustainable Development Goals. This includes the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework to monitor the progress of existing, and stimulate the launch of new, genuine and durable partnerships for this group of countries. The United Nations has also been tracking the implementation of the more than 1,400 voluntary commitments made by Governments, the United Nations system, civil society organizations, academia, the scientific community and the private sector around the United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14 (the Ocean Conference). Those commitments, together with the Conference outcome document, mark a global breakthrough on the path to the sustainable management and conservation of our oceans, seas and marine resources. In addition, nine thematic multi-stakeholder “Communities of Ocean Action” were launched in support of Goal 14.3.	Financing for sustainable development The unanimous agreement on the intergovernmental conclusions and recommendations of the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up of 2018 signalled a strong interest on the part of all stakeholders in facilitating the mobilization of adequate financing for sustainable development. The forum drew on the Organization’s analytical work, specifically, the report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development, which has become an authoritative voice on Sustainable Development Goal financing that resonates beyond the United Nations. The forum attracted a record number of Ministers and other high-level representatives, again underscoring the high level of interest in the United Nations as a forum for discussions on financing issues. The inaugural Sustainable Development Goal Investment Fair was widely welcomed as a promising platform to scale up investments on the ground. The United Nations has also provided practical tools to support developing countries in countering tax base erosion and profit shifting, including the second edition of the Handbook on Selected Issues in Protecting the Tax Base of Developing Countries, and the Practical Portfolios on Protecting the Tax Base of Developing Countries. Drawing on these guidelines, the United Nations delivered capacity development activities to approximately 300 tax officials of 50 developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. These have facilitated the implementation of domestic and international tax law measures in several countries. In the area of tax evasion and avoidance, the United Nations supported the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, in particular in the delivery of the 2017 Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing Countries; the 2017 Practical Manual on Transfer Pricing for Developing Countries; and the handbook on extractive industries taxation issues for developing countries. 4.	Technology In October 2017, we welcomed Sophia, the first robot to be a panellist at the United Nations as she addressed a joint meeting of the Economic and Social Council and the Second Committee of the General Assembly. This event provided a preview of the increasing opportunities that technology creates, and how it can facilitate the realization of the 2030 Agenda. While incredibly enabling, these technologies also generate fundamental challenges relating to ethics and human rights, peace and security, jobs and even society as we know it. While many frontier technologies offer great promise for improving lives, livelihood and environmental sustainability, advances in artificial intelligence and automation raise serious concerns regarding the future of work. It is with this in mind that I have established a High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation, comprising 20 eminent personalities from Governments, the technology industry, academia and civil society. Their task is to raise awareness of the transformative impact of digital technologies across society and the economy, to identify policy, research and information gaps and to present concrete proposals for strengthening cooperation in the digital space in an effective and inclusive manner.The Technology Facilitation Mechanism, comprising 36 United Nations agencies in the Interagency Task Team on Science, Technology and Innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals continued to work with a group of 10 high-level external advisers. The third annual global Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals was held in May and provided a platform to enable greater understanding of different perspectives including those on rapidly advancing technologies. These forums have also provided space for selected innovators from across the world to feature their solutions to Sustainable Development Goal challenges, such as “leaving no one behind”. The newly established Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, inaugurated on 4 June 2018 in Istanbul, will expand the use of science, technology and innovation to tackle sustainable development challenges in the least developed countries. It will promote access to intellectual property, foster policies relating to science, technology and innovation, facilitate the transfer of technologies, promote innovation and connect least developed countries into the global economy. With the operationalization of the Technology Bank, we have achieved the first Sustainable Development Goal target: target 17.8. Identifying the spatial location of drought or flood areas is critical and the Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management moved forward two initiatives that will help to ensure that no one is left behind. The global fundamental geospatial data themes enable national mapping agencies and national statistical offices to offer guidance, including information which combines statistics and geography to provide repositories of national information. The United Nations has actively promoted the use of new data sources and new technologies to improve the availability and dissemination of high quality statistics and indicators. Examples of these public-private partnerships are the Open Sustainable Development Goal Data Hub and collaborative data projects under the Global Working Group on Big Data for Official Statistics. To fully implement and monitor progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, political commitment is needed to meet the demand for quality, accurate, open, timely and sufficiently disaggregated data and statistics. In December 2017, I also launched the Centre for Humanitarian Data in The Hague, the Netherlands, to increase the impact of data and its use to inform evidenced-based humanitarian action.5.	YouthYoung people are crucial for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda. Their ideas and innovations, some of which they shared at the Economic and Social Council Youth Forum in January 2018, are an important contribution to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals at national and local levels. My Envoy on Youth, Jayathma Wickramanayake of Sri Lanka, is proactively addressing youth concerns by continuously advocating for their needs and rights, including their right to participate in decision-making processes at all levels, and by playing a key role in strengthening the United Nations system’s coordination on delivering for and with youth. Young people are seizing the opportunity to lead and take responsibility for their future as agents of change. Therefore, including youth in policymaking and the setting of national priorities and plans and their implementation is not only good practice but beneficial for all. Recognizing the importance of youth and the challenges we face in tapping into young people’s potential and concerns, the Organization has adopted the United Nations strategy on youth. Through this strategy, we seek to step up our work with and for young people across the three pillars (peace and security, sustainable development and human rights) and to strengthen the Organization’s capacity to engage with young people and benefit from their views and ideas. The strategy aims to facilitate increased impact and expanded global, regional and particularly country-level action to address the needs for quality education, health care, decent work and civic and political participation. The strategy includes empowering youth to act and advancing the rights of young people around the world and ensuring their engagement in the implementation, review and follow-up of the 2030 Agenda as well as other agendas and frameworks.6.	Taking advantage of global mobility through the global compact for international migrationSince 2000, the global number of international migrants has increased by 49 per cent to reach 258 million in 2017 (see figure I). The share of international migrants in the total population has grown too: international migrants now comprise 3.4 per cent of the global population, compared to 2.8 per cent in the year 2000. While the largest number of international migrants reside in Asia (80 million) and Europe (78 million), Africa recorded the fastest increase in the number of international migrants since 2000 (67 per cent). Most international migrants move within their region of birth. Figure I Number of international migrants by region of destination, 2017International migration is one of the drivers of population change. In the developed regions, the net inflow of migrants has outpaced “natural increase” (the excess of births over deaths) as the primary source of population growth since the 1990s. International migration is projected to remain a major driver of population growth in developed regions after 2020. In contrast, the impact of migration on overall population change in developing regions is likely to remain relatively small for the next several decades. Officially recorded remittances to low- and middle-income countries reached $466 billion in 2017, an increase of 8.5 per cent compared to 2016. Global remittances, which include flows to high-income countries, grew 7 per cent, to reach $613 billion in 2017. The global average cost of sending $200 was 7.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2018, more than double the Sustainable Development Goal target of less than 3 per cent.In response to the growing scale, complexity and impact of migration, the General Assembly, in July 2018, agreed upon a Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. The Compact will be presented for adoption at an intergovernmental conference to be held in Morocco in December 2018.Firmly rooted in the 2030 Agenda and the commitments made in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, the Compact is the first global agreement designed to better manage international migration in all its dimensions, for the benefit of all States and communities, including migrants. This comprehensive framework comprises a range of objectives, actions and avenues for implementation, follow-up and review, all aimed at facilitating safe, orderly and regular migration, while reducing the incidence and impact of irregular migration.7.	ForestsForests and trees play an important role in support of life on earth, human well-being and sustainable development. At its thirteenth session, in May 2018, the United Nations Forum on Forests adopted a communication and outreach strategy to raise awareness, within and outside the forest sector. Member States at the Forum adopted the format for voluntary national reporting to the Forum on the implementation of the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030. Several Member States also announced their voluntary national contributions towards the achievement of the six global forest goals and targets of the strategic plan, which provides a global framework for sustainably managing all types of forests and trees outside forests, halting and reversing deforestation and forest degradation and increasing forest area. To further enhance access of eligible countries to multilateral funding for forests, the Forum at its thirteenth session also adopted guidelines for the operation of the Global Forest Financing Facilitation Network. 8.	Stepping up our effortsAchieving the Sustainable Development Goals requires immediate and accelerated actions by countries, together with collaborative partnerships among Governments and stakeholders at all levels to implement a risk-informed and resilient 2030 Agenda. While much has been done in the past year, we must step up efforts to achieve meaningful progress by September 2019, when the high-level political forum will take stock of progress towards realizing the vision of the 2030 Agenda. The cross-cutting and comprehensive nature of the Goals makes our task even more challenging, but in every aspect their achievement has the potential of reducing and even eliminating human suffering and preventing the outbreak of conflict, the values that the United Nations is mandated to uphold. The paradigm shift reflected in the 2030 Agenda requires significant adjustments in the skillsets, leadership, and coordination and accountability mechanisms of the United Nations development system. To remain a partner of choice, the United Nations system must ensure that it is better prepared to support countries across all Sustainable Development Goals, with a much greater degree of cohesion, and leveraging partnerships and financing for national priorities on an unprecedented scale. These are key objectives of the ongoing reforms. A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable developmentThe adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an unparalleled achievementThe adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development represents an unparalleled achievement in setting objectives for the international community. It marks a paradigm shift towards a comprehensive and integrated vision of inclusive sustainable development, applicable to all people in all countries and explicitly anchored in human rights. To ensure that actions follow this vision, more must be done to incorporate the Sustainable Development Goals into national plans and strategies, establishing performance baselines and effective statistical capacities.I am committed to ensuring that the success of the Agenda is measured by the yardstick of improvement of the well-being and prospects of the poorest, most excluded and most vulnerable people in society. Countries and stakeholders confirm that the Agenda’s core promise — to leave no one behind — must underpin the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The United Nations is undertaking cross-cutting efforts to support national actors in implementing this commitment through support for laws, policies and programmes and the ratification of international treaties. These include measures to eradicate poverty, combat discrimination and uphold equality for all.Leaving no one behind was the theme of the 2016 high-level political forum on sustainable development, which serves as the central platform for follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda. In a clear signal of their commitment and of the universal character of the Agenda, countries from all regions and levels of development are outlining national priorities and approaches to include the Sustainable Development Goals in their development plans and strategies. Almost a third of the Organization’s membership has volunteered to report on progress in implementing the 2030 Agenda.The following challenges are faced by countries and vary enormously by region and other factors:(a)	Persistent poverty and inequality;(b)	Economic fragility;(c)	Unemployment, especially among youth;(d)	Unsustainable patterns of production and consumption;(e)	Unsustainable use of natural resources;(f)	Impacts of current conflicts and lingering effects in post-conflict situations;(g)	Vulnerability to disasters and the consequences of recent disasters;(h)	Climate change;(i)	Lack of resources;(j)	Institutional shortcomings: defects in rule of law, tax evasion and corruption;(k)	Limited space for civil society.The Sustainable Development Goals are for the whole of societyTo meet these challenges, the successful implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals depends on national actions and on forging multilateral partnerships with Governments and non-governmental organizations, strengthening collaboration between national and local-level entities and promoting inclusivity in decision-making processes. The Sustainable Development Goals offer a new opportunity to demonstrate a commitment to serving people and building trust in political leadership. Key individual contributions are needed from experts, scientists in particular. Science is critical for understanding and identifying synergies and trade-offs among the Sustainable Development Goals, and an independent group of scientists has begun work to prepare the Global Sustainable Development Report for the 2019 high-level political forum. The United Nations is also soliciting expert opinions on advancing the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and leveraging its holistic nature. Cooperation on achieving the 2030 Agenda is working its way across the United Nations system. The Economic and Social Council partnership forum is a critical space for sharing the perspectives and contributions of all partners, while the New Urban Agenda adopted at Habitat III in October 2016 addresses the manner in which cities are planned, financed, governed and managed. The 2017 Ocean Conference brought people together to formulate tangible solutions on such areas as marine pollution, climate change, ocean acidification and ocean governance. In addition, it will be critical for developed countries to deliver on both official development assistance (ODA) and climate finance commitments.1.	The challenge of climate change Climate change is undeniable; the science is beyond doubt and human influence is clearClimate change is an overriding megatrend, with a multiplier effect on desertification, displacement of people, weather-related disasters and water scarcity and pressures on other natural resources. As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has demonstrated in a series of exhaustive and authoritative reports, climate science is beyond doubt and human influence is clear. I am intensifying high-level political engagement aimed at limiting temperature rise to well below 2 degrees and as close as possible to 1.5 degrees Celsius. I am rallying the United Nations development system behind Member States as they pursue climate action, mobilizing resources to support the implementation of national climate action plans and strengthening partnerships through North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation. I also intend to convene a dedicated climate summit in 2019 to mobilize political support.2.	Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals Despite the halving of the global poverty rate since 2000, intensified efforts are required to boost incomes, alleviate suffering and build the resilience of those still living in extreme poverty, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. While the proportion of humanity living in poverty is lower, some 700 million people still live in extreme conditions, and progress has not included a decline in inequality. Poverty as a percentage of population is deeply persistent in the least developed countries, although the largest number of people trapped in poverty live in middle-income countries. In view of the variability of purchasing power parity, our efforts to eradicate poverty globally require a focus on all levels, from the least developed to the middle-income nations. Nevertheless, with the current economic growth trajectory, nearly 35 per cent of the population in the least developed countries may still be living in extreme poverty by 2030 (see figure I).	Figure I Progress towards Sustainable Development Goal 1One of the keys to creating decent jobs and reducing poverty will be the promotion of structural transformation towards more productive and green activities. Structural transformations can generate resources for social protection that is designed to assist those who are unable to escape poverty with their own resources. Strong national ownership of the development agenda is critical. Efforts to combat hunger and malnutrition have advanced significantly since 2000. The proportion of undernourished people worldwide declined from 15 per cent in the period 2000-2002 to 11 per cent in the period 2014-2016. Yet ending hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition for all will require continued and focused efforts, especially in Asia and Africa. Tragically, famine threatens four States today, caused by drought and conflict.Donor aid has increased but more is needed. A significant achievement in 2016 was the rise in net ODA from member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)/Development Assistance Committee by 8.9 per cent in real terms to $142.6 billion, a new peak. An increase in aid spent on refugees in donor countries boosted the total. But even when refugee costs were removed from the calculation, aid rose 7.1 per cent.3.	Data and statistics on the Sustainable Development Goals In 2017, the Statistical Commission adopted the global indicator framework to monitor progress towards the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda. Tracking progress on the Sustainable Development Goals requires the collection of an unprecedented amount of data disaggregated at all levels, which poses a major challenge for national and international statistical systems. The global statistical community is working to modernize and strengthen statistical systems to address all aspects of the production and use of data on sustainable development. To this end, the first United Nations World Data Forum, held in South Africa in January 2017, brought together key stakeholders to discuss innovations in capacity-building. Furthermore, the High-level Group for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity-building developed the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data, which provides a framework for addressing the capacity needs of national statistical systems and innovative solutions for achieving the full 2030 Agenda.In February 2017, the General Assembly adopted the recommendations of the open-ended intergovernmental expert working group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction (resolution 71/276) to measure progress against the global targets of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. As a result, the simultaneous and coherent measurement of disaster-related targets of the Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework is now possible, reducing the reporting burden on countries.Gender statistics will play a critical role in monitoring progress on gender equality and women’s empowerment across the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. The United Nations is working collaboratively with other global, regional and national actors (including national statistical offices) to enhance the availability and use of gender statistics to support the accelerated implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and achieve transformative results for women and girls.4.	Means of implementation The ambitious and complex 2030 Agenda can be achieved only if countries have the means to pursue the goals. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda on financing for development identifies ways to unlock the necessary resources and investments. In its first substantive report, the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development concluded that the current global growth trajectory would not deliver the eradication of extreme poverty by 2030. However, it found that national actions and international cooperation could help change the global trajectory and support countries in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. A major undertaking of the Task Force in 2016-2017 was building a comprehensive catalogue of progress on more than 300 commitments and actions agreed by Member States.The financing required to achieve the 17 Sustainable Development Goals is estimated to be on the order of trillions of dollars annually. The redirection of capital flows can include efforts to attract, leverage and mobilize investments of all kinds — public, private, national and global. Nevertheless, there are theoretically enough savings in the global economy to drive this transformation, and the benefits will flow back to investors.Strengthening the capacity of developing countries to formulate more effective and efficient tax systems is a critical element in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters has been working on a number of products, including training and in-country assistance, that will help countries to ensure appropriate taxation and in particular to counter tax evasion. In another initiative, the United Nations, OECD, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have jointly launched a new Platform for Collaboration on Tax.The goal of enhanced development cooperation is to provide adequate and predictable means for developing countries, in particular least developed, landlocked and small island developing countries, to implement programmes and policies to end all dimensions of poverty. The Development Cooperation Forum, an inclusive multi-stakeholder platform, is the primary locus for discussing efforts to improve the quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation. It is used by Southern partners to share their experience, good practices, solutions and challenges among themselves and with a range of actors. In that context, the Government of Argentina, in collaboration with the United Nations, will host a high-level symposium on South-South and triangular development cooperation in Buenos Aires in September 2017. 5.	Strengthening implementation The challenge now lies in coordinated and coherent implementation by Member States, non-governmental organizations and partners across the United Nations systemThe 2030 Agenda provides a vision for development; the challenge now lies in its implementation. It is critical to mobilize adequate financial and non-financial support, ensure the effectiveness of multi-stakeholder partnerships and maintain a relentless focus on the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. The General Assembly requested me to prepare concrete proposals, and my vision includes planning for collective results, linking functions with funding. Member States have reaffirmed the complementarity and mutually reinforcing nature of the Sustainable Development Goals with peace and security and human rights, as well as with work streams under the sustaining peace agenda.6.	Regional dimensions Increasingly, regional and subregional groupings of countries are identifying solutions to their common development challenges, while regional institutions are being called upon to work collectively with Member States to develop regional strategies and approaches, not only on cross-border issues but also on more traditional issues of economic, social and environmentally sound development.In 2017, each regional commission engaged with Member States to adopt, align and integrate the 2030 Agenda into their national development frameworks and convened a regional forum for sustainable development that will inform the high-level political forum.7.	Countries in special situations Each country faces specific challenges, and the most vulnerable countries deserve special attention. The United Nations continues to support the implementation and follow-up to the Istanbul Programme of Action (least developed countries), the Vienna Programme of Action (landlocked developing countries) and the Samoa Pathway (small island developing States), as well as the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The United Nations has also played an important role in establishing the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries; the challenge now is to fully operationalize the Bank in seeking to fulfil Sustainable Development Goal target 17.8.8.	HaitiIn a step welcomed by Member States, the United Nations has initiated a new approach to the cholera crisis in Haiti (see A/71/620), consisting of two tracks. Track 1 consists of intensified efforts to upgrade the water and sanitation systems, while track 2 provides a package of material assistance and support for those Haitians most directly affected by cholera. My Special Envoy for Haiti is guiding the implementation, which is already under way; however, obtaining adequate funding to support the new approach remains a key challenge.9.	Effects of crime on development Crime continues to erode growth and development outcomes as well as peace and security prospects for countries of all income levels. In the context of providing sustainable financing for development in line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the United Nations has intensified its strategic approach, whereby crime prevention is considered a fundamental determinant of sustainable development. This includes building the capacity of Member States to combat illicit financial flows, prevent corruption and strengthen anti-money-laundering efforts. 10.	Natural disasters Over the past decade, economic losses resulting from natural disasters have reached nearly $1.4 trillion, hindering economic growth and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Investment in resilient communities and green infrastructure for schools, hospitals, roads, bridges, water and sanitation, energy, transport systems and housing is an imperative more critical than ever before, as is investment in effective, multi-hazard early warning mechanisms. This is an important aspect of my prevention-oriented reform agenda.11.	Forests The global focus since 1992 has been to reduce deforestation and forest degradation. However, in a ground-breaking decision in January 2017, the United Nations Forum on Forests set a target to increase global forest area by 3 per cent by 2030. The United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017-2030 (General Assembly resolution 71/285) provides a global framework for actions at all levels to sustainably manage all types of forests and trees outside forests and to halt deforestation and degradation. It features a set of six global forest goals and 26 associated targets to be reached by 2030, all of which are voluntary. The global forest goals and targets support the objectives of the international arrangement on forests and aim to contribute to progress on the Sustainable Development Goals and other international forest-related commitments. Crime affects all aspects of development and forest management is no exception. The work of the United Nations in addressing wildlife and forest crime focuses not only on strengthening the law enforcement, criminal justice and legislative capacity of Member States but also on improving the livelihoods of vulnerable rural groups, such as local communities relying on natural resources and ecosystem services.12.	Empowering vulnerable social groups With its central commitment to ensure dignity for all, the 2030 Agenda recognizes the contemporary global risks of rising inequality, discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. It also recognizes that people who are vulnerable must be empowered, including all women, children, youth, persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants. In response to dramatically rising numbers of people in search of safety or opportunity, the General Assembly convened a high-level plenary meeting on 19 September 2016 to address large movements of refugees and migrants, at which it adopted the New York Declaration on Refugees and Migrants (resolution 71/1). The Declaration sets out steps towards adopting two major compacts in 2018: (a)	A global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration; (b)	A global compact to more equitably share the responsibility for hosting and supporting refugees. At the same meeting, my predecessor launched the “Together” campaign, a coalition of Member States, civil society organizations and the private sector that aims to strengthen social cohesion, counter xenophobia and promote positive narratives about refugees and migrants.As global populations are growing older, the Organization is creating a forum for dialogue on the challenges and opportunities of ageing. Strong stakeholder input around disability-inclusive development also led to the effective integration of important commitments in the New Urban Agenda, in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The number of young people is also growing, and the United Nations is broadening its strategy to more effectively account for the role of youth, including young women and men, in peacebuilding and humanitarian action, as well as to ensure identification of cross-pillar linkages.My High-level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment identified purchasing goods and services from women-owned businesses as one of the primary drivers of progress. Corporations and Governments are also targeting companies owned by women in their procurement practices, while the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, covering 31 organizations and bodies, has prioritized purchasing from women-owned businesses.A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development This reporting period marked the end of one era in the quest for sustainable development and the beginning of a new and even more promising phase in which there is a real chance for us to eliminate poverty, inequality and exclusion in all corners of the world. The global mobilization behind the Millennium Development Goals helped to lift more than 1 billion people out of extreme poverty, to make inroads against hunger, to enable more girls to attend school than ever before and to protect our planet. They generated new and innovative partnerships, galvanized public opinion and showed the immense value of setting ambitious goals. Yet the landmark commitment entered into by world leaders in the year 2000 — to “spare no effort to free our fellow men, women and children from the abject and dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty” — was not fully achieved by the 2015 deadline. Inequalities persist and progress has been uneven across regions, among and within countries, leaving millions of people behind. This is especially true where violence is reversing or impeding advances in development. The dramatic upsurge and relapse of conflicts in the past decade tremendously reduced the gains that were made. At a time of growing polarization and crises, a new era for sustainable development was needed. The experiences and evidence from the efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals demonstrated that we know what to do, but also indicated a need for deeper approaches that can tackle root causes and do more to integrate the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. 1.	The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development On 25 September 2015, world leaders gathered in New York to adopt the historic 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Agenda is the product of one of the most inclusive and holistic processes in United Nations history. As the global framework for the next 15 years and a promise by Member States to “leave no one behind”, it encapsulates the global vision of the world we want to live in. The Agenda is anchored on 17 Sustainable Development Goals. These goals commit all countries and stakeholders to (1) ending poverty in all its forms everywhere; (2) ending hunger, achieving food security and improved nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture; (3) ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages; (4) ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all; (5) achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls; (6) ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all; (7) ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and clean energy for all; (8) promoting sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all; (9) building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization and fostering innovation; (10) reducing inequality within and among countries; (11) making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; (12) ensuring sustainable consumption and production patterns; (13) taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts; (14) conserving and sustainably using the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development; (15) protecting, restoring and promoting sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably managing forests, combating desertification, and halting and reversing land degradation and halting biodiversity loss; (16) promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, providing access to justice for all and building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels; and, finally, (17) strengthening the means of implementation and revitalizing the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development. The Goals are accompanied by 169 targets. This is an ambitious agenda, integrating the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, and addressing human rights and the interconnected root causes of poverty, hunger, pandemics, inequalities, environmental degradation, climate change, forced migrations, violence and extremism. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was built upon and expanded on the lessons learned from the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed commitments. It is reinforced by and reinforces several other global agreements reached in 2015 and the reporting period, including the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 aims to guide management of disaster risk in development at all levels. It focuses on preventing new and reducing existing disaster risk through proactive measures and investments across all sectors, including education, health, agriculture, water and energy. The focus on increasing the number of countries with national and local disaster risk-reduction strategies by 2020 is a clear opportunity to complement national planning under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on climate change. These mutually reinforcing agendas represent a new departure. The challenge now lies in implementation. This cannot be achieved by any actor alone. Ambition at the global level needs to translate to action by all communities and nations, on the basis of locally owned, gender-responsive implementation strategies. The systematic integration of a gender perspective into national sustainable development plans, strategies and budgets needs to be a priority. Governments must drive the process. They must show leadership and ownership and align policies, legislation and resources with the Sustainable Development Goals. Tapping into the synergies among the goals will help to fast-track implementation. In this vein, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda commits countries to set the necessary policies and regulatory frameworks and it incentivizes changes in consumption, production and investment patterns. The Action Agenda also reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance (ODA) commitments remains crucial and stresses the role of ODA in catalysing additional resource mobilization from public and private sources. It also welcomes the increased contribution of South-South cooperation to sustainable development. Special efforts will be needed in the least developed countries, the landlocked developing countries and the small island developing States. These countries, along with conflict-affected States, represent segments of the global community that face the biggest constraints on sustainable economic growth and development. While national leadership and ownership are critical, these countries depend on global partnerships for financial resources, policy advice and technical assistance. The Istanbul Programme of Action, the political declaration adopted at the midterm review of the Programme of Action, the Vienna Programme of Action and the Samoa Pathway are compacts that address the challenges and opportunities of these groups of countries. These dedicated programmes of action complement Agenda 2030. The Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, to be operational in 2017, has the potential to strengthen national capabilities and provide expertise to least developed countries to achieve internationally agreed development goals. Financing will also be key to implementation. The Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development was a key first step in this regard. As an input to that important discussion, the Inter-agency Task Force on Financing for Development produced a report that maps the more than 300 commitments and action items contained in the Addis Agenda, including the means of implementation targets for the Sustainable Development Goals. It creates a monitoring framework and presents data sources and tools to monitor their implementation in future years. Another important input was the first Global Infrastructure Forum, held by the multilateral development banks in Washington, D.C. Implementation — and accountability for implementation — will also falter without quality, accessible and timely data. The Statistical Commission of the Economic and Social Council has agreed on a global indicator framework. The implementation of an indicator framework for monitoring and assessing progress will present a challenge in many countries, and national statistical capacities will have to be strengthened. At its forty-sixth session, the Statistical Commission established the High-level Group for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity-Building for Statistics for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to provide strategic leadership for statistical monitoring and reporting of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The data revolution is an important enabler for the global indicator framework. The Statistical Commission is already working towards the organization of a United Nations World Data Forum at the end of 2016 to strengthen the dialogue with a broad range of partners and stakeholders. In view of the adoption of Agenda 2030, the annual annex to the present report entitled “Millennium Development Goals, targets and indicators: statistical tables” has been discontinued. In its place, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 70/1, paragraph 83, there will be an annual progress report on Agenda 2030 based on a global indicator framework to inform the high-level political forum. An annex entitled “Sustainable Development Goals, targets and indicators: statistical tables” will be included in that progress report. 2.	The need for action on climate change This reporting period saw a new sense of urgency as well as new hope for the most existential quest of our time, to combat climate change and reverse its effects where we can. Climate change represents the greatest threat to achieving sustainable development and the eradication of extreme poverty. The year 2015 was the warmest since modern record-keeping began. The five-year period 2011-2015 was the warmest on record. Carbon dioxide levels — the primary driver of climate change — surpassed 400 parts per million globally for the first time in recorded history. The science is crystal clear. So too are the increasingly visible effects in people’s lives. Each year, we see increasing evidence of the effects, particularly on the world’s poorest and most vulnerable populations. From the highly vulnerable island nations in the Pacific to the drought-stricken areas throughout the Horn of Africa, impacts of climate change are undermining the ability of developing countries to achieve sustainable development and in some cases threatening their very survival. Action on climate will reinforce action on sustainable development. Investments made under the climate agenda are investments in development. Global cooperation across all sectors of society is essential for meeting this challenge. The reporting period witnessed the culmination of a 10-year effort on my part to contribute to the successful conclusion of an ambitious climate agreement. After the successful conclusion of my Climate Summit in 2014 in New York and the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Lima, I set two main objectives: to mobilize political will towards finalizing a new agreement in Paris at the end of 2015 and to catalyse ambitious action on the ground to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience. The engagement of Heads of State and Government during 2015 was also essential to finalizing an ambitious agreement. To that end, I convened leaders on two occasions to galvanize engagement at the highest levels in the lead-up to the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties in Paris. These encounters resulted in a broad consensus among key countries and provided strong impetus for an agreement in Paris. The adoption of the Paris Agreement on 12 December 2015 and the high-level signature ceremony for the Paris Agreement, on 22 April 2016, capped a remarkable year of multilateral achievements for people and the planet. It demonstrated the real commitment and ambition of all countries around the globe to mitigate climate change by reducing their greenhouse gas emissions by and beyond 2020, and provides a solid foundation for the climate-resilient transformation of the global economy in a manner that is sensitive to human rights and gender equality. Now it is critical to translate commitment into action. This transformation will help to secure a future that is safer, healthier and more prosperous for all. Action at every level, from the local to the global, must accelerate. We have no time to waste, and much to gain, by moving quickly down a lower-carbon pathway. Climate finance is critical for catalysing action on the ground and for building political trust. The definition of a politically credible trajectory for achieving the goal of $100 billion per year by 2020, and the full operationalization of the Green Climate Fund and the approval of its first projects by the Board of the Fund in November 2015, were crucial for the successful outcome in Paris. Successful climate action is a multifaceted global challenge. Recognizing the importance of resilience and adaptive capacity, I also launched a new global initiative on climate resilience: A2R (Anticipate, Absorb, Reshape). A2R is a multistakeholder partnership that focuses on accelerating action to strengthen climate resilience prior to 2020, particularly for the most vulnerable countries and people. A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development1.	The Millennium Development GoalsExperience with the Millennium Development Goals has shown the value of a clear, collective vision for galvanizing action, combined with focused targets for measuring progress. We have made enormous progress. Several targets have been met (see annex). The global extreme poverty rate has been halved and continues to decline. More children than ever are attending primary school. Child deaths have dropped dramatically. About 2.6 billion people gained access to an improved drinking water source. Targeted investments in fighting malaria, HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis have saved millions. Coherent national policies aligned to global agreements have resulted in progress in combating both non-communicable and acute diseases. Significant gaps remain, however, including in improving maternal and reproductive health, achieving gender equality, achieving full and productive employment especially for women and youth, stemming the alarming global rate of deforestation, and accelerating progress across the board in least developed countries. In many cases, these lags have been mutually reinforcing. For example, gender equality and empowerment of women are preconditions for overcoming poverty, hunger and disease, but progress towards Goal 3 has been slow on many fronts. Deforestation exacerbates greenhouse gas emissions and climate change and undermines the attainment of other targets, since forest resources contribute to poverty eradication, food security and the distribution of wealth, especially for the rural poor. The measurement of regional and national averages can mask large differences across and within regions and countries. Advances in many areas often bypass the poor and the most vulnerable. Policies and interventions will be needed to eliminate the persistent or even increasing inequalities between the rich and the poor, between rural and urban areas, and to improve the conditions of those disadvantaged by gender, age, disability, ethnicity, or geographic location, and those who experience multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, such as women and girls.Member States are addressing these issues through the negotiations on financing for development and the sustainable development goals. Further, the nonlegally binding instrument on all types of forests and the global objectives on forests must be implemented, as must the outcome document of the first World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held in September 2014, and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. To accelerate progress towards gender equality, urgent action will be needed in the six priority areas agreed to by Member States during the 20year review of the Beijing Platform for Action. After 10 years, Member States are reviewing the implementation of the 10 targets for connectivity and 18 Action Lines adopted by the World Summit on the Information Society to monitor implementation of its core vision: a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented information society.Bolder and more focused action is also needed to accelerate progress in the least developed countries. If recommended by the High-level Panel of Experts on the feasibility study, a technology bank for the least developed countries will be operationalized during the seventieth session of the General Assembly. The comprehensive high-level midterm review of the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries, to be held in Turkey in June 2016, will provide an important opportunity to strengthen the global partnership for structural transformation and rapid poverty reduction in the least developed countries. Many least developed countries still depend heavily on official development assistance (ODA) as the primary source of external and public financing and, while overall flows may be stable, flows to the poorest countries are still falling, the distribution among those countries has been uneven and the impact has not always been as successful as envisaged. Only 5 of the 29 members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have met the United Nations ODA target of 0.7 per cent of their gross national income, while 9 meet the lower bound of the target by providing more than 0.15 per cent of their gross national income as ODA to the least developed countries. The average tariff applied by developed countries to developing country exports has decreased notably, but tariff peaks and tariff escalation continue to impede developing countries’ access to developed country markets. Despite debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, several HIPC countries are again approaching moderate to high levels of debt distress, some small States face significant debt sustainability challenges, and some developed countries also face severe debt overhangs. While some lower-middle-income countries have begun to access international capital markets for the first time, when interest rates rise globally some of these countries will be unable to refinance their borrowings, running the risk of a new crisis. Monitoring progress towards the Millennium Development Goals has led to the strengthening of statistical systems to enable the provision of quality data. However, data gaps, data quality issues, compliance with methodological standards, lack of disaggregated data that allow for monitoring of progress by age, sex and other social categories, and lack of geospatial information have been major challenges. Considerable effort and investment will be needed to build a solid data and information and communications technology infrastructure to support the new sustainable development agenda until 2030.Landlocked developing countries have continued to face important challenges, but have nevertheless made tangible progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, particularly in reducing the proportion of people living in extreme poverty. The Vienna Programme of Action for the Decade 2014-2024, adopted at the Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries in November 2014, aims to address the special development needs and challenges arising from landlockedness, remoteness and geographical constraints. Small island developing States also continue to be among those most exposed to exogenous shocks and disproportionately vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, such as sea level rise and increased frequency and severity of extreme weather events. In September 2014, the Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States adopted the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway. As 2014 was the International Year of Small Island Developing States, many awareness-raising and other activities were conducted throughout the year. 2.	Sustainable developmentThe year 2015 provides an unprecedented opportunity to put the world on a sustainable development path. The post-2015 development and climate processes, which ultimately aim to eradicate poverty, improve people’s lives, and rapidly transition to a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy, are mutually reinforcing: when acted on together, they can provide prosperity and security for present and future generations.This new agenda aims to address both existing and emerging challenges. Growing global inequality, increasing exposure to natural hazards, rapid urbanization, new patterns of migration, and the overconsumption of energy and natural resources by some threaten to drive disaster risk to dangerous levels with systemic global impacts. Annual economic losses from disasters are estimated at an average of $250-300 billion. As underscored by the ambitious Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in March 2015, investing in risk reduction pays high dividends while saving lives.By building and expanding on the lessons learned from the experience of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed commitments, the post-2015 development agenda will chart development efforts, for the next 15 years and beyond, in pursuit of poverty eradication and sustainable development in its social, economic and environmental dimensions. It will be an agenda to improve people’s lives and realize their human rights, in full harmony with nature. In a new departure, it will be a universal agenda entailing national and global responsibilities for all countries. Each and every country will have a responsibility towards its own citizens and towards the international community for implementing this agenda. The inclusion of all stakeholders in the implementation of the post-2015 agenda, including monitoring and review, is of the utmost importance to ensure ownership at all levels.The proposed 17 sustainable development goals and 169 targets developed by the Open Working Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals will be at the heart of the post-2015 development agenda. They are ambitious. They have the potential to transform societies and mobilize people and countries. They integrate the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals and go beyond them by addressing inequality, new challenges and structural issues such as climate change, sustainable economic growth, productive capacities, peace and security and effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. They take a proactive approach to achieving gender equality. They capture the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development in a balanced way. They also spell out means of implementation under each specific goal and in one stand-alone goal on the global partnership, bringing together Governments, civil society and other actors for a truly integrated approach to international development for people and planet. The elaboration of the agenda has engaged Governments and non-State actors. The Open Working Group produced a focused and ambitious outcome. It crafted a new way of working, with small groups of Member States sharing seats. I welcome this willingness on the part of Member States to try new ideas and approaches. It was also the most inclusive and “bottom-up” of processes, involving unprecedented numbers of stakeholders. These discussions have confirmed the importance of the United Nations as a global convening institution for sustainable development. Through their recent main themes of drawing lessons from the Millennium Development Goals and managing the transition from the Millennium Development Goals to the sustainable development goals, the 2014 and 2015 cycles of the Economic and Social Council have supported Member States through substantive policy guidance in the transformative shift to the universal post-2015 development agenda. The high-level political forum, which met this past year again under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, reflected on the implications of the new universal and transformative agenda, and on how best to ensure its implementation and track progress, including through the forum’s role to review and follow-up on the post-2015 development agenda. The integration segment, which focused on the theme “Achieving sustainable development through employment creation and decent work for all”, also helped in generating ideas for policy integration. This is going to be the new key feature of the Economic and Social Council. On the basis of this positive foundation, I am confident that the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda will produce a solid and universal agenda, to be adopted at the summit at United Nations Headquarters in September 2015. Implementation of the post-2015 development agenda will require renewed efforts by all Governments to strengthen public institutions by enhancing their responsiveness and accountability in order to meet growing demands on service delivery, as set forth in the proposed goals and targets. Governments must therefore be ready to innovate and develop effective, accountable, participatory and transparent institutions at all levels, to ensure efficient and effective use of public resources for the services and benefits of all citizens, particularly women and girls and marginalized groups.To be realized, these goals must be matched by an equally ambitious agreement on financing for development, technology facilitation and capacity-building, and by a universal and ambitious climate change agreement. New ways must be found to mobilize and allocate financial resources and other means of implementation such as information and communications technologies more effectively. Only by making progress on these tracks together can we achieve a better future for humanity. On 13 July, I joined with Heads of State and other high-ranking Government officials, the heads of international organizations, business leaders, nongovernmental organizations and prominent academics for the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, at which Member States adopted the Addis Ababa Action Agenda as the outcome document. The Action Agenda establishes a strong foundation to support implementation of the post-2015 development agenda including the sustainable development goals. It provides a new global framework for financing sustainable development. It includes a policy agenda that incentivizes a shift in investment towards areas of global need, and that aligns all financing flows and policies with economic, social and environmental priorities. It contains agreement on a comprehensive set of policy actions by Member States, with a package of over 100 concrete measures that are related to all sources of public, private, national and international finance, trade, debt, systemic issues, science, technology, innovation and capacity-building. The Action Agenda also serves as a guide for actions by the private sector, civil society, and philanthropic organizations. Deliverables announced at the sidelines of the Conference, along with additional initiatives to be launched in the coming months, will further contribute to reaching our global goals. Together, they should support a revitalized and strengthened global partnership for sustainable development. The Action Agenda also strengthens data, monitoring and follow-up for the financing for development process. It establishes an annual Financing for Development Forum as part of the Economic and Social Council, with intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations that will feed into the high-level political forum.During the dialogue in the Economic and Social Council on the longer-term positioning of the United Nations development system, Governments sought to ensure a coherent approach in responding to the new and emerging challenges that the United Nations system will face while implementing the post-2015 development agenda. The dialogue analysed the interlinkages between functions, funding, governance, organizational arrangements, capacity, impact and partnership approaches and explored ideas for further analysis and action to make the United Nations development system fit to deliver the new agenda.In addition to new sustainable development goals, Member States have a historic opportunity to finalize a meaningful, universal climate agreement in Paris in December 2015. In so doing, we will build a safer, healthier, more equitable world for present and future generations. To that end, the Climate Summit I hosted on 23 September 2014 created strong political momentum and advanced solutions to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience. At the Summit, more than 100 Heads of State or Government and 800 leaders from finance, business and civil society announced significant new actions on forests, energy, transport, cities and other key issues. Public and private sector leaders pledged to mobilize over $200 billion in climate finance by the end of 2015 to finance low-carbon, climate-resilient growth. Governments made important strides at the Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention on Climate Change held in Lima in 2014, launching the Lima-Paris Action Agenda to expand climate partnerships, and pledging $10 billion to initially capitalize the Green Climate Fund. The task now is to ensure that projects are approved and that funds are disbursed as soon as possible to where they are needed most. The Lima Work Programme on Gender was also adopted, with the aims, inter alia, of increasing awareness and capacity to address the gender dimensions of climate change, improving women’s participation and ensuring that climate policies and measures are gender responsive. Progress is still needed on several fronts, however. Climate finance is critical for catalysing action and building political trust. Developed countries must define a politically credible trajectory for achieving the goal of $100 billion per year by 2020 announced in 2009 in Copenhagen. Adaptation and resilience efforts must be strengthened and supported, especially in the small island developing States and the least developed countries. All countries should submit ambitious national contributions that detail how they will address climate change in the post-2020 period. Action must accelerate at every level, from the local to the global. We have no time to waste, and much to gain by moving quickly down a lower-carbon pathway. All countries must be part of the solution if we are to stay within the global temperature rise threshold of 2°C. Working together, we can turn the climate challenge into a powerful opportunity to reduce poverty and inequality, strengthen sustainable growth, improve public health and promote sustainable development.A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development1.	Accelerating progress on the Millennium Development GoalsThe 2015 deadline for achieving the Millennium Development Goals is swiftly approaching. The final picture is increasingly clear. Overall, substantial progress has been made in meeting many of the targets. Both the number of people living in extreme poverty and the proportion of people without sustainable access to improved water sources have been halved. The proportion of urban slum dwellers has declined. Remarkable progress has been made in combating malaria and tuberculosis. There have been notable improvements in primary education. Several other important targets are also likely to be met by 2015, assuming continued commitment by Governments and other stakeholders. Progress in many areas is, however, far from sufficient. Much remains to be done to secure the well-being, dignity and rights of those still on the margins, in addition to those of future generations. Considerable effort will be needed to fully meet target 1.C and improve nutrition. The world is still failing to renew the promise of survival for its children, while too many women are dying in childbirth when we have the means to save them. More than 2.5 billion people continue to lack improved sanitation facilities. Our natural resource base is in serious decline, with continuing losses of forests, species and fish stocks.Some progress has been made on gender equality and women’s empowerment. In 2013, more women were elected to legislatures than ever before, with women now holding 21.8 per cent of parliamentary seats worldwide. For the first time, the Commission on the Status of Women comprehensively assessed progress with regard to each Goal, identified structural factors that have held back achievement of the Goals on the part of women and girls, and called for a transformative and comprehensive approach for gender equality. Gender-based violence remains a scourge that contravenes the rights of women and girls and undermines development. It is an affront to our common humanity.Progress towards the Goals remains uneven among and within countries, especially where violence is reversing gains made. Poverty rates remain high in subSaharan Africa. Children from poor or rural households are more likely to be out of school than their rich or urban counterparts. There are wide gaps in knowledge about and access to medicines for HIV and its prevention in sub-Saharan Africa, which has been hardest hit by the epidemic. Many least developed countries lag behind and will meet none of the global targets. At the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the realization of the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals for persons with disabilities: the way forward, a disability-inclusive development agenda towards 2015 and beyond, in September 2013, participants highlighted the urgent need to address disability as a cross-cutting development issue and called for an inclusive approach in our global agenda-setting.On a more positive note, notwithstanding the fiscal constraints stemming from weak economic performance in many donor countries and after two years of falling volumes, official development assistance rose by 6 per cent to a record high of $134.8 billion in 2013. That amount was, however, equivalent to only 0.3 per cent of the gross national income of donor members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a small improvement from 2012 towards the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income, which was met by only five countries.The risk of disasters continues to increase, threatening economic growth and hampering efforts to reduce poverty. The United Nations has taken steps to strengthen partnerships with the private sector and to ensure that investment decisions reduce risk. Accelerated action is needed, however, for the remaining term of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters and for post-2015 disaster risk reduction work. The United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience is key. Global, regional and thematic multi-stakeholder consultations have been convened in preparation for the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Japan in March 2015.Preparations are under way for the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, which, in conjunction with the International Year of Small Island Developing States, will provide a unique opportunity for global leaders to inject political momentum and commit themselves to taking tangible action to tackle the specific structural challenges of this vulnerable and geographically disadvantaged group of Member States by recognizing and launching genuine and durable multi-stakeholder partnerships. Time is running out to take the action necessary to keep the rise in global temperature below the agreed threshold of 2°C, however. Progress has also been made in preparations for the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.2.	Post-2015 development agendaIn the past 12 months, significant progress has been made in shaping a transformative universal agenda to harmonize peoples’ ambitions and the planet’s needs, while embarking on a more sustainable development path. This was a key message of my report entitled “A life of dignity for all: accelerating progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and advancing the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015” (A/68/202 and Corr.1), which I presented to Member States in September 2013. The special event of the President of the General Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals showed the determination of Member States to free the world from poverty, inequality and hunger and to address, in an integrated way, the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. Member States agreed that the agenda should promote peace and security, democratic governance, the rule of law, gender equality and human rights for all. At the heart of this agenda will be a concise set of ambitious goals with the overarching objective of eradicating poverty and with sustainable development at their core, universal in nature and applicable to all countries, taking into consideration their various contexts and levels of development.The work of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, supported by the United Nations system, has galvanized enthusiasm, ambition and energy, including through extensive outreach to key stakeholders. The Open Working Group has proposed a set of sustainable development goals that show the strong ownership of Member States and their commitment and ambition to working towards a global vision, not only of ending poverty in all its forms, but also of ensuring equitable distribution of development gains and tackling common challenges affecting all people and our planet.By September 2014, the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing will have delivered options to facilitate the mobilization and use of resources in achieving sustainable development objectives. The outcome of the events organized by the President of the General Assembly, including his high-level stocktaking event on the post-2015 development agenda, will also be available as input to the process.Intergovernmental negotiations will lead to the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda at a high-level summit in September 2015. Before the end of 2014, I will bring all input together in a synthesis report. It will include the output of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing and the structured dialogues on technology, in addition to the wider input facilitated by the United Nations, including the second phase of national and global consultations, the “My World” consultations and the regional dialogues on accountability. Expectations for the summit include a set of action-oriented and universal sustainable development goals, and both a renewed global partnership for development and an inclusive accountability framework for the post-2015 development agenda. Those expectations need to be backed by the broadest and highest-level engagement, including by civil society, the private sector, parliamentarians and the scientific and academic community, to ensure strong impact and high visibility. It will therefore be critical to ensure that we have an effective United Nations development system, which is fit for purpose when it comes to supporting the implementation of this agenda, while leading other constituencies to likewise engage with this important issue.The second meeting of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, in July 2014, has charted the way towards an ambitious and universal post-2015 development agenda. It has given more clarity to the implications of a universal agenda in a context of varied regional priorities, all grounded in the scientific findings of the Prototype Global Sustainable Development Report. We must continue to shape the forum so that it delivers its mandate to review sustainable development goals, ensuring coordination and coherence of sustainable development after 2015.Through its high-level Development Cooperation Forum, the Economic and Social Council has generated policy messages and recommendations on the critical role of development cooperation in supporting the implementation of a post-2015 development agenda. The Forum has also called for a robust global monitoring and accountability framework for development cooperation commitments engaging all actors.I am confident that a renewed global partnership and clearer and fairer rules for the global economy will emerge from the process launched at the International Conference on Financing for Development, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development track on means of implementation and the work of the Development Cooperation Forum. The third International Conference on Financing for Development, to be held in Addis Ababa in July 2015, should make an important contribution to and support the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.The new development agenda must mitigate the risks of future crises such as those that we have witnessed in the fields of energy, finance, food and climate. That vision can, however, be delivered only if ambition is matched with equally strong commitment to reframing development models and unblocking the wide range of resources needed to achieve sustainable development objectives. Capable implementation by effective institutions anchored in the rule of law and accountability by all will be essential.3.	Need for action on climate changeClimate change is one of the greatest threats to a sustainable future. Without urgent action, the consequences will be highly dangerous and perhaps irreversible. Poverty eradication, sustainable development and efforts to combat climate change are mutually reinforcing goals that can provide prosperity and security for current and future generations.The fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change provides a compelling case for tackling climate change through substantial and sustained reductions of greenhouse-gas emissions. It is concluded therein that atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, among other gases, have increased to unprecedented levels in human history. The Panel has assessed, with 95 to 100 per cent certainty, that human activities are the dominant cause of observed warming. Projected losses from climate change range from 0.2 to 2.0 per cent of global annual income, with a rise in temperature of 2°C. We are likely to exceed this range. Climate and social risks will interact and amplify each other to increase overall adverse impacts further. In addition to the tremendous savings and opportunities for economic growth, however, climate action can foster decent jobs, equality and access to sustainable energy, help to build sustainable cities and enhance the health of people and the planet. World leaders and Governments have never been more aware of the destructive effects of climate change. They are also aware of the existence of affordable and scalable climate solutions that can lead to cleaner and more resilient economies. I am hosting a climate summit on 23 September to provide leaders with a platform to champion an ambitious vision and transformative action. In the lead-up, the Abu Dhabi Ascent, held in May 2014, brought together leaders from Governments, the business sector and civil society to explore new approaches to expanding action to combat climate change. The summit will give leaders an opportunity to demonstrate their political will for a global climate agreement in 2015 and to catalyse action on the ground to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience to climate change. I call upon leaders to come to New York on 23 September to make bold announcements of the significant steps that they are willing to take.A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development We are within a thousand days of the conclusion of the largest, most successful anti-poverty push in history, the Millennium Development Goals. As the deadline looms, efforts to achieve the unfinished business of the eight Millennium Development Goals are intensifying. Rather than seeing 2015 as an end point, however, we must view it as the beginning of a new era: an era in which we eradicate extreme poverty, protect the environment and promote economic opportunity for all. We must build on the successes of the Millennium Development Goals, persist in the effort to meet them where they have not been met, attend to the gaps and address new and emerging challenges. To that end, the Organization is supporting Member States in their efforts to define a bold, ambitious and universal post-2015 development agenda with sustainable development at its core. Recognizing the risk that climate change may pose to our development objectives, we are also supporting the negotiations to achieve a legally binding global climate agreement by 2015. 1.	Accelerating progress on the Millennium Development Goals The Millennium Development Goals have improved the lives of billions of people. Clear and easily understood, they helped to set global and national priorities and fuel action on the ground. Governments, the international community, civil society, the private sector and individuals came together, aided by new technologies, scientific advances and partnerships. Consequently, global poverty is declining, access to improved water sources has expanded, 40 million more children are in primary school, more than 5 million children are surviving annually who would otherwise have died, more than 1.1 million people are alive who before would have died from malaria, and an estimated 8 million people in low- and middle-income countries are now receiving life-saving HIV treatment. However, there are some goals on which we are noticeably lagging. Progress on others has been distressingly uneven. Unless we take resolute action, almost 1 billion people will still live in extreme poverty in 2015. Mothers will die needlessly in childbirth and children will suffer and die from preventable diseases. Poor sanitation — the goal where we lag most — will remain a daily challenge for billions. A great deal of work lies ahead to ensure that all children can complete primary education. Fifty-seven million are not in school and, as Malala Yousafzai reminded us so powerfully, many girls in particular must overcome almost insurmountable odds to get an education. Economic growth has been insufficiently inclusive, resulting in a significant jobs gap. Young people bear the brunt: 73 million of them worldwide are out of work, and many others face poor wages and working conditions. Although the Millennium Development Goal on reducing hunger may now be within reach, one in eight people worldwide still do not have enough to eat and progress has slowed or stalled in many regions. Meanwhile, global consumption and production exceed the Earth’s capacity: we currently consume 150 per cent of the Earth’s annual regenerative capacity, up from 65 per cent in 1990. It is also clear that we need to think differently about the relationships between and within the goals. Failure to meet some targets undermines efforts to meet others. Broad-brush measurement of progress has masked significant and growing inequalities both within and across countries. The most vulnerable segments of society are too often left behind. Failure to achieve gender equality has negative consequences for other goals, which strongly depend on women’s empowerment and access to education, work, health care and decision-making. Failure to secure appropriate sanitation facilities can dramatically exacerbate health challenges, as we saw most tragically in the cholera epidemic in Haiti. Failure to nurture and protect our natural resource base has undermined the attainment of social, economic and environmental Millennium Development Goals, intensified poverty and resource degradation and contributed to deforestation, desertification and biodiversity loss. Geographically, southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa continue to suffer from the highest rates of child and maternal mortality and the disparity between those two regions and the rest of the world has grown. Finally, and in spite of recent signs that the situation may not be as dire as we feared, a significant portion of vulnerable and conflict-affected countries have yet to achieve a single Millennium Development Goal. Even as we redouble efforts to meet the Goals, the post-2015 agenda must find ways to address the gaps and inequalities that have so significantly detracted from the overall effort. Several important initiatives were launched in the past year to draw attention to and galvanize action — often from a wide variety of stakeholders — on goals with glaring lags or inequalities. In September 2012, I launched the Global Education First Initiative to spur international efforts to make education a top global priority. We have already secured over $1.5 billion in commitments. In January 2013, I appointed my first Envoy on Youth to promote and support the needs and concerns of young people. Initiatives to end preventable child deaths by 2035 and significantly expand access to family planning were launched as part of Every Woman Every Child. The Zero Hunger Challenge aspires to a future where every person enjoys the right to food, while the Scaling Up Nutrition movement focuses on maternal and child nutrition. In conjunction with the International Year of Water Cooperation, 2013, the General Assembly has undertaken a Sanitation Drive and the United Nations system is re-energizing its efforts in a Call to Action on Sanitation. We have also redoubled our efforts at the national and international levels to improve the available data for monitoring progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and are drawing attention to the importance of implementing existing commitments and of stronger accountability and monitoring mechanisms. Since the Millennium Development Goals were agreed, the world has changed. The size of the world economy has more than doubled, much of the growth taking place in the global South. The world population has become larger, more urban, more connected and more mobile. By 2050, it is projected to reach 9.6 billion people, of whom 86 per cent will be living in what are now developing countries. While the populations of developed countries are ageing, in the developing world half of the population will be under 28 by 2015 and, in the poorest countries, half will be under 20. Civil society and levels of political participation have increased in strength. Young and digitally connected populations have been a major factor in movements for democracy and dignity worldwide, calling for decent work, equality and an end to corruption. These movements have had a dramatic political impact in countries where inequalities have risen in spite of economic growth and poverty reduction. The environmental impact of the past decade’s economic and demographic changes is also dramatic, with rapid increases in total demand for water, food and other commodities and increased energy use with related rise in carbon dioxide emissions. In addition, there is a great deal more awareness of the impact of climate change, including the potential for future losses from natural disasters. Finally, the global aid landscape has begun to change in profound ways. Official development assistance (ODA) declined by 4 per cent from 2011 to 2012. ODA will remain an important source of support and serve as a significant catalyst in particular for the least developed countries. At the same time, more diverse sources and flows of funding will play an increasing role in the future development agenda. 2.	Post-2015 United Nations development agendaThe post-2015 development agenda represents an unprecedented opportunity to meet new and anticipate future challenges, while finding more effective ways to meet existing goals. At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, in June 2012, Member States confirmed their commitment to sustainable development in three interconnected dimensions: economic development (including the end of extreme poverty), social inclusion, and environmental sustainability. They agreed to build on the success of the Millennium Development Goals by developing a set of goals for sustainable development that are global in nature and universally applicable. The General Assembly has established an Open Working Group, with 30 members, to develop those goals, and this work is ongoing. Member States will also discuss strategy for financing sustainable development and consider options for improved sharing of technology. In July 2012, I established a High-level Panel of Eminent Persons — 27 individuals from government, civil society, academia and the private sector — in support of Member States’ efforts towards a post-2015 development agenda. The Panel was charged with producing bold yet practical recommendations that would help to respond to the global challenges of the twenty-first century, building on the Millennium Development Goals and with a view to ending poverty and promoting sustainable development. At the heart of the Panel’s proposals are five transformational shifts. The new agenda must include everyone. It must put sustainable development at its core in order to drive prosperity, while addressing the threats to humanity from climate change and environmental degradation. Generating jobs must be a priority. Peace, security and freedom from violence are essential. A new global partnership is needed to implement the agenda. This is a universal agenda that requires deep transformations in the way our economies work and our societies are organized, both in the North and in the South. The recommendations of the Panel inform my own report on accelerating progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and advancing the development agenda beyond 2015, for the consideration of Member States in September 2013. My report also draws on other inputs, including from the scientific and technological community, the business sector, a broad set of consultations at the national, regional and global levels, and the views of the United Nations system. Overall, these efforts point to the importance of arriving at a single and coherent post-2015 agenda, firmly grounded in the principles of human rights, equality and sustainability, and applicable to all countries while taking into account regional, national and subnational circumstances and priorities. Consultations on the post-2015 development agenda have been opened to people from all over the world. The consultations indicate that people want a global development agenda, backed by national policy action, which can empower them to realize the future they want. They want their leaders to take action to create the conditions for a more equitable and safer world. They want to see further progress on education, health, water and sanitation.I look forward to the special event on the Millennium Development Goals, to be held in the General Assembly in September 2013, where these strands will begin to come together. This is an opportunity for a paradigm shift in international development. Accountability, mutual responsibilities and a clear understanding of different capabilities in responding to this paradigm shift will be essential to its implementation.3.	The need for action on climate changeLifting people out of poverty and protecting the planet and its resources are two sides of the same coin. The poor and vulnerable suffer most, but no country is immune from the effects of climate change. The past decade has been the warmest on record. Extreme weather is on the rise. The cost in lives, livelihoods, infrastructure and resources is growing. New data to advance our understanding of the human causes of the warming of the planet will be available in the forthcoming fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.In the past year, the urgency of the challenge was further recognized by Member States. At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, Member States reaffirmed climate change as one of the greatest challenges of our time. At the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Doha, Member States successfully launched a new commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol and agreed on a firm timetable to adopt a universal climate agreement by 2015. Developed countries reiterated their commitment to deliver on promises for long-term climate finance support to developing countries. Recognizing the importance of political leadership, I note broad, positive responses to my offer to convene leaders in 2014 to mobilize the political will necessary for this universal climate agreement. The high-level meeting, planned for September 2014, will provide a platform for leaders to demonstrate political will, raise ambition, and catalyse action on the ground to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience. Meanwhile, my Sustainable Energy for All initiative, a multi-stakeholder partnership of Governments, the private sector and civil society, is working towards universal energy access, a doubling of the rate of energy efficiency improvement, and a doubling of the share of renewables in the global energy mix by 2030. To date, tens of billions of dollars have been mobilized and more than 75 developing countries have opted into the initiative. Support for the initiative comes from all quarters, from small island States to emerging and developed economies. New leadership for the initiative is now in place, regional and thematic hubs have been created, and progress is being made. The case for climate action has never been clearer or more compelling. Policy tools exist and, where applied, are generating concrete results. Some 118 countries around the world now have renewable energy policies or targets. More than half are developing countries. Thanks to the growing public and political support for tangible action, international agreements are being translated into action and public policy on the ground. Investment in clean energy has surpassed $1 trillion. However, more is needed. For the United Nations part, I am proud that renovations to the Secretariat building in New York are designed to reduce energy consumption by 50 per cent and that, as part of the wider “Greening the Blue” initiative, we are taking steps to lessen the greenhouse gas footprint of peace operations. The challenge of climate change and sustainable development will need to be met through the coordination of poverty elimination, economic development and environmental protection.4.	ConclusionIn the next two years, we face a series of milestones and deadlines that together provide a unique opportunity to inject political momentum and take tangible action on these interconnected challenges. In 2013, in addition to the special event on the Millennium Development Goals, we have the high-level dialogue on international migration and development, the high-level meeting on disability and development, and the fourth session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, which aims at a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction. In 2014, the special session of the General Assembly on the follow-up to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development will be held, as will the 10-year Review Conference on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action for the landlocked developing countries and the Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States. I will also convene global leaders for a major summit on climate change. These processes culminate in 2015 with agreement on a new development agenda and the deadline for a comprehensive, binding climate change agreement. The United Nations will support Member States as they endeavour to make the most of each individual event and to ensure that the cumulative impact is far-reaching and fitting to the enormity of the challenges ahead. A.	Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development Building the foundations for sustainable development is the greatest challenge we face today as an international community. We know what we must do: we must eradicate extreme poverty, protect our planet and catalyse inclusive economic growth.1.	Accelerating progress on reaching the Millennium Development GoalsThe first concrete test of our resolve is three years away: achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The international community has made important progress in many areas: in reducing poverty globally, improving access to primary education for all children, reducing child and maternal mortality, increasing access to HIV treatment and reducing slum populations. We can even celebrate the achievement of some global targets ahead of schedule: 89 per cent of the global population can now access improved water sources and the percentage of people living in extreme poverty has been reduced by half globally. Conditions for more than 200 million people living in slums have been ameliorated — double the 2020 target — and primary school enrolment of girls equalled that of boys. Commitment and the active adoption of improved policies by national Governments have been central to the improvements we have seen.Progress has not been uniform, however. Inequalities among many populations are rising — particularly in southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Food insecurity and malnutrition are prevalent. While access to health and education may be expanding, the quality of services in many regions remains inadequate. While the Millennium Development Goal water target may have been reached, progress towards sanitation targets is dismal and, in some areas, the quality of water has worsened. Last year, official development assistance decreased for the first time in many years and trade protection measures are increasing in popularity.In short, in this final sprint to 2015, we must not lose our momentum or our focus. To this end, the Organization has been accelerating its work in support of all the Millennium Development Goals and intensifying its efforts to bolster resilience to climatic, economic and social shocks. Efforts include global initiatives like Every Woman, Every Child; the Global Plan towards the Elimination of New HIV Infections among Children by 2015 and Keeping Their Mothers Alive; the Scaling Up Nutrition Movement; the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security; and targeted support for national capacity development such as the Millennium Development Goal Acceleration Framework, and in key areas like improving the collection and analysis of national statistics.Disaster risk reduction is crucial to making development sustainable. Following the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 66/199 on 22 December 2011, the Organization initiated a process to formulate a new disaster risk reduction framework which will replace in 2015 the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters. The United Nations also mobilized networks of parliamentarians, local government officials, business and other partners to raise awareness. Another important recent element of the work of the Organization has been developing accountability mechanisms which can monitor delivery on commitments made to advancing the Millennium Development Goals. This includes developing an Integrated Implementation Framework to help to monitor progress in meeting commitments to support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, establishing with Member States a Commission on Information and Accountability for Women’s and Children’s Health that tracks resources and manages results, and developing a global monitoring framework and voluntary targets for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases. The United Nations has further continued to focus efforts on empowering women to help achieve progress across all Millennium Development Goals. In 2010, Member States established UN-Women to lead, coordinate and promote the accountability of the United Nations system on gender equality and women’s empowerment. This past year, UN-Women has focused its work on all aspects of gender equality, including through promoting women’s political participation as voters, candidates and holders of political office with an emphasis on the Middle East and North Africa region; and continuing the Secretary-General’s UNiTE campaign to end violence against women and girls.2.	Charting a new course at Rio+20 All these efforts received new impetus at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), where Member States confirmed their commitment to pursue a sustainable development path. This will influence the way the Organization and its Members move forward, not least in relation to the preparations for the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015.The Conference accomplished a number of important milestones. In the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”, Member States agreed to define universally applicable sustainable development goals and launched a process for their elaboration. As agreed in Rio, this work will be closely coordinated with the processes considering the development agenda beyond 2015, including the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda established by the Secretary-General, and will build on the Millennium Development Goals.In Rio, Member States also decided to pursue policies for an inclusive green fund accompanied by technical support to help countries to adapt green economy policies to their own particular circumstances. In addition, the Conference launched a programme to develop broader measures of progress to complement gross domestic product indicators and a 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns. The Conference further acknowledged that human rights are essential to sustainable development.World leaders agreed to establish a universal intergovernmental high-level political forum, which will replace the Commission on Sustainable Development, and to strengthen the United Nations Environment Programme. They committed themselves to initiating an intergovernmental process under the auspices of the General Assembly, to consider strategic options for financing sustainable development. They asked me to propose options to the General Assembly for a facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies.Beyond those decisions, the Conference produced many voluntary commitments and catalysed the formation of global partnership around sustainable development with civil society, the private sector and a range of major groups and international organizations. For example, Rio+20 galvanized the largest business gathering ever held in support of a major United Nations conference. Over 1,000 executives from more than 100 countries gathered at the Rio+20 Corporate Sustainability Forum and gave their support to priority issues, including sustainable energy, climate, water, food and women’s empowerment. 3.	The growing need for action on climate changeWhile climate change may have receded from the headlines of major newspapers, especially since the Durban conference, the climate crisis continues. The World Meteorological Organization has reported that carbon emissions are at their highest in history and rising. The International Energy Agency has warned us that without a bold change of policy direction the world will lock itself into an insecure, inefficient and high-carbon energy system. The change in climate is already having an important impact on people. There is an increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. In 2011, Brazil experienced the deadliest floods in its history, and those in Thailand resulted in the country’s most expensive natural catastrophe ever. Globally, some 106 million people were hit by floods while 60 million people were affected by drought.In 2011, at Durban, the seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change accomplished three important outcomes. First, it achieved the continuation of the Kyoto Protocol. Second, Durban cemented the mitigation plans of 89 countries until 2020. Third, it secured the agreement of Governments to negotiate a future legal framework by 2015 that will cover all countries of the world in a fair way. Clearly, the international community must tackle head on the difficult task of reconciling the challenge of mitigating and adapting to climate change while supporting the growth priorities of developing countries. To do so, it must mobilize financial and technological resources far beyond historical levels, especially for least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, and small island developing States, which are among the most affected and vulnerable groups of countries. Governments have launched the Green Climate Fund and are finalizing arrangements for the Technology Mechanism under the Framework Convention. Numerous initiatives led and/or supported by the Organization and its Member States are in place. The private sector has become involved in mitigation action and increasingly in adaptation action.I am committed to working with Member States to secure resources and a global, binding agreement commensurate with the threat and impacts of climate change, by 2015, as agreed in Durban.4.	Sustainable energy for allSustainable energy — energy that is accessible, cleaner, more efficient and affordable — is essential to sustainable development, which is why I launched a Sustainable Energy for All initiative. I set three objectives for this multi-stakeholder initiative. Pursued simultaneously, these objectives will help to put the world on a more sustainable energy pathway by 2030; they are (a) ensuring universal access to modern energy services; (b) doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency; and (c) doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.In April, I released my Global Action Agenda which charts a way to achieve this vision on the ground. The Agenda offers the United Nations as a convening platform where stakeholders from both developing and developed countries can mobilize bold commitments, foster new public-private partnerships and leverage the significant investments needed to change the world’s energy systems. This is the partnership model of the future.The initiative is already having a tangible impact. More than 50 developing countries have engaged with the initiative and more continue to join. Tens of billions of dollars have been committed in support of the initiative’s three objectives. Hundreds of actions and commitments have been catalysed. More than one billion people will benefit from the public and private commitments made. I encourage all our stakeholders to support this critical effort.5.	The global jobs crisisThe recent economic crisis, coupled with the upheaval in the Middle East and North Africa, has brought the global jobs crisis to the forefront of the international arena. In many parts of the world we see rising unemployment rates, young people being particularly affected. According to the International Labour Organization, young people are three times more likely to be unemployed than adults and over 75 million young people worldwide are looking for work. We are also seeing a reduction in job quality: part-time, temporary and informal employment is on the rise relative to stable full-time work. The United Nations addressed this issue during the annual ministerial review of the Economic and Social Council. The thematic debate and high-level policy dialogue emphasized alternative policy options and approaches for promoting decent and productive jobs given reduced policy space and the need to safeguard the environment. The resulting ministerial declaration (see A/67/3/Rev.1, chap. IV.F) put full and productive employment for all, especially women and young people, at the centre of national development strategies and the United Nations development agenda. In support of this agenda, the Organization will further develop programmes and assist Member States with policies to stimulate job creation.C. Development of Africa  Context82. While Africa’s economies continue to recover, challenges to inclusive growth remain, such as unemployment and lack of access to essential services and rights. The United Nations is firmly committed to supporting Africa in reducing poverty, empowering people, increasing the engagement of women and youth, pursuing transformative action and investments in climate change mitigation and fostering inclusive development.  Key objectives83. The United Nations Secretariat maintains two significant programmes in support of Africa’s development. Through the Special Adviser on Africa, the United Nations helps to raise international awareness on issues affecting Africa and strengthens the coherence of the Organization’s work across the peace, security and development nexus. Through the work of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the United Nations promotes economic and social development on the continent, helps to foster intraregional integration and promotes international cooperation.  Key outcomes and results84. Over the course of 2018, the United Nations and the African Union further deepened their partnership. Most importantly, a new sustainable development framework between the two organizations, signed in January, envisions stronger coordination to ensure that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 are mainstreamed and integrated in national development plans and that they contribute positively to people-centred and planet-sensitive structural transformation in Africa.85. In support of the global and regional development agendas, ECA, for example, created a toolkit that facilitates streamlined planning and reporting by African Governments on the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063. To help boost regional integration, the United Nations and the new African Union Development Agency collaborated in supporting the African Continental Free Trade Area. The United Nations also continued to support efforts by the African Union Commission to enhance preparedness and resilience-building through disaster risk reduction frameworks.86. The United Nations worked with the African Union to maximize the positive contribution of migration on the continent and address the related challenges. In that context, United Nations support has been focused on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the global compact on refugees.  Outlook87. The United Nations will continue to provide sustained global advocacy on African issues and generate cutting-edge policy research on key priorities while providing policy advice at the regional and country levels. In that context, the Organization will advocate and support the African Union’s efforts to help “silence the guns” by 2020, advance the African Continental Free Trade Area and implement the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (resolution 69/313, annex) and the Paris Agreement (FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex). Those efforts will feed into the broader support of the United Nations for the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063. C.	Development of Africa As I am a strong believer in African-led solutions to African problems, I made the solemn promise that the relationship between the United Nations and the African Union will be based on mutual respect, solidarity, complementarity and interdependence to deliver effectively for the African people. Our mutual goals and aspirations are not only about economic development, environmental protection and reduced conflict, but also about a fundamental commitment to social justice for all and leaving no one behind. These are also the guiding principles for our work and partnerships on the continent. To complement the United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security accomplished in 2017, we signed the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the African Union Summit in January 2018. The goal of the new framework is to further accelerate the implementation of the sustainable development agenda in Africa, one of my highest priorities. It envisions stronger coordination between the two organizations to ensure that both Agendas are mainstreamed into national planning frameworks and contribute to people-centred and environmentally sustainable structural transformation in Africa. A harmonized and integrated approach to the implementation and monitoring of the two Agendas will minimize duplication, optimize domestic resource mobilization and strengthen partnerships. It will thus help us to better serve the true beneficiaries of our efforts, the Africans themselves, enabling them to unleash their full social and economic potential.To enhance our collective response in the Sahel region, for instance, an international high-level conference on the Sahel was held in February 2018 by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union, which resulted in pledges of €414 million, complemented by a technical agreement and a robust compliance framework to address human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, the United Nations has developed a United Nations support plan for the Sahel to accelerate implementation of key programmes in support of national and regional priorities. The plan, which is aligned with the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063, provides for strategic support by the United Nations across the governance, peace, recovery and socioeconomic pillars.Intra-African exports made up only 18 per cent of total exports in 2016, compared to 59 and 69 per cent for intra-Asia and intra-Europe exports, respectively. To address this issue, in March 2018, in Kigali, 44 African Heads of State and Government signed the framework to establish the African Continental Free Trade Area, a landmark initiative of the African Union. The Free Trade Area will cover a market of 1.2 billion people and a gross domestic product of $2.5 trillion. By progressively eliminating tariffs on intra-African trade, it will contribute significantly to Africa’s regional economic integration and structural transformation. Enhanced intra-continental trade will potentially generate cross-border entrepreneurial initiatives and decent jobs, help to formalize the informal sector and create opportunities for the growing youth population, thus harnessing the continent’s demographic dividend. The United Nations has undertaken several activities in 2018 in a number of African countries (for example, Angola, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Comoros, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mali and the United Republic of Tanzania) to provide integrated packages of support, including toolkits and software designed by the Economic Commission for Africa to align the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 2063. The annual Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable Development met to review progress, promote learning by sharing experiences, good practices and lessons learned and build consensus on policy recommendations to accelerate implementation of the development agenda.Development of Africa: demographic aspectsChanges in the global population affect the implementation of the 2030 Agenda; therefore the location and demographic characteristics of people need to be taken into account. Africa has the fastest growing population of all major regions and that is expected to continue for decades to come (see figure II). Supporting larger populations and improving their quality of life without bringing about negative environmental impacts or otherwise diminishing the quality of life of future generations remains the central challenge of sustainable development. Figure II World population estimates and projections, by region, 1950–2100Africa is the only region where the number of young people aged 15–24 years is projected to increase until mid-century (see figure III). The ability of countries to harness the demographic dividend depends critically on investments in education, health care and job opportunities needed for a productive integration of working-age women and men into the labour force. If human capital investment falls short or if the labour market is unable to generate productive employment opportunities, the potential of the demographic dividend may be squandered. The consideration of these major changes in the size, characteristics and location of the human population should be part of data-driven planning for sustainable development. C.	Development of AfricaOne of my highest priorities is to strengthen United Nations efforts in Africa. To reinforce this commitment, my first trip as Secretary-General was to attend the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa in January, where I met with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat. In April, I convened in New York the first United Nations-African Union Annual Conference, where we pledged to strengthen and deepen cooperation and underscored the importance of the strategic partnership between the two organizations in efforts to promote sustainable development, peace and security and human rights on the continent.Africa today, like other parts of the world, presents a dynamic yet contradictory picture of progress and challenges. On the one hand, economic growth in several African countries surpassed that in other parts of the globe, and the data encouragingly show that enrolment in primary education in sub-Saharan Africa improved dramatically from 52 per cent in 1990 to 80 per cent in 2015, while the reduction in child mortality rates has also been significant. Yet some parts of Africa face threats and challenges involving protracted violence and human insecurity that undermine development. Continued conflict has meant that three of the four countries currently facing severe threats of famine are located in Africa. Economically, the continent remains highly commodity dependent, while, as a result of the volatility in global commodity prices, unstable export income in many African countries has significantly affected economic growth patterns. Future challenges also confront the continent. Projected population growth estimates show Africa as the fastest-growing region of the world (see figure IV), with a growing youth population that will reach about 60 per cent of the total population by 2050 (see figure V). These young people require education, jobs, housing and health care, thereby putting pressure on Governments to deliver. 	Figure IV World population estimates and projections, by region, 2000-2050	Figure V Youth aged 15-24 years, by region, 1950-2060The continent can take advantage of this demographic dividend by investing in quality education, teacher training, technology and innovation, which would boost productivity, create jobs and promote inclusive growth and prosperity. Scaling up investments and strengthening the ability of institutions to deliver innovative solutions will involve multilateral partnerships, which the United Nations can facilitate. Providing opportunities and empowering women and youth as a development goal will be essential. The 2030 Agenda is key to Africa’s future, and the United Nations is working closely with its partners in Africa towards a mutually reinforcing implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, in harmony with the African Union’s Agenda 2063. To promote these synergies, the United Nations and the African Union have together adopted a common reporting architecture with a single monitoring and evaluation framework. Furthermore, in December 2016 the General Assembly adopted the Framework for a Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027 (resolution 71/254). These dynamics require a concentrated effort, and it is in the interest of every country in the world to focus on preparing a strong future for Africa.C.	Development of AfricaAfrica’s development priorities identified in the African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda were enshrined during the reporting period in several continental and global landmark agreements, including the African Union Agenda 2063, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Effective implementation of these agendas will require coherence and complementarity between global, continental, regional, national and local efforts. The continent has embarked on the first ten-year implementation plan for the African Union Agenda 2063. The Agenda’s people-centred approach promises to enhance inclusive economic and social progress and its emphasis on agriculture development, infrastructure development and industrialization provides critical drivers for job creation and poverty eradication. The United Nations system is supporting the efforts of the African Union, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and African regional economic communities for the effective implementation of the new agendas.The slowdown in the economies of major trading partners and low commodity prices decreased growth projections for Africa during the reporting period. However, the remarkable economic performance of past years was sustained in part through improving macroeconomic management and economic diversification. Africa continued to make progress in the implementation of NEPAD. African countries have also continued their efforts to promote regional integration, including through the Tripartite Free Trade Area, which provides a strong foundation for the establishment of the Continental Free Trade Area by 2017. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union deepened considerably, including through the adoption of the Framework for a Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027 and through efforts to finalize a joint United Nations-African Union framework for an enhanced partnership in peace and security. The United Nations continues to support the Silencing the Guns initiative of the African Union to end all wars in Africa by 2020. Both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union Agenda 2063 recognize the importance of peace and stability, not only as critical enablers but also as important components of sustainable development. In line with this aspiration, Africa has also continued, with the support of the United Nations and development partners, to address emerging challenges to peace, security and development, such as the rise of terrorism and violent extremism as well as the growing number of migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons. In this regard, African countries continue to attach great importance to tackling the root causes of conflict such as youth unemployment, inequality, and economic and social exclusion, including through the African Peace and Security Architecture and the African Governance Architecture. Recognizing the critical needs and role of women, the African Union declared 2016 the African Year of Human Rights with Particular Focus on the Rights of Women. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica’s development gains continued in the reporting period. The economic growth rate is projected to rise to 4.6 per cent in 2015, up from 3.5 per cent in 2014. With support from the United Nations, progress was made in priority sectors of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, including infrastructure, agriculture and food security, health, education, science and technology, transport, gender equality and governance. Within the framework of the United Nations monitoring mechanism, the Organization worked to strengthen international support to Africa’s development through a review of implementation of commitments. The first biennial report of the United Nations monitoring mechanism was submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. Through the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and the interdepartmental task force on African affairs, the Organization worked to ensure coherent and better coordinated United Nations system-wide support to Africa.This past year was notable in several respects, with the end of the Millennium Development Goals and the Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union approaching. United Nations support was therefore focused in particular on ensuring that the continent’s priorities as encapsulated in the African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda and Agenda 2063, the long-term strategic vision for the continent’s development, were taken into consideration in the successor agreements, namely the post-2015 development agenda including the sustainable development goals. The Organization also provided technical support for African countries participating in the Third International Conference on Financing for Development and the upcoming United Nations summit to adopt the post-2015 development agenda.Despite the persistence of security threats and the impact of climate change in some parts of the continent, some progress was made in addressing election-related threats and in strengthening the nexus between peace, security and development. Given the importance of women’s and girls’ empowerment and leadership in peace, security and development, the United Nations also worked to enhance global visibility and awareness of the African Union’s agendas in this regard, including through a possible continental results framework on women and peace and security in Africa, and 2015 was proclaimed by the African Union as the Year of Women’s Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063.C.	Development of AfricaAfrica continues to make steady development gains. Economic growth reached 4.0 per cent in 2013 and is projected to reach 5.3 per cent in 2014. Improved regulatory frameworks, macroeconomic policy and business environments have helped to increase foreign direct investment flows by 6.8 per cent. Substantial progress was made towards the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, in particular those on education, gender equality and women’s empowerment and combating HIV/AIDS and other diseases. Significant headway was also made towards consolidating peace and security and strengthening democratic institutions, including through multiparty elections. Challenges remain with regard to redressing income and gender inequalities, the lack of infrastructure and underemployment, in particular for Africa’s burgeoning youth population. Food insecurity and malnutrition are exacerbated by climate change and, in some instances, conflicts and political instability. The United Nations has helped to advance the African development agenda in several ways, cooperating closely with the African Union, including the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the regional economic communities, to develop the African Agenda 2063, a transformative 50-year development agenda. Important milestones included the tenth anniversary of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, the fifteenth session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and the Dakar Financing Summit for Africa’s Infrastructure Development, held in June 2014.Institutional support was provided to the High-level Committee of African Heads of State and Government on the Post-2015 Agenda, especially in the formulation of a common African position, and several important regional meetings were jointly organized with the African Union, including a consultative meeting on sustainable development goals and a ministerial meeting in preparation for the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on the Status of Women. Coordination support was provided through the interdepartmental task force on African affairs and the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa to increase collaboration and strengthen coherence in delivering system-wide support to Africa. The Organization also undertook global advocacy for NEPAD by partnering with the African Union, the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency and the African Peer Review Mechanism to organize the Africa-NEPAD Week in 2013. In view of the important nexus between peace, security, human rights and development, the Organization also continued to support efforts to make the African Peace and Security Architecture operational, implement the Human Rights Strategy for Africa and improve electoral management and monitoring. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica made significant development strides in the past year. Its economic dynamism is attributable to strengthened economic and political governance as well as an improved business climate and increased foreign capital flows, particularly from Africa’s new and emerging development partners. While these developments have reduced poverty levels and created a burgeoning African middle class, the continent continues to face significant challenges. Its economic growth has not been sufficiently inclusive or equitable and, despite significant progress on some Millennium Development Goals, levels of poverty, food insecurity, maternal and infant mortality and youth unemployment remain unacceptably high. Prospects for sustainable development are also threatened by challenges to peace, security, governance, the rule of law and the environment. The Organization worked closely with the African Union and its New Partnership for Africa’s Development programme, including the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and the African Peer Review Mechanism, as well as with African regional economic communities and Member States to address these challenges. United Nations support was provided to projects and programmes in infrastructure, water and sanitation, energy, environmental protection, information and communications technologies, transport, agriculture and food security, and democracy and governance. In recognition of the links between peace, security and economic development, the United Nations adopted a multidimensional approach. It also continued to support the African Union in implementing the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme in the specific areas of peace and security, post-conflict reconstruction and development, human rights, justice and reconciliation. At the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the African Union in May 2013, I welcomed the changing narrative in Africa and pledged the continuing support of the United Nations to that continent. Efforts are well under way to ensure that discussions on the post-2015 development agenda fully reflect Africa’s needs and priorities. To that end, the United Nations worked with the African Union Commission and the African Development Bank to initiate national, regional and continental consultations with the aim of arriving at an African common position. Progress was also made on the establishment of a monitoring mechanism as mandated by the General Assembly in resolution 66/293, for which the United Nations will provide a secretariat. This step is vital for reviewing the implementation of all commitments made towards Africa’s development. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica remained a key area of focus for the United Nations during the past year. While Africa continues to experience solid overall economic growth and the absolute number of people living in extreme poverty seems to be declining, inequalities persist. Unemployment remains high and armed conflicts undermine development prospects in key regions.The Organization worked closely with the African Union and its New Partnership for Africa’s Development programme, and the Millennium Development Goals Africa Steering Group, to advance the African development agenda. It partnered with interested Governments to implement projects that boost financing for development in areas such as sustainable forest management and to promote and strengthen the engagement of citizens in governance and public administration.A large number of countries with special needs, including least developed and landlocked developing countries, are located on the African continent. More than half of the population in least developed countries lives below the poverty line. Landlocked developing countries continue to be marginalized in international trade and face serous constraints to their overall growth due mainly to their lack of access to the sea and remoteness from major markets, inadequate transit facilities, cumbersome Customs and border-crossing procedures and inadequate transport infrastructure. Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States further face difficulties related to climate change, desertification and loss of biodiversity. In the past year, the Organization worked towards addressing the special needs of these countries, including taking steps to implement the Istanbul Programme of Action, the Almaty Programme of Action, and the Mauritius Strategy.