Effective functioning of the Organization  Key workstreamsHighlight: environmental sustainability. “Walking the talk” on environmental sustainability is a key priority for United Nations operations. Building on its environmental strategy, the United Nations established a performance and risk framework that increases accountability for the environmental footprint of its field missions. Those missions – which deploy more than 100,000 people in fragile settings – reported to the General Assembly on their environmental scorecards for the first time in the context of their budget performance reports for 2017/18.134. Several operational processes underpin the functioning of the United Nations Secretariat, with its annual resources of about $13 billion and more than 37,000 civilian staff in 450 duty stations. Many of those processes are being substantially overhauled in 2018/19 as a result of the Secretary-General’s management reform initiative. They include the management of finance, human resources, information and communications technology, supply chains, facilities, conference services, and security and safety operations, as well as the communication of the Organization’s work and the strengthening of relations with the principal organs of the United Nations, Member States and other stakeholders.  Key outcomes and resultsHighlight: combating harassment and abuse. The United Nations continued to advance its victim-centred, zero-tolerance approach to sexual misconduct. It approved a system-wide model policy on sexual harassment, informed by the first-ever staff survey on the issue. A 24 hour “Speak up” helpline was set up in 2018, and a new Clear Check database now makes it possible to vet job candidates across all United Nations system entities to prevent the rehiring of perpetrators of sexual misconduct. The Organization also introduced a database to better assist victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. Victims’ rights advocates began to deploy to the field, and a new group of sexual misconduct investigators was set up.135. In 2018, the United Nations laid the foundation for an ambitious management reform initiative that became effective in 2019. In shifting its management paradigm, the United Nations is putting the strongest emphasis on transparency, accountability and better implementation of mandates. Effective 1 January 2019, the Office of the Secretary-General launched a simplified and streamlined framework for the delegation of managerial authority to more than 200 heads of United Nations entities to cut through bureaucracy and bring decision-making closer to the point of delivery. The Organization began to simplify administrative policies and strengthened its internal accountability framework. It also put in place dashboards to convey performance and compliance data to managers in more timely, reliable and user-friendly ways. Furthermore, the Organization improved its formal programme and performance documentation to present a better overview of results to the General Assembly, aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals. For the first time in its history, the United Nations achieved gender parity among senior management. Highlight: ethics and integrity. In 2018, the United Nations responded to a higher number of internal requests for confidential ethics advice and guidance on whistle-blower protection. Responsiveness improved, as the average number of days for preliminary reviews dropped by 50 per cent, to 13 days. More than 31,000 staff participated in leadership dialogues on whistle-blowing and a stronger policy against retaliation for reporting wrongdoing. The number of tips on potential wrongdoing increased, suggesting greater awareness of reporting options and increased confidence in the system. To help improve the work environment, the United Nations Ombudsman launched a civility campaign and assisted more than 2,700 staff with a safe space, a confidential ear and independent advice on workplace challenges.136. To facilitate multilateral dialogue and decision-making of Member States, the Secretariat continued to provide conference services, with multilingual support whenever mandated. The Organization serviced more than 35,000 intergovernmental meetings or conferences in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi and provided more than 4,500 documents and other materials. To strengthen inclusive multilingualism, the Organization also expanded its pool of conference interpreters and translators from traditionally underrepresented regions. 137. To keep staff and visitors safe, the United Nations worked with more than 1,400 security officers across its 11 major non-field locations. Across the world, United Nations security officers not only helped to protect staff and their dependants, but also kept 3 million visitors, Heads of State and Government representatives safe as they passed through Secretariat premises.138. In 2018, the United Nations Secretariat also strove to better communicate its work to global audiences. By the end of the year, for example, the United Nations had put in place partnerships for broadcasting its content with 1,100 media entities in 153 countries and territories. More than 46 million unique users visited the un.org website, more than 60 per cent of whom were 18–34 years old. Nearly 16 million users consulted the dedicated website on the Sustainable Development Goals. In just one of many global campaigns, some 2,000 people from more than 120 countries shared videos of themselves reading an article of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in one of 80 native languages.Strengthening the Organization A significant endeavour in the past year has been my reform effort that aims at making the Organization more effective, nimble, field focused and efficient to serve Member States and their populations. This is the first time that the United Nations has embarked on a reform agenda of this scale. The repositioning of the United Nations development systemOn 31 May, the General Assembly provided robust mandates to take forward the repositioning of the United Nations development system to support the 2030 Agenda. The resolution adopted offers a unique opportunity for the system to become more than the sum of its parts and effectively deliver on the ambition of the 2030 Agenda. The system initiated transition planning immediately after the adoption of the resolution, with the aim of repositioning the system starting in January 2019. In 2019 we will see the progressive establishment of a new generation of United Nations country teams, with enhanced skillsets, better tailored to country realities and more responsive to national priorities. We will also implement all mandates to establish a reinvigorated resident coordinator system, fully dedicated to the coordination of the development activities of the United Nations in countries and with enhanced accountability for system-wide results. We will redouble efforts to advance common premises and shared services across entities, generating significant savings that can be reapplied into development programmes. These reforms are highly significant to the success of the Sustainable Development Goals and the litmus test will be results on the ground. The renewed United Nations Development Group and the Joint Steering Committee to Advance Humanitarian and Development Collaboration are already operational and will bring about solutions, on the required scale, to challenges faced by countries and United Nations country teams. I count on Member States to continue to support the implementation of these reform efforts, including by providing the necessary funding to the resident coordinator system and the system at large. Repositioning the United Nations development system is a shared responsibility. Enhancing coherence of peace and security activitiesThe goal of Headquarters peace and security pillar reform is to make its undertakings more coherent, nimble and effective through a “whole-of-pillar” approach that prioritizes prevention and sustaining peace. It significantly addresses fragmentation by moving away from working through separate departments towards a single, integrated effort with two closely linked departments: the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations. The two Departments will share a single regional political-operational structure, which will be responsible for the management of all political and operational peace and security activities. A strengthened Peacebuilding Support Office within the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs will connect the pillar with system-wide efforts and tools across the conflict spectrum, ensuring a more holistic approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. On 5 July 2018, the General Assembly approved the proposed restructuring, to be implemented effective 1 January 2019. Management reformIn October 2017, I proposed a new management paradigm that will empower managers to determine how best to use their resources to support programme delivery and mandate implementation. This will mean transferring greater responsibility to managers and holding them accountable for the programme and financial performance of their programmes. Support to managers will be improved by streamlining and simplifying the policy framework, providing clear guidance and restructuring the current management and support departments to better support delivery of all programmes and provide all managers with quality assurance and strategic policy guidance.In July 2018, the General Assembly approved the restructuring of the current Department of Management and Department of Field Support into two new departments. The new departments will become operational on 1 January 2019. Both departments will service the entire Secretariat, with one providing guidance on strategic, policy and compliance matters and the other providing operational and transactional support to managers. The impact of this transformation will enable the United Nations to become more nimble, effective, transparent, accountable, efficient, pragmatic and decentralized to better support its normative and operational activities.Ending sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse The Organization is taking concrete steps to eradicate sexual exploitation and abuse as well as sexual harassment and is establishing a mechanism to protect and support victims. To accelerate our work in addressing sexual exploitation and abuse, I have crafted, in cooperation with Member States, a voluntary compact which identifies specific prevention and response actions, elevates the interests of victims, and develops a sexual exploitation and abuse risk management toolkit that provides field missions with a systematic approach to identifying, assessing and mitigating risks. To address sexual harassment, I have mobilized senior managers to improve guidance, information and services for staff, and I have launched a 24-hour helpline for colleagues to access information and confidential support. The Office of Internal Oversight Services is implementing a fast-track procedure to receive, process and address all sexual harassment complaints. In addition, the United Nations is creating a specialized investigation team. Protecting whistleblowersProtecting whistle-blowers is critical to rooting out fraud, corruption, sexual abuse and other forms of misconduct. Staff must feel safe to report wrongdoing and believe the Organization will take action against perpetrators. I have significantly strengthened the whistle-blower protection policy by extending protection from retaliation to include individual contractors and consultants and allowing the transfer of the retaliator (as opposed to the complainant) to another office after an investigation. The policy is now in line with best practices and will remain under continuous review. Efforts are under way to socialize this policy throughout the Organization. I am also strengthening the Ethics Office, increasing its independence. Enterprise risk managementGiven the nature and complexity of risks the Organization faces, it is incumbent upon managers to proactively identify and mitigate risks to their operations. The Organization recently completed the first-ever fraud and corruption risk assessment, identifying the most critical areas for immediate and sustained management attention.Leveraging technology and innovationEvolution in information and communications technology is accelerating innovation and the delivery of data for decision-making, making such technology an increasingly valued partner and enabler of the work of the Organization. A broad range of analytics tools now support strategic direction, policy formulation and decision-making. Others, such as the computer-assisted translation tool eLuna, facilitate the work of conference services, while the electronic fuel management system supports our field missions. Umoja will enable us to produce dashboards providing real-time information on financial and programme performance of departments and offices. As part of my management reform efforts, I intend to publish, soon after the appropriate Umoja extensions are in place, comprehensive, real-time and easily accessible transaction-level information about United Nations operations relating to the Sustainable Development Goals, using the standards established by the International Aid Transparency Initiative, which aims to make all information about spending easily accessible. This will increase transparency and allow Member States and the public at large to access and assess information. Making our budgets a tool for greater accountabilityIn response to my management reform proposals, the General Assembly in December 2017 approved one of the most significant changes in the programme planning and budgetary processes of the Organization since the 1970s. Starting from 2020, the Secretariat will move towards an annual programme budget document, replacing the current two-year cycle with an annual cycle. Member States, for the first time ever, will be able to access information on programme planning, programme performance, evaluation results and financial requirements in one document. The General Assembly will be able to consider the information at one session instead of several different sessions held over a three-year period. Our budget document will now become a tool for accountability to enable us to better assess the performance of our programmes and how our resources support programme delivery.Duty of careThe United Nations continues its commitment to the duty of care for its people. With the leadership of the Secretariat, more than 50 United Nations entities are operating under one security management umbrella. This strategy provides system-wide security policies, multidimensional operational approaches, security threat information, security training and crisis preparedness to ensure the safe delivery of United Nations operations and programmes.The Organization is also committed to providing the necessary psychosocial and health-related support to all staff. We have promulgated a United Nations workplace mental health and well-being strategy and have implemented duty station health risk assessments and standards for the safety and quality of health care delivered in United Nations facilities. United Nations personnel work in increasingly challenging and dangerous situations. Protecting them is my top priority and I have enacted these reforms to strengthen the capacity of the Organization to meet that goal while carrying out the mandates enshrined in the Charter.	Strengthening the OrganizationOur efforts to implement the Organization’s ambitious reform agenda rest on ensuring that we simplify procedures, decentralize decision-making and move towards even greater transparency and accountability. The Organization requires systems, policies and procedures that bring decision-making closer to the point of delivery and empower senior management to deliver on their programmes. To bring about this paradigm shift, I have launched a set of action-based processes to strengthen the management of the Organization.In April 2017, I established an internal review team on management reform under the overall guidance of the Chef de Cabinet. The team was requested:(a)	To identify internal measures that the Secretariat could take to streamline procedures, reduce delays and improve the implementation of mandates, some of which are already under way;(b)	To identify proposals that would support and advance the broader agenda to reform the Organization. Consultations have been central to this reform track. During May and June, we held a series of informal brainstorming sessions with Member States and received feedback from departments, funds and programmes. In July, I held a retreat with Member States to present the initial ideas of the internal review team on management reform. The Secretariat will prepare my report on management reform for the consideration of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session. The Umoja planning and operational system has been implemented to modernize the way in which the Secretariat globally manages the administration of business and information technology processes. Umoja has been slow to take root and it has been a challenge to remove its kinks, but Secretariat entities are increasingly leveraging the system’s capabilities to improve the efficiency of their operations. On environmental responsibility, the Secretariat is leading by example in helping the United Nations system “green” its operations by implementing environmental management systems.The Organization requires systems, policies and procedures that bring decision-making closer to the point of delivery and empower senior management to deliver on their programmesSmart technology alone is not enough, however. The Organization must develop and deploy its greatest asset — its human resources — in a more strategic manner. The aim of the staff selection and managed mobility system launched in January 2016 is to develop dynamic, adaptable and agile staff who can best deliver the mandates entrusted to them. Because I believe that gender parity in the workplace is essential, I recently promulgated a comprehensive strategy to this end and plan to reach gender parity at the senior leadership level by 2021 and across the Organization soon thereafter. My special representatives are essential conflict managers in the field, and the United Nations has been steadily increasing the number of women special representatives and deputy special representatives (see figure IX). 	Figure IX Head of mission and deputy head of mission posts encumbered by womenThe United Nations has wrestled with the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse. Every victim deserves justice and our full support. My report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/71/818) outlines four main areas of action: putting victims first; ending impunity; engaging civil society and external partners; and improving strategic communications for education and transparency. To this end, I have created the position of Victims Rights Advocate at the Assistant Secretary-General level.The United Nations must uphold its ethical standards. Therefore, I have strengthened the whistle-blower protection policy that allows the Ethics Office and the Office of Internal Oversight Services to take preventive action where a risk of retaliation against those reporting violations has been identified. Staff now also have the right to seek a review of Ethics Office determinations. The revised policy is based on elements deemed to be international best practice. I have asked an internal working group to consider additional areas for improvement and I intend to consult staff and management in coming months. Additional strengthening of United Nations ethical standards includes the establishment of the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework, which fosters a culture of integrity and honesty and informs staff about the ways in which the Secretariat prevents, detects, responds to and reports on fraud and corruption. Transforming the Organization to better deliver on its mandate is our ultimate goal. This means strengthening and integrating our management team, our methods of analysis and our early warning and delivery systems. It also means improving the quality of leadership at Headquarters and in the field and building the confidence of Member States. 	Strengthening the OrganizationThe General Assembly made important strides in revitalizing its work during the reporting period, supported by the Secretariat where appropriate. For instance, it brought forward the elections of non-permanent members of the Security Council and members of the Economic and Social Council, introduced innovations in the selection process of my successor and enhanced its interaction with civil society. Intergovernmental negotiations continued on Security Council reform even as a commonly agreed formula continued to elude the membership as a whole. The Secretariat, meanwhile, continued to modernize and improve conference services provided to Member States, including through the use of new technologies to improve the timeliness and quality of multilingual documentation.A similarly energetic use of technology and multilingual platforms, both traditional and digital, was applied to public information outreach activities during the reporting period to popularize the achievements and activities of the Organization, particularly the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on climate change. To mark the seventieth anniversary of the Organization, a year-long commemoration was undertaken. The various observances of the seventieth anniversary helped to connect the Organization to local and grassroots audiences worldwide and to engender further support for the United Nations and its work.Following a decade of comprehensive management reform, the Secretariat is now well positioned to operate as a modern, efficient and integrated global organization. Through Umoja, the new enterprise resource planning system, business processes have been standardized and automated across our global operations. This is an opportunity to review the way we do business and to simplify and streamline processes and consolidate the fragmented administrative architecture of the Secretariat. In the hope of strengthening our stewardship of the resources Member States entrust to us, my proposal for a new global service delivery model is being developed and will be presented to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session.The new staff selection and managed mobility system was launched starting with POLNET (political, peace and humanitarian job network) on 1 January 2016. This system provides a more strategic and global approach to human resources management while building an adaptable global workforce of staff with diversified skills and experience. Significant progress has been made in reducing the fragmentation of information and communications technology resources, which in turn enhances the Organization’s ability to support Umoja and to comply with technology standards and best practices. There has also been progress on modernizing the office environment. The first phase of flexible workplace implementation started in January 2016. During my tenure, the internal system of administration of justice which forms part of the accountability architecture of the Organization was established. The General Assembly envisaged a system that, inter alia, ensures the accountability of managers and staff members alike. The report of an independent panel and my comments on its assessment of the system are the subject of separate reports for the Assembly’s consideration during the seventy-first session.Enterprise risk management has been a key part of my vision of a strengthened Secretariat. It facilitates effective strategic decision-making across the Organization and stimulates healthy dialogue at the most senior levels on critical issues in an environment of growing complexity and uncertainty. Following a Secretariat-wide risk assessment, the Organization is taking steps to mitigate the top strategic risks to the Organization in areas such as organizational structure; organizational transformation; strategic planning and budget allocation; safety and security; extrabudgetary funding and management; and human resources strategy, management and accountability. One of the most critical risks facing the Organization is the current security environment. Improvements in security management practices and policies have proved effective in containing casualties: a lower number of personnel have been killed as a result of violence since 2011, despite the increasing number of attacks against the United Nations. Tragically, however, in addition to the high losses of uniformed personnel mentioned in paragraph 37, 15 civilian personnel lost their lives as a result of acts of violence, mostly due to crime and civil unrest. The Organization has also focused on strengthening its duty of care to staff deployed in high-risk environments, balancing it with the implementation of critical United Nations programmes and mandates. In the global context, the Organization is determined to pursue effective and coordinated responses, consolidating its resources through the integration of all the security resources of the Secretariat under the Department of Safety and Security, and enhancing collaboration with host Governments towards greater security of United Nations personnel and accountability for perpetrators of crimes against United Nations personnel.	PartnershipsThe United Nations has long recognized the power of partnering as a specific element of its work. Partnerships should include not only Governments but also businesses, private philanthropic foundations, international organizations, civil society, volunteer groups, local authorities, parliaments, trade unions, research institutes and academia. Multi-stakeholder arrangements have proved successful because they expand on traditional partnerships by significantly increasing available resources, improving the effectiveness of their use and increasing policy and operational coherence. Such partnerships can channel commitments and actions, and their success depends on assigning roles, responsibilities and clear accountability. The multi-stakeholder partnership model has emerged as a promising way to share burdens, catalyse action and bring all relevant actors to bear in addressing specific problems. Multi-stakeholder partnerships are critical for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Engagement with business is proving especially important. Through our main initiative for mobilizing the private sector — the United Nations Global Compact — more than 8,000 companies are advancing principle-based business practices and advancing United Nations goals. A majority of companies surveyed indicate that they are aware of the Sustainable Development Goals and a similar majority state that they are willing to implement the Goals in their business plans. A clear trend is emerging: business organizations, including investors, seeing themselves as legitimate and involved actors in the broad sustainable development agenda. The Paris Agreement on climate change marks another milestone in terms of our ongoing collaboration with the international business community — and likewise opens new opportunities for partnership and cooperation between the United Nations and business on this most urgent global issue. Enhancing the integrity and accountability of the United Nations in working with the private sector is essential. The revised guidelines on United Nations-business cooperation are serving as a critical framework for coherent and transparent private sector engagement as the United Nations implements the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. These Guidelines on a Principle-based Approach to the Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector also refer to the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, with clear language on transparency and stakeholder accountability.	Strengthening the OrganizationThe General Assembly made important strides in the past year to enhance the Organization’s decision-making capabilities and to make it more reflective of the twenty-first century. Intergovernmental negotiations continued on Security Council reform and the Assembly placed a new emphasis on coordination among the principal organs on topical issues. Enhanced interaction between the Assembly and civil society was also prioritized. There was a 21 per cent rise in the frequency of Security Council meetings and a 36 per cent increase in the number of General Assembly meetings, and the Secretariat provided quantitatively more but qualitatively consistent conference service support. Delivery of conference services was modernized in a variety of ways, including with a global United Nations platform for computer-assisted and machine translation.The Secretariat made notable progress throughout the year on a number of key transformational initiatives designed to make the Organization truly global and to maximize our capacity to deliver on mandates effectively and efficiently. For example, Umoja, the enterprise resource planning system, reached another critical milestone in June with its deployment to the Nairobi-based entities (United Nations Office at Nairobi, United Nations Environment Programme, UN-Habitat) as well as to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. It will be deployed to all other duty stations in November, thereby enabling an integrated and streamlined management of financial, human and physical resources for the global Secretariat. This standardized solution will in turn support a global service delivery model that will provide high-quality, timely and standardized administrative services across the global Secretariat, including services to peacekeeping and special political missions. I will present a framework proposal on the global service delivery model to the General Assembly at its seventieth session.In addition, the mobility and career development framework will soon become a reality with the launch on 1 January 2016 of the first job network (POLNET), which includes departments and offices working on political, peacekeeping and humanitarian affairs. This new approach to staffing will permit the movement of staff to meet the strategic needs of the Organization arising from mandate requirements and organizational priorities.The implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards in 2014 has increased transparency by making available much more detailed information about the Organization’s financial position and the use of its resources and has led to greater traceability of management decisions, thereby strengthening accountability.In view of the endorsement by the General Assembly of an information and communications technology strategy, I will continue to address the highly fragmented technology landscape, including by transitioning technology services and programme delivery to a model with both enterprise-wide and regional components that comply with standards, best practice and governance requirements. I continue to accord the highest priority to information security and operational resilience.Given the level of inherent risk the Organization faces as well as the additional risk generated by the magnitude of organizational change under way, the Secretariat is in the process of implementing an enterprise-wide coherent and integrated risk management system to mitigate the risks to our work.The renovation and refurbishment of the Headquarters complex in New York has been successfully concluded with the dissolution of the Office of the Capital Master Plan in July 2015 and the transfer of responsibilities to the Office of Central Support Services in the Department of Management.Considerable management attention was dedicated this year to the increasingly critical question of the safety and security of United Nations personnel around the world. The Organization worked towards strengthening its duty of care in high-risk environments, ending impunity for serious crimes and acts of violence committed against United Nations personnel, and ensuring consistency in the implementation of the programme criticality methodology in order to weigh security risks against programme imperatives. In addition, the Organization remains committed to the strengthening of security management.	PartnershipsMulti-stakeholder initiatives such as Sustainable Energy for All, Every Woman, Every Child, Global Education First Initiative, the Zero Hunger Challenge and Global Pulse demonstrate the great potential in partnership to harness the strengths of various actors towards achieving the goals of the United Nations. The Climate Summit in September 2014 mobilized leaders from the private sector, finance and civil society to commit to ambitious actions to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience. The Organization should continue to seize the great potential of partnership, while ensuring oversight and accountability.Taking heed of the positions of Member States, I informed the General Assembly that I no longer wished Member States to consider the proposals related to the establishment of a partnership facility which had been made in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015. This allows further consideration of how best to achieve the objectives for which a partnership facility had been proposed. It also allows any subsequent proposals in this area to be informed both by the discussions held in the context of the consideration of the proposed partnership facility and by decisions of Member States on financing for development and on the post-2015 development framework.With respect to existing partnership we continue to focus on increasing the impact of our work with a broad range of partners, including Governments, civil society, the private sector, philanthropy, academia, and other multilateral organizations. Through the United Nations Global Compact, over 8,000 companies in more than 150 countries are already advancing responsible business practices. In addition, consultations were held across the United Nations system to revise the Guidelines on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Business Sector. The Department of Public Information raised global awareness of the work and goals of the Organization through partnerships with traditional and new media outlets across multiple languages, the creative community, and over  1,000 universities that have committed themselves to the United Nations Academic Impact. Outreach programmes mandated by the General Assembly, including those related to the Holocaust, the Rwanda genocide and the transatlantic slave trade, continued to be strengthened with the association of new partners and the enlargement of audiences. The Organization also signed a Revised and Restated Relationship Agreement with the United Nations Foundation, to reflect the evolving nature of the Foundation’s activities, from primarily grant making to advocacy and resource mobilization and cross-sector partnerships.	Strengthening the OrganizationOver the past year, the General Assembly has taken steps to further strengthen the work of the Organization, for example by strengthening the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations Environment Programme. The question of the equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council remains of central importance to the wider membership. The intergovernmental negotiations thereon resumed during the main part of the sixty-eighth session.My management reform efforts aim to strengthen the Organization and enable it to deliver its mandates more effectively while ensuring the proper stewardship of resources, by improving administrative support, resource management, accountability and transparency. The Organization’s enterprise resource planning solution has become a reality with the implementation of Umoja Foundation in peacekeeping operations and political missions and is improving administrative services and related decision-making. Full implementation throughout the Organization is expected by the middle of 2015. Delivering the mandates entrusted to the United Nations around the world requires a workforce that is dynamic, adaptable and mobile. The approval by the General Assembly of a managed mobility and career development framework will help to ensure that the right people are in the right position at the right time, while also enabling a fairer sharing of the burden of service in hardship duty stations. To enhance transparency and improve the management of financial resources, we are fully implementing the International Public Sector Accounting Standards in the financial year 2014, which will allow stakeholders to have a more comprehensive view of the Organization’s financial position, performance and cash flows, and a better assessment of how well the United Nations has used its resources. Improving our delivery of mandates also requires proactive risk management. To this end, we have conducted a comprehensive, Secretariat-wide risk assessment and identified the top strategic risks to the Organization. In addition, the Administration is working in close cooperation with the oversight bodies, maintaining quarterly meetings to discuss issues of mutual concern, implementing their findings and recommendations and ensuring that they are effectively fed into the management process.The Secretariat has continued to modernize delivery of the conference services provided to Member States, implementing efficiencies to significantly reduce resources while minimizing the impact on the serving staff. Changes have included the integration of conference services in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi into a single global operation, the use of new technology to improve the timeliness and quality of the services and the reduction of their environmental impact. In late 2014, I will present a revised information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations, which will focus on continued reform and modernization through innovation and automation. In the face of growing cybersecurity threats and need for resiliency, priority has been assigned to, and significant progress made in, strengthening information security and operational resilience.The Organization remains determined to deliver its mandates in challenging global security environments. In 2013, the United Nations continued to strengthen its security management system, including in areas with heightened security risks. This entailed efforts to enhance situational awareness, collaboration with host Governments and non-governmental organizations, security incident reporting, security risk management and the security of premises. The aim is to balance critical programmes with the duty of care towards United Nations personnel.	PartnershipsStrengthening the capacity of the Organization to partner at scale, while ensuring accountability, integrity and transparency, remains a priority. More than 1,000 partners are engaging on key issues through United Nations platforms such as the Every Woman, Every Child initiative, the Women’s Empowerment Principles: Equality Means Business, the Children’s Rights and Business Principles, the Caring for Climate initiative, the Sustainable Energy for All initiative, the Zero Hunger Challenge initiative, the CEO Water Mandate and the Global Pulse initiative. The United Nations Global Compact remains our main avenue for engaging businesses, with over 8,000 participants in more than 140 countries. In September 2013, I launched a post-2015 business engagement architecture that provides a framework for scaling up business engagement and action, in addition to promising initiatives such as the Business for Peace platform, the Food and Agriculture Business Principles and Business for the Rule of Law. As partnerships continue to expand throughout the Organization, we must use the partnership tool more, in a more effective and accountable manner, with the full range of actors, including philanthropists, civil society and academic institutions. The General Assembly has taken a positive step in welcoming my intention to strengthen the collaboration of the Organization with all relevant partners, while noting the importance of continued consultations with Member States in this area. In this regard, my proposed partnership facility, which is being considered by the Assembly, aims to provide a more supportive enabling environment for United Nations partnership activity, together with greater accountability, coherence, efficiency and scale, to ensure that we deliver our goals. 	Strengthening the OrganizationThe rapidly changing global environment described above is increasing demands on the United Nations, even as the available resources shrink. The United Nations must adapt in order to deliver successfully. To that end, I continued to prioritize efforts to put in place a modern and accountable global organization able to deliver at the highest standards while minimizing administrative and support costs, streamlining and simplifying procedures, and harnessing the full potential of partnerships and of information and communications technology. Staff members are and will always be the most valuable asset of the Organization. The Organization must be able to develop and deploy the most appropriate and qualified staff when and where there is a need. The mobility and career development framework now under consideration by Member States seeks to foster the skills and capacity of our staff and help the Organization to better manage our global workforce. Member States have welcomed my commitment to this approach and asked for further information, which I will submit at the sixty-eighth session. I look forward to a decision of the General Assembly later in 2013. In addition, to ensure that staff is equipped with the latest knowledge and skills, I am taking a comprehensive approach to the range of our learning, training and knowledge service activities as well as exploring possibilities for knowledge services consolidation. I continue to mainstream a results orientation into the working culture of the Organization, including through the results-based management concept that I presented to the General Assembly in 2013, our enterprise risk management initiative and efforts to increase implementation of the recommendations of oversight bodies.Careful stewardship of the resources entrusted to the Organization by Member States — human, financial and material — is also a priority. Efforts to improve and integrate the management of these resources continued in the past year, with a focus on enterprise resource planning solutions through the Umoja project. By making available transparent, real-time information, Umoja will permit better and faster decision-making on administrative issues. It was officially launched in July 2013 in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon. Meanwhile, the global field support strategy is currently piloting shared service delivery for peace operations in the field, which may in turn yield valuable lessons for the rest of the Secretariat. To enhance transparency and accountability in the use of global resources and to enable Member States to access improved monitoring and decision-making information, we implemented the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) on 1 July 2013 in peacekeeping operations. These standards will be the basis for the financial statements of peacekeeping operations for the 2013-14 fiscal period and from 2014 for the rest of the Secretariat.Across the Organization, we are finding ways to make maximum use of the potential of information and communications technologies, both in our substantive work and in our administrative and management systems, collectively referred to as the “digital Secretariat”. We are making use of affordable emerging technologies to facilitate information-sharing, collaboration and internal communication. Social media platforms are cost-effective tools for expanding our reach and we now have millions of followers on our major platforms in all official United Nations languages. Significant progress has also been made in digital dissemination of United Nations knowledge products. As the Organization increasingly relies on information and communications technology, I am mindful of our vulnerability to cyber attacks. The Organization has strengthened the security of information and systems but we must do more. I am committed to ensuring the appropriate protection of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the Organization’s information, and of the systems used for its storage, processing and transmission. The capital master plan has also modernized the way we work, having introduced open and modern accommodation for staff and delegates working in the renovated Secretariat and Conference buildings. The open office environment and new technologies available encourage communication and collaboration among staff while reducing our carbon footprint through lowered energy consumption. At the General Assembly’s request, we are also examining the long-term accommodation requirements of the Organization in New York City. In 2012, the United Nations continued to strengthen its security management system in order to enable the Organization to deliver its programmes and activities, including in areas with heightened security risks. This entailed strengthening crisis response capacity, restructuring security management training, modernizing information tools for security threat and risk analysis, developing practical policies and guidelines and enhancing collaboration with host Governments, as well as with governmental and non-governmental organizations. 	PartnershipWith the growing number and complexity of our mandates, there is a need to broaden our human, operational and financial resource base. The private sector, philanthropy, and civil society have dramatically expanded in size, sophistication and global reach, especially in developing countries. We must find ways to use the partnership tool more, and more effectively, to help us deliver on all our goals and mandates. As we look at ways to accelerate the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and as we work on a framework to meet future global development challenges, it is imperative to match our ambitions with concrete ways to get us there. That is why I have submitted to the General Assembly my proposal for a new partnership facility to achieve greater accountability, coherence, efficiency and scale, and a more supportive enabling environment for United Nations partnership activity. Strengthening the Organization’s capacity for strategic partnership can ensure that the United Nations remains relevant at a time in which business, philanthropy and civil society are increasingly active, resourceful and vibrant in the global public goods space.In the past year, we continued to make use of multi-stakeholder partnership initiatives to achieve key goals. These include Every Woman Every Child and Sustainable Energy for All. Our Women’s Empowerment Principles and Caring for Climate initiatives are the world’s largest business platforms for action on these issues. These initiatives include stakeholders from all relevant sectors and use the comparative advantages and core competences of each to catalyse wide-ranging changes in behaviour, achieving greater scale and impact because benefits accrue broadly. Partnerships such as these supplement traditional development assistance and have proved to leverage the increase of both official development assistance and non-traditional financial flows. The task at hand is however to move beyond consideration of financial flows only and adopt a vision which encompasses a range of contributions such as innovation, technology, research, human capacity and more to make progress on the Millennium Development Goals and serve as a model for achieving the post-2015 development agenda. The Global Compact has continued to serve as a powerful corporate citizenship initiative, with more than 7,500 companies in 140 countries committed to universal principles and with the potential to contribute significantly to achieving United Nations goals, in particular those related to the post-2015 global development agenda. I.	Strengthening the OrganizationAt the end of my term, I want to leave behind a global, dynamic and adaptable Secretariat, accountable to all its stakeholders, delivering high-quality results and able to help Member States to deal with global challenges, while working within recognized resource constraints.The Organization has embarked on a number of critical initiatives which build on experiences and successes already achieved within the United Nations system. In the medium term, they offer the opportunity to reconsider the present distinction between so-called Headquarters-based activities and field-based activities, which has created distinctive approaches to management and administration over the past six decades. The actions taken by the General Assembly over the past decade to harmonize conditions of service across the entire United Nations system, and innovations adopted by other entities of the system, such as the creation of shared service centres, afford opportunities for strengthened oversight, greater standardization and additional efficiencies.To achieve a global, dynamic and adaptable workforce, the Organization is enhancing young professional recruitment, implementing a system of continuing contracts, and rolling out the new talent management system. The Organization is drawing up a comprehensive and structured approach to mobility and career development, which I will present to Member States for consideration at the main part of the sixty-seventh session with the aim of agreeing an approach that will be implemented across the Organization. To ensure that our staff is equipped with the latest knowledge and skills, we will need to reinvigorate our approach to learning, training and research. This will be a priority in my second term. With this approach, the Organization should be able to deploy a global workforce that can effectively fulfil current and future mandates and meet evolving operational needs while concurrently broadening opportunities for career development. The capital master plan will contribute to modernizing the workforce culture and will upgrade the working environment in the renovated Secretariat building.In spite of a number of problems encountered during the past year, Umoja, the enterprise resource planning project, is moving from the design phase to the build phase. Umoja will drive a substantial improvement of our business model and processes, bringing the realization of important benefits, improvements, control and transparency to our administration. It is fundamental to the way the United Nations will conduct business in the future, enhancing accountability, managerial control and decision-making. The Organization has also made good progress over the past year on preparations for the implementation of International Public Sector Accounting Standards. As the implementation will commence in July 2013 for peacekeeping operations and January 2014 for all other operations, the project’s focus has shifted from policy to implementation, with an emphasis on coordinated change management and transition planning with the Umoja project.The accountability system is being internalized in the Organization’s day-to-day work through outreach, education and training of staff at all levels. Proactive responses to recommendations of the oversight bodies are encouraged. Lessons are being drawn from pilot exercises in enterprise risk management. One early indication that these efforts are having an impact in fostering a culture of accountability is that the implementation rates of oversight recommendations have noticeably improved. The Organization is also beginning to see the benefits of the reformed internal justice system. Both staff and management are encouraged to seek to resolve disputes informally in the first instance. Where disputes cannot be settled, they are resolved by the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal. Senior management is closely following the developing jurisprudence of the Tribunals and has issued guidance manuals to improve administrative decision-making within the Organization.The Organization is moving decisively towards climate neutrality and achieving substantial savings and efficiencies by producing and distributing documents in a greener fashion. All documents are now processed and distributed electronically to all Member States and system-wide. The pilot of the PaperSmart model, introduced at the Rio+20 Conference, resulted in major savings, with an average of only one or less sheets of paper used per participant. I intend to submit a report on this pilot and propose next steps during the sixty-seventh session. The introduction of new e-services has made documents more accessible also to persons with disabilities, particularly the visually impaired, a goal to which the Organization remains fully committed.In 2011, the Organization replaced the United Nations security phase system by a security risk management process designed to be more measurable and flexible, in line with our goals to find ways to stay and deliver, not leave, in heightened security risk areas. Concurrently, on the programme side there is a development process under way to determine how to measure impact and continue critical programmes in high-risk environments. Combined with improved training for designated officials, security advisers and officers, and members of the in-country security management teams, the Organization is addressing heightened security risk situations in several countries in ways that kept vital programmes operating, where previously large and lengthy evacuations would have been standard.In a related development, the Organization has recruited, trained and fielded additional personnel to specifically analyse security threats. An enhanced ability to more accurately and completely understand security threats to the United Nations and implementation partners in real time has also helped to keep United Nations operations delivering under difficult circumstances.In the past year, I reached out to my staff and to Member States for additional ideas that improve our work. To help to develop associated deliverables, I created a small change management team and a network of change management focal points across the Organization. Following discussion with Member States of the plan which the team had developed, the General Assembly, in its resolution 66/257, took note of the initiatives and also requested that I submit to the Assembly proposals or measures related to the implementation of a number of its recommendations. In this regard, I intend to provide Member States with an overview and a road map in this area for the next five years. This will be followed by detailed proposals to the General Assembly that will be phased as appropriate.It is my conviction that the global problems we face today are simply too complex to be solved by Governments alone. They require collective and coordinated action by Government, by the private sector, by civil society, by academia, and by international organizations and multilateral development banks. Over the next year, I will develop a comprehensive proposal which seeks to harness the power of partnership.