
1. Introduction 
 
Integrating with its national development frameworks, Ethiopia has implemented the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which spanned the period 2000 to 2015 and registered remarkable achievements. The MDGs were implemented through effective government leadership and coordination of all stakeholders in an organized and structured manner throughout the country. The integration of MDGs with the national development frameworks enabled full access to the national budget allocated and human capital deployed for the implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the national development frameworks by avoiding duplication of efforts. Ethiopia had also a recent experience in evaluating and capturing best practices and identifying challenges from the national review it had conducted on the performance of the MDGs where important lessons of experiences have been drawn at the national level with which Ethiopia has made significant contributions to the preparation of the 2030 Global Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
 
Ethiopia has been pursuing pro-poor policies, implementing development plans and programs within which global development frameworks such as the MDGs, the Brussels Program of Action and its succcessor the Istanbul Program of Action for Least Developed Countries have been maintreamed with remarkable acheivements in economic growth, social development and environmental management. This, in turn has, helped in gaining replicable development experiences over the last decade and half. Informed by these experiences and having recognized future opportunities, Ethiopia has accepted with strong government commitments and endorsed the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by the House of People Representatives with full sense of national ownership to implement the 2030 Agenda and its sustainable development goals (SDGs) as an integral part of its national development framework, the Second Five Year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II). Accordingly, implementation of SDGs has been and is well in progress in Ethiopia. 
 
In response to the invitation made by the United Nations Economic and Social Council (UN-ECOSOC) to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE) in August 2016 to engage in the 2017 Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs), the government of FDRE has been volunteered to prepare the 2017 VNRs on SDGs, and preceded with the review process by following the proposal for Common Reporting Guideline of the Secretary General of the United Nations.  Accordingly, purposes of the review are established, review methodologies and processes, findings and lessons and challenges are clearly presented.   
 
The 2017 VNRs on SDGs of Ethiopia has two main purposes including (1) review of the process of national preparation for and implementation of the SDGs which has been undertaken in a manner reflecting the objective realities in the country and identify strengths, gaps, challenges and opportunities of implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as part and parcel of GTP II (2)  prepare and get approved the 2017 VNRs report by the Council of Ministers of the FDRE, present the report at the High Level Political Forum (HLPF) of the United Nations and receive constructive feedbacks from members countries and others participants of the 2017 HLPF which might be used as input in effective implementation of SDGs.  
 
The National Planning Commission (NPC) of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia being responsible to coordinate and prepare the national development plan, monitor and review implementation progress/performance of the national plan and conduct studies to verify the implementation of the national plan, spearheaded the overall national coordination of the 2017 VNRs. Accordingly, NPC has established the necessary groundworks before the actual conduct of the 2017 VNRs and report preparation. These groundworks include preparation of a Concept Note and a Check-list to properly guide and coordinate the VNRs process at the national level, conducting consultation on the Concept Note and the Checklist with representatives of the private sector, civil society organizations, and professional associations.  
 
Consultations with government institutions that are more relevant for the 2017 VNRs review were technical and focused on (1) the rationale behind the 2017 VNRs (2) the data sources for the preparations of the 2017 VNRs (3) methodologies and major processes of the 2017 VNRs (4) the contents and presentation formats of the 2017 VNRs report (5) the timeline for the submission and presentation of the 2017 VNRs.  The 2017 VNRs at macro 

and sectoral level was also coordinated by macro and sectoral federal government institutions. The budget for the review processes have been approved by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC).  
 
The NPC established a team of experts at national level to coordinate, support, and facilitate the process of the VNRs. Similarly, government institutions were involved in the coordination and preparation of the 2017 VNRs. The teams of experts established at sectoral levels conducted the VNRs at sectoral level and submitted the compiled review report to the NPC. Subsequently, the NPC synthesized the draft 2017 VNRs report. Consultations have been conducted on the draft VNRs report at the federal, regional and city administration levels with representatives of all stakeholders. Important feed-backs obtained from the consultations have been used to enrich the draft 2017 VNRs report. The 2017 VNRs report having been reviewed by various stakeholders through national consultations held at the regional states, city administrations and federal levels, and having incorporated the feedbacks, the final draft of the report has been approved by the government. 
 
The 2017 VNRs report has 13 sections including the introduction (Section1). Section 2 presents the review methodologies and processes; Section 3 deals with policies and the enabling environment; Section 4 focuses on the integration of the SDGs with the national development frameworks; Section 5 discusses the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development; Section 6 outlines performance of selected SDGs; Section 7 deals with the implementation of SDGs; Section 8 presents institutional mechanisms for implementing SDGs; Secton 9 reports on means of implementation of SDGs; Section10 highlights  next steps to implement SDGs; Section 11 presents monitoring, reporting and review of SDGs; Section 12 deals with the summary of the report including strengths and challenges, and  the final section  shows statistics-Annexes.  
 
 	 

2. Review Methodology and Processes 
 
2.1 Review Methodology   
 
The principal method that has used for the preparation of the 2017 VNRs has been compiling and analyzing official sample-survey/census data, and administrative data Survey and census data and/or information were collected from the Central Statistics Agency (CSA), while administrative data and/or information have been collected from other pertinent government executive organs. Efforts were also made to collect information at the national, regional and city administration levels through engagement of different stakeholders.  Collection & compilation of inputs for the 2017 VNRs on SDGs includes assessing the national legal frameworks, policy directions and other enabling environments, institutional co-ordination mechanisms for implementation, and performance monitoring and evaluation. Care has been taken to avoid data disparities. The 2017 VNRs report followed the proposal for voluntary common reporting guidline of the Secretary General of the United Nations for Voluntary National Reviews at HLPF.  
 
Statistical data pertaining to the main theme of the 2017 VNRs and the six goals of SDGs selected for the 2017 in-depth review have been collected and utilized in the VNRs. The six goals of SDGs review include: Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere, Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture, Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages, Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls, Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation,  Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development. Goal 17: strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development has also been reviewed in association with each of the six sets of SDGs indicated above. 
 
Consultations were made on the draft report of the 2017 VNRs with government officials and other stakeholders to bring about common understanding on the objectives and other elements of the 2017 VNRs. The feed-backs from these consultations served to enrich the report. 
2.2 The review processes 
 
Preparatory and implementation processes for the 2017-SDG-VNR in Ethiopia have been assessed. The implementation of the MDG served as the preparatory step for the 2017-SDG-VNR. Common African Position (CAP) on post-2015 Development Agenda and the 2030-Sustainable Development Agenda were used as a basis to own the SDGs by adapting it to objective realities in the country and by integrating it with the nationis 2nd Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II). During the preparation of GTP II several consultations were made to raise awareness of the development actors. Integrated with GTP II, implementation of the SDGs has commenced and due monitoring and evaluation were being conducted. Detail reviews are presented below.  
 
2.2.1 Contribution of Ethiopia to the preparation of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda 
 
Regarding the implementation of MDGs, six of the eight MDG goals were successfully achieved. In Ethiopia, the achievements of the remaining two MDGs were also impressive. The two goals not achieved were 1) gender equality and empowerment and 2) improving maternal health. Baseline data on the indicators of these two goals showed very low progress. The government made concerted efforts in cooperation and coordination with other stakeholders to achieve the goals. However, some unhealthy traditional practices and misperceptions along with paucity of some critical infrastructure remained Challenges accounting for the failure to achieve these goals 100 percent.   
 
On account of its appreciable performances in the MDGs, Ethiopia was selected by the UN as one of the 50 countries tasked with providing data for the preparation of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. In response, Ethiopia managed to provide the required data having had several review workshops at the federal and regional levels on the performance evaluation of the MDGs in Ethiopia. Sample surveys/census data obtained from the CSA and documents bearing administrative data obtained from sectorsi executive organs were used to compile to a good standard national review report on the performances of the MDGs in Ethiopia which was submitted to the UN.  
 
Ethiopia was also one of the ten African countries selected to form the High Level Committee for the preparation of the \0xEBCommon African Position (CAP) on Post 2015 Development Agendai. Ethiopia gave substantive contribution. It succeeded in proposing \0xEBStructural Transformation for Inclusive and People Centered Developmenti which was endorsed by the organizing committee. The proposal was made one of the strategic pillars of the post-2015 African Development Agenda. The post-2015 African Development Agenda is believed to have meaningfully contributed to the 2030 Sustainable Development agenda which is currently under implementation. 
 
2.2.2 Owning the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda 
 
The FDRE accepted and approved the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda during the UN- member statesi meeting held in New York from September 25 to 27/2015. Subsequently, it integrated the SDGs with the 2nd Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII). All stakeholders (from diverse communities) either directly or through their representatives were made to participate in the process to create awarenesss on the purposes and principal goals of the SDG-integrated GTP II and to enrich the document. Stakeholders were involved at all levels including the federal, regional states and city administrations. 
 
The stakeholders from the regional states that participated in the process included representatives from pastoralist communities, youth associations, women associations, the private sector, and the academics; The stakeholders from the federal government  comprised representative from the associations of the disabled, religious organizations, civil society organizations (CSO), non-governmental organizations (NGO), higher education institutions, research institutions, professional associations, youth associations, women associations, the private sector, opposition parties & development partners. The SDG-integrated GTP II was subsequently endorsed 1st by the council of ministers and then by the House of Peoplesi Representatives (HPR), then its implementation commenced.  
Regional states and city administrations have also prepared GTP II. In their GTP II, SDG  was also fully integrated. Thus, the SDG in Ethiopia has now been fully owned nationally and in the regions by including all stakeholders and this has been confirmed in the recently held three conferences organized by the UN Country Team (UN-CT) in collaboration with the government. Heads of Bureaus of the regional states and city administrations and representatives of CSOs participated in the three conferences. 
High level of commitment on the part of the FDRE is thus evident in light of owning the SDGs and implementing them. All development actors are implementing it in a coordinated way. The SDG which is integrated in GTP II has now been made legally enforceable in Ethiopia having been ratified by the HPR. This fact itself shows the high level of sense of ownership of the government.  
2.2.3 Ensuring the implementation of the 2030 SDGs Agenda by all Stakeholders 
As mentioned earlier on, the FDRE has commenced the implementation of the HPR-ratified GTP II which incorporates SDGs. GTP II implementation span covers five years, between 2015/16 to 2019/20. In effect all developments undertaken by every stakeholder in each development sector are drawn from the GTP II which includes SDG. Under the leadership of the FDRE all stakeholders shall remain engaged in implementing the SDGs and GTP II in general. 
The main coordination mechanism for the implementation of the SDG has already been put in place at all levels. The \0xEBPublic Wingi is one major institutional set up that every government executive organ shall make use of in the coordination and spearheading of the implementation of the SDG. 
  
The \0xEBPublic Wingi provides a platform for all stakeholders and government executive organs where they could participate in discussions pertaining to common developmental objectives.  The stakeholders include the private sector, CSOs, NGOs, professional associations, women & youth associations, pastoral Communities etc. The government via the Public Wing would evaluate quarterly development plan preparations and their implementation performances; strengths and weaknesses shall be identified; subsequent plans shall be reviewed and approved. Such practices are believed to ensure effective participation of stakeholders in the implementation of the SDG. 
 
Development Partners (DPs) are expected to engage in giving supports in the plan preparation, in the monitoring of implementation performances via Technical Working Groups (TWGs) instituted in each sector and also in participating in the evaluations of the annual implementation performances.  Feed-backs on the evaluations of performances and identification of priority and focal issues to be addressed in subsequent stages shall also be expected from the development partners.   
 
Throughout the SDGs implementation period, creating the awareness of stakeholders and promoting their sense of ownership of the SDGs shall remain one major task in the years ahead. To such end, the UN-CT in coordination with the government has organized workshops at selected centers; the workshops aimed at creating awareness and sense of ownership of the SDGs among stakeholders including the Bureau-heads from all regions and city administrations and the representatives of CSOs. Similar workshops shall continue to be organized.  
Effective participation of stakeholders across the country in the implementation of the SDGs is fairly evident. Increased efforts shall be made to coordinate the stakeholders utilizing the government institutional mechanisms for them to be able to monitor and evaluate the implementation of the SDGs.  Government executive organs at all administrative levels implement development plans coordinate stakeholders and engage them in the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the SDGs, and GTP II in general.   
 	 
3. Policies and Enabling Environment 
 
The Constitution of the FDRE is a manifestation of the covenant made among nations, nationalities and peoples of Ethiopia. It aimed at building a unified economic society. It has been made constitutional to adopt decentralized government administrative system in order to be able to provide for the direct participation of the broader citizenry (devolution of sufficient powers to lower administrative levels) in the economic and social development of the country and in the building of democratic system of government.  
 
General policy directives of the country derive from the Constitution; the policies allow equal participation of the people at all levels and ensure economic and social development and eradication of poverty and the building of democratic systems. While remaining embraced under the national policy frameworks, regional states and city administrations are obliged to prepare and implement plans and programs that reflect their local objective realities. Indeed, they have been discharging such responsibilities. 
 
The development policies and strategies are drawn from the principles of the Ethiopian constitution.  The decentralized economic administration allowed for the participation of the people at various levels and aimed at forming strong economy. The policiesi principal pursuits are forming strong national economy, ensuring that the people remain beneficiaries of the economy and that poverty in all its manifestations is eradicated from the country. There is strong integration and harmony among the national policy and strategies that are implemented at various government administrative levels, regional states and city administrations. This creates a conducive  environment for the implementation of SDGs.  
 
With a vision to achieve the Lower-Middle-Income Countries category, the government of the FDRE has embarked upon an accelerated implementation of economic growth, infrastructure building, social development and the building of democratic system.  To this end, it has put in place essential institutional mechanisms along with the necessary human capital. These institutional mechanisms are facilitating the implementation of the SDGs in Ethiopia.  
\0xEBPublic Wingsi platform governed by the \0xEBCharter of Citizensi have been formed under each government executive organs providing the enabling environment for the government organs to coordinate the discharge of their responsibilities along with the involvement of stakeholders. The Public Wings platform shall hold quarterly joint meetings to deliberate on common agenda and make decisions. This facilitated stakeholdersi enhanced awareness and sense of ownership of the SDGs; it also allowed close monitoring and evaluation of implementation progress of SDG, thus enabling their contribution to the success of their common goal.    
 
4. Integrating the SDGs with the National Development Frameworks 
    
The SDGis integration into the GTP II (which spans the FY 2015/16 to 2019/20) was made possible by taking in to account principal directions from GTP II which focuses on creating conducive condition for macroeconomic stability, ensuring fast & sustained economic development, infrastuctural development, human resources and technological capacity building, ensuring good governance and democratic systems building. There would be two more GTPs spanning the SDG plan years of 2015 to 2030 including the GTP II; they are under preparation presently. 
Common understanding of the SDGs has been attained among all actors of development in the discussions made at different levels during the preparation of GTP II. The ratification of GTP II at the federal level by the parliament and council of were important steps to integrate SDGs with the national development frameworks.  
 
In light of implementing the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, the FDRE appreciates the meaningful contribution of the SDGs to Ethiopiais aspirations to eradicate poverty and bring about prosperity for its people. SDGs have also role to accelerate the economic development of Ethiopia in infrastructures development, environmental development and in the building of democratic systems, and in general in fulfiling the renaissance journey of Ethiopia.  Awareness creation workshops were conducted at various government administrative levels already in order to be able to implement the SDGis according to the objective realities in Ethiopia with full sense of ownership. 
Existing institutional forms and mechanisms have been used in implementing the SDGs and GTP II.  GTP II is the first five year phase (2015/16 to 2019/20) of the 15 years SDG implementation span (2015-2030). Having been endorsed by the government, GTP II and its integral part SDGs have been under implementation with close monitoring and evaluation at all levels of government administration. All executive organs of the federal government, the regional states and city administrations implement SDGs as an integral part of GTP II. The government has also effectively coordinated and engaged various stakeholders (private sector, CSOs, NGOs, youth and women associations, disabilities, pastoral communities) by organizing them in the form of public wing under the appropriate executive organs in expediting the joint implementation of the development plans.  
 
As mentioned earlier, the SDGs having been integrated with the GTP II, the first five years phase of the SDGs 15 years span (2016-2030)) shall also be integrated with the forthcoming GTPs for the remaining years along the priority development themes. The Government of FDRE has identified ten national development priority areas in its five year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II), the first five year phase of SDGsi 15 yearis implementation period. These   priority areas of the GTP II are integrated with the SDGs as shown below. 
 	 

Figure1. Integration of Ethiopiais National Development frameworks (priorities) and the SDGs  
 
S/No. 
Ethiopiais National Development Priorities  
Sustainable Development Goals 
1 
 Agricultural sector development  continue to be the major source  source of an accelerated  economic growth and development  
 
 
2 
Bringing about concrete structural transformation in the economy through the development of the manufacturing industry 

3 
Increasing efficiency and focusing on the productivity, quality and competitiveness of the productive sectors to achieve high economic productivity. 

4 
Focusing on the imbalance of demand and supply by accelertaing growth and correcting the imbalance in the macro economy.   

5 
Implementing the construction industry policy and strategy framework in order to be able to achieve developmental and successful project management. 
   
 	 
Figure 1: Integration of Ethiopiais National Development frameworks (priorities) and the SDGs contid 
  
S/No. 
Priority Development Areas of Ethiopia 
Sustainable Development Goals 
6 
Prioritizing urban administration and management to bring about accelerated urbanization and structural change in a manner coping with the accelerated industrialization. 
 
7 
Prioritizing the transformation of  domestic investors 
 
8 
Prioritizing the development of human resources supported with technological capacity building  
   
9 
Giving priority to building climate resilient green economy  
    
10 
Eliminating rent-seeking behaviors and ensuring the predominance of developmental frame of mind.    
 

 
The GTP II policy matrix shows the direct and proxy indicators useful to monitor the performances of the SDGs. Seventy percent (70%) of the data used for performance monitoring indicators are from administrative data. The rest are sourced from the Central Statistics Agencyis (CSAis) sample surveys/census data. Other reliable data sources are also accessed and their data utilized. There has recently been a study launched to identify those indicators that are not compatible with the objective realities of Ethiopia. 
SDG financing needs study shall be conducted during the SDG implementing years (2016-2030). Implementing the SDGs is believed to have a big contribution in assisting the vision of the FDRE to place the country among the Lower-Middle-Income-Countries of the world by 2025 and to accelerate the transformation and renaissance journey of the country.  
  
 	 
5. Integrating the three Dimensions of the SDGs  
 
Chapter 10 of the Constitution of the FDRE outlines economic objectives, social objectives and environmental health objectives. The national policies and the regional and sector policies and strategies that were prepared under the framework of the constitution are all compatible and harmonized to the local objective realities at all levels. The three dimensions of the SDGs (economic, social and environmental aspects development) are integrated. Besides, the Climate-Change-Resilient Green-Economy Development Strategy (CRGE-Strategy) has been prepared in a manner integrating these three dimensions of the SDGs.  
GTP II takes into consideration the national vision, the national sectorsi policies, the international and regional agreements that Ethiopia has made in the areas of post-2015 development goals. The Paris Climate Change international agreement has been ratified by the HPR of the FDRE. All these evidences show the integration of the three dimensions of the SDGs in Ethiopia. In general it could be said that there has been already sufficient directives issued to integrate the three dimensions of the SDGs. Nevertheless, the execution and implementation of the policy directives have faced some limitations due to capacity constraints.     
There exist, huge gaps in the developmental capacity in all sectors and at all levels to ensure executing and implementing the national policies and to satisfactorily implement the SDGs. Misperceptions among the executive bodies and the implementing bodies, deficiency in their level of motivations and in their sense of ownership and in delivering efficient services are among the main challenges to be addressed.  
However efforts are being made across the nation to scrutinize the policies in light of ensuring their implementability at all levels and in light of identifying any policy gaps based on evidences and filling the policy gaps by authorities. In general, could be stated GTP II has been harmonized and integrated with the three dimensions of the SDGs and would reach successful ends. 
 
6. Performance Instances of Goals and Targets 
 
Integrated with GTP II, SDGs were implemented across the nation in 2015/16 fiscal year and progresses have been registered.  For example, annex 13-1 presented the performances of SDG 4, 6 and 7.  
 
SDG 4: Ensuring universal (inclusive) access to equitable and quality education: With regard to access to education, pre-school enrollment increased from 39 percent in 20014/15 fiscal year (male 40 percent and female 38 percent), to 49.9 percent in 2015/16 (male 51.1 percent and female 48.6 percent). Commendable performance, but shows also the need to increase the performance of girlsi education to bring down the performance disparity between male and female students.  In 2014/15 fiscal year, the number of elementary schools (grade 1 to 8), were 33,373 with net enrollment of 96.9 percent (male 100 percent and female 93.2 percent); The net enrollment increased to 97.6 percent (male 100 percent and female 93.74 percent) in the fiscal year 2015/16.  Again, commendable performance but suggesting also the need to increase the performance rate of the female to bring down the performance disparity between the male and the female. Gender-parity- index marginally declined from 0.93 in 2014/15 to 0.91 in 2015/16. It could be said that the general performance of the fiscal year 2015/16 is commendable while recommending more efforts to increase the performance rate of the female to bring down the performance disparity between the male and the female. 
  
In 2015/16, secondary level education (1st cycle: Grades 9 to 10) gross enrollment increased to 44.8 percent (male 46.2 percent and female 43.4 percent) from that of 2014/15is rate of 39.8 percent (male 41.3 percent and female 38.4 percent). In 2015/16 fiscal year, secondary level preparatory education (2nd cycle: Grades 11 & 12) gross enrollment increased to 12.6 percent (male 13.4 percent and female 11.7 percent) from that of 2014/15is rate of 10.6 percent (male 11.3 percent and female 9.9 percent). Female participation was a bit lower than those of males at both steps suggesting the need for increased effort to bring up the rate of enrollment of female students. 
 
Regarding Technical & Vocational Education and Training, about 304,139 total trainers were graduted up to 2015/16, while 131,097 students were in training in the fiscal year under review. Increase in TVET enrollment rate should be encouraged in light of meeting the demand of TVET graduates. The number of undergraduate students enrolled at higher education increased from 729,028 (35% female) in 2014/15 to 778,766 (34 percent female) in 2015/16 fiscal year.     
 
SDG-6: Ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all: The development objectives of the water and sanitation sector comprise ensuring sustained supply of potable water and sustainable sanitation/sewerage disposal system; supplying water for use in industries and large irrigated agricultural development works and participatory watershed development & conservation to ensure sustained use of water resources. Rural potable water supply coverage increased from 59 percent in 2014/15 to 61.1 percent in 2015/16. The water systems reported are the \0xEBimproved water systems/schemesi. Urban piped-potable water supply coverage increased from 51 percent in 2014/15 to 52.5 prcent in the 2015/16 fiscal year. National (Urban and Rural total) potable water supply coverage increased from 58 percent in 2014/15 to 61 percent in fiscal year 2015/16. Non-functional rural potable water supply schemes showed marginal change from 11.2 percent in 2014/15 to 11 percent in fiscal year 2015/16. Potable water supply and sanitation/sewerage coverage and the performances thereof could be said to be at rather low level and therefore deserve increased attention/focus.  
 
SDG-7: Ensuring access to affordable & reliable energy for all: The objectives of the energy infrastructure development of Ethiopia comprise expanding electrical transmission lines, providing reliable and efficient energy supply and distribution. Energy development across the nation is growing and expanding. Power generation in Ethiopia focuses on hydropower, geothermal energy, wind and solar power, which are all renewable energy sources.  The country has managed to increase its electricity generation capacity to 4269.5 MW. Many power generating development schemes are under construction every year. The Grand Ethiopian Rennaissance Dam (GERD) has reached 57 percent completion in 2016/17. Construction of the transmission line increased from 14,065 km in 2014/15 to 15,137 km in 2015/16. Coverage of electricity supply increased from 54.25 percent in 2014/15 to 56 percent 2015/16 fiscal year. 
Sectors at all levels of government administration monitor the implementation of the SDGs and their targets. Monitoring reports reach the HPRs and the Standing Committee (SCs) of the parliament for performance assessment every year. Feedbacks on the performance assessments are sent to the section. The federal institutions prepare and submit performance reports of GTP II including SDGs to the NPC every end of each fiscal year. The NPC assesses the performances of GTP II including SDGs within each fiscal year.  
The integration of the SDGs with the GTP II as accomplished to produce the SDG-Integrated GTP II is notable. Objective realities in Ethiopia have of course influenced the integration. Ethiopia is preparing long-term national development plan; there is also a study being launched to assess financing needs for implementing the SDGs. Further integration of the SDGs with the GTPs is envisaged to be informed by the long term plan and the SDG financing needs assessment reports. GTP III & IV (2020-2030) are anticipated to better integrate with the SDGs and better resourced from the annual budget to be allocated. Options for effective data collection and reliable data sources to monitor and evaluate the performances of the SDGs implementation shall be strengthened. In this regard, what are evident at this stage are the resource and capacity gap challenges that need to be tackled to be able to collect data timely and up to the desired standards of details and qualities.   
     
7. Implementation of SDGs 
 
7.1. Performance of the SDGs in general  
 
The national and sectoral policies and strategies of the FDRE focuses on eradication of poverty and  implementation of development interventions that would have returns satisfying all the nation-wide demands/needs while ensuring inter-generational equity. The Climate-Change-Resilient Green-Economy strategy (CRGE-strategy) has been under implementation. The Paris Agreement on climate change has also been under implementation. National Policy and strategy on disaster prevention and management has been implemented across the nation.   
The development policies of Ethiopia aim at benefiting the people of Ethiopia at all levels. As indicated in the Ethiopian Rural Development Policies and strategies, Ethiopiais principal endowments are the countryis vast land and human resources. In light of these the policy directions elicited the need for accelerated and comprehensive economic growth, economic infrastructure development, social development and expediting the building of democratic system in a manner that centered on the development of its people. The implementation of the policies are envisaged to ensure food security in the whole country and at every household level to eradicate poverty in all its forms, to ensure gender equality, to withstand climate change and bring about prosperity of the nation.  
 
In order to achieve the 2030 SDGs, national development priorities have been identified in the GTP II which is the first 5 year-phase (2015/16-2019/20) of the long term national development plan (2015/16 to 2029/30) which is now under preparation. These include (1) ensuring that the agriculture development sector remains the mainstay of the nationis accelerated economic development (2) expediting change in the economic structure of the nation by transforming the manufacturing industry development (3) enhancing the economy to its full economic capacity through increased focus on competitiveness, efficiency, productivity and quality (4)  Correcting the imbalance between overall demand and supply (5) fostering the development of the construction industry and projectsi management capacity (6) institutionalizing urban administration and management compatible with the accelerated urbanization, industrialization and structural changes in the economy (7) creating enabling environment for the transformation of domestic investors (8) providing support to human resources development through building technologic capacity (9) building climate resilient green economy  and (10) eliminating rent-seeking behaviors and ensuring the predominance of developmental frame of mind.    
 
SDGs have clearly been integrated with the above mentioned national development priority areas as well as strategic pillars of GTP II. Their tagets, have also been integrated with the GTP II targets in areas of macroeconomy, economic sectors, infrastructure development sector, human resources development and technologic capacity building, developmental good-governance and the building of democratic systems, and in all croscutting issues such as environment management and others. The strategic pillars of GTP II include (1) continuing with the accelerated growth of the economic development, (2) aiming at the attainment of the full economic production capacity, fostering the productive forces, increasing efficiency, productivity, quality and competitiveness to sustain growth (3) transforming the domestic investors into competent actors of development (4) fostering the development of the construction sector, (5) administering and managing rapid urbanization in the country in order to harness its contribution to the accelerated growth of the economy, (6) expediting the development of human resources and the building of its technologic capacity, (7) building the implementation capacity of the government and increasing the participation of the people in order to create democratic good governance, (8) bringing about the participation and competence of women and youth and ensuring they benefit from the economy, and (9) building climate-resilient green-economy.  
 
Following the UN declaration on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AA-AA), the government of FDRE has been assertively working to increase national capacity to mobilize and effectively utilize domestic resources. Although tax revenue has been increasing in the last decade, the existing level of revenue collection remains low compared to the revenue generating potential of the economy and the total resource demand for government expenditure commitment. Thus, the government has given high emphasis in GTP II period to increase domestic resource mobilization through widening the tax base; strengthening and ensuring full implementation of tax information administration system; enhancing taxpayersi education and communication; enforcing tax laws; and strengthening revenue and customs institutional capacity. Accordingly, the government has set stretched target in GTP II to increase tax revenue from 12.7 percent of GDP (Birr 165.3 billion) in 2014/15 to 17.2 of GDP (Birr 542.8 billion) in 2019/20. The over all domestic revenue (tax and non-tax) has projected to increase from Birr 199.6 billion in 2014/15 to Birr 620.6 billion in 2019/20.  Important tasks to provide the finance, technology and capacity needs for the implementation of the SDGs are being carried out via organized and coordinated engagements around international partnership.     
 
National, regional and global affairs pertaining to development, peace and security have been made part and parcel of the GTP II. The SDG-Integrated-GTP II commenced during the 2015/16 drought year. The drought constrained the budget allocated for the implementation of the SDGs right from the beginning of the phase. Nevertheless, through concerted effort of the government the drought could be spanned in a manner where not one soul (citizen) died of starvation and the pace of implementation of the SDGs was not affected that much. In the second year of the SDGs (2016/17) the drought exacerbated in the water stressed areas of the country. The hazard posed by climate change though threatening the achievement of the SDGs by competing with their tight resources if continued, the government, capitalizing on its experiences with responding to the situations through concerted efforts, preparedness and effective responses would be in a better position to maintain the pace of implementation of the SDG-integrated GTP II. The effective implementation of the national policy on disaster prevention and management has also proved helpful in mobilizing resources and no human-life was lost during the two consecutive drought years 2015/16 and 2016/17. These successes also showed us the economic strength of Ethiopia that has been achieved over the last 15 years.    
7.2.  Leaving No One Behind 
 
The Ethiopian economy grew at a remarkable average rate of 10.8 percent through successfully implementing three consequetive National Development Plans that and integrated the MDGs. In 2009/10, GDP per capita was 377 US$ while it increased to US$ 794 in 2015/16 fiscal year. The national poverty level also declined from 44.2 percent in 1999/2000 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 fiscal year. It was anticipated that it would further decline to 23.4 percent in 2014/15 fiscal year. It has also been targeted in GTP II, to attain a poverty level of 16.7 % by end of 2019/20 fiscal year.   
With respect to human resources development, the number of elementary schools (grades 1 to 8) increased from 26,951 in 2009/10 to 33,373 in 2014/15; net enrollment in elementary education increased from 82.1 percent in 2009/10 to 97.6 percent in 2015/16. The government adopted functional Adult Education Strategy targeting reduction of 95 percent illiteracy which is significant. Literacy in this connection involved enabling those between 15 and 60 years of age to read, write, and do a little arithmetic. According to the Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia (CSA), statistic data \0xEBliterate adultsi number was 20.4 million in 2011/12 and reduced to 8.4 million in 2014/15 (a 58.82 percent reduction). There were 6.9 million adults attending Adultsi functional education in 2015/16. This would lead to reduction of adult illiteracy to 1.5 million (92.65 percent). GTP II targeted eliminating illiteracy through organized and coordinated efforts. On the other hand, national health coverage increased from 89.6 percent in 2009/10 to 98 percent in 2015/16 fiscal year. National coverage of potable water supply assessed by the GTP II standard reached 68.1 percent by end of 2015/16 fiscal year. Nevertheless, according to the 2016 Human Development Report (HDR) the Human Development Index (HDI) of Ethiopia was low, HDI level of 0.448.  
 
Poverty Tracking: Ethiopia was successful in halving poverty level and thus meeting most of the MDGs target. According to the CSA study, poverty level reduced from 44.2 percent in 1999/2000 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11. In 2014/15 it was estimated to decline to 23.4 percent. Similarly, of poverty with respect to the level of education showed that increased level of education has the positive impact of reducing poverty level in both rural and urban settings. Considering the age of the family-head, the risk of exposure to poverty for those in the span of 30 to 64 years of age was shown to be 33 percent while those above 65 years of age has a 29 percent risk. Those in the span of 16 to 29 years of age have a 16 percent risk of exposure to poverty. In 2010/11, Poverty Analyses Report also disclosed that diseases, drought, loss of livestock lives, flood, inflation, unemployment and shortage of food supply account for overall vulnerability. 
 
One of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda is to eliminate poverty and hunger. The government of the FDRE through implementing its SDG-integrated GTP II focuses on eliminating poverty by addressing the needs of those citizens who make vulnerable parts of the society, children, youths, women, the disabled, the elderlies, and those who lead low level of livelihood. It addresses those who have poor access to quality-social and economic infrastructure and those districts and communities who are exposed to shortage of rain and food.  
 
Policy Directions: The development policies of the government focused on expeditiously bringing about broad and inclusive economic growth and on expanding social infrastructure, environmental health development and on elimination of poverty. The policy directions enable equal participation of the people in the development efforts and also that they remain beneficiaries from the development.   
 
The budget allocation focuses on poverty reduction and on the sectors that encourage savings and investments; budget sources are mainly revenues. To this end, expanding the tax-base, improving tax-collection capacities, increasing remittances, and increasing domestic loan services have been considered. In this 2017 VNR report the main theme of the Sustainable Development Agenda viz. Leaving No One Behind was incorporated in each of the themes selected for the voluntary national review with respect to policy directives, implementation mechanisms, lessons learne and challenges; In the following section financial inclusiveness, road safety and traffic management, childrenis welfare, and participatory monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs have been highliged as follows.  
7.2.1. Financial Inclusiveness 
 
Financial inclusiveness is important for stabilizing the finance and monetary system of Ethiopia, to transform cash transactions to regular banking systems, to encourage and support  savings, to meet the demand for loans, to enable the growth of  investments, to create employment, to increase incomes and ultimately to eradicate poverty. 
 
Policy directions of Financial Inclusiveness: The financial inclusiveness policy centered on the countryis \0xEBdevelopmental democracyi principle and its objectives include: (1) to realize the vision of the country to become a Lower-Middle-Income-Country by 2025 (2) to succeed in implementing the Rural Development Policy (3) expediting the Transformation and Renaissance Journey of the country in order to maintain the allinclusive rapid economic growth (4) rolling out modern, efficient, accessible financial system to all communities and peoples in the country. To such end, there have been adopted strategies to strengthen various financial institutions, to ensure the supply of various appropriate financial products and services, to ensure service centers availability in sufficient numbers, to roll out robust financial security systems for users and to increase the level of awareness and knowledge of financial services.  
  
Performance: National Financial Inclusiveness Strategy has been prepared; it analyzed the hitherto achieved financial inclusiveness and was prepared based on the priority development agendas of the nation and along its economic and social directions. National Financial Inclusiveness Council has also been established. There is on going effort to modernize the finance system of the country. With regard to increasing accessibility of financial services, 16 private banks and two government banks are operating. In 2015/16 there were 363 branches of private banks and 131 branches of government banks; this added up to 494. Overall, the number of bank branches nation-wide increased from 3187 in FY 2014/15 to 3681 in FY 2015/16.  This enabled the number of users per bank to de crease from 33 448 in 2014/15 to 28,932 in FY 2015/16.    
 
Seventeen insurance firms, 35 micro finance institutions and five lease companies are also operating across the country. In the rural part of the country 18,000 Savings and Credit Cooperative Works Associations were established. These have 11.8 million users. As of March 2016, their savings reached 19.3 million ETB; customers of the micro finance institutions have reached 11.4 million. This added up to 30.7 million saving accounts and indicates that there now are 68 saving accounts for every 100 adults. This performance in financial inclusiveness has had significant contribution on the economic growth registered, on the growth in savings and investments, and to poverty reduction. 
7.2.2 Childrenis Right and Welfare 
 
Policy Direction: The mission of ensuring childrenis rights and welfare, care and support, participation and that they benefit more has the bases including (1) The nationis development policy and strategy (2) International Agreements on Childrenis Rights and Welfare (3) The African Charter on the \0xEBRights and Welfare of the Child and (4) The proclamation for Registration of Vital Events & the Strategy for Special-needs Education. The direction followed in order to succeed in this endeavor has thus been cooperation and partnership with national and international organizations, enabling the participation with ownership of the children and the society including all institutions such that the rights and welfare of children are ensured.  
 
Performance: Although women and childrenis affairs are cross-sectoral issues, the government, taking into consideration that the affairs of women and children deserve special attention, has opted to establishing a national institution owning, leading and coordinating the affairs of women and children. Further, in each sectoral departments that are specially assigned to own, coordinate and handle women and childrenis affairs are producing fruitful results.  
 
Considerable results were achieved around the rights and welfare of children during the implementation of the MDGs in Ethiopia. In the last 18 months of the implementation of the SDG which incorporated childrenis right and welfare, a number of pertinent developmental works have been executed. Draft policy for childrenis rights and welfare has been prepared and submitted to the government; the draft was discussed in several occasions. In the regional states, there has been an effort to roll out information systems for childrenis right and welfare. At the federal level the database for childrenis rights and welfare is being produced. Centers for the rehabilitation of children are being built; in the judiciary children-friendly courts are being established; institutionalizing childrenis affairs is a task given to all sector organizations and is under implementation. 
 
Training platforms were created on childrenis rights, securities and welfares. Awareness creation seminars and trainings were made to 21,860 sector officials on: childrenis rights and welfare, on illegal facilitation of the migration of children, on labor exploitation, on gender related offences and on the proper raising of children. Training has also been given to 8,402 participants on the same topics to the Coalition of Childrenis Support and Care, to the Executive Committee for Childrenis Right Convention, and for members of Childrenis Parliaments and Associations. Further 461,552 participants from the society were given orientations on the harmful practices on the offences and labor exploitation of children. 
 
With respect to increasing the participation of children and improving their livelihood, 447, 683 children received social support and care; 67, 844 got guardian families; 945 children were adopted within the country; 63 were adopted abroad; 2928 children were made to benefit from reintegration programs and 45,808 children benefited from Special-needs educational support. 
Children Parliament of Ethiopia: The government of the FDRE in order to safeguard the rights and welfare of children has issued various legal and policy frameworks and has signed the International Childrenis Right Convention. In particular the measures taken to increase the participation of children are encouraging. In this connection, it should be disclosed that different organizational forms and platforms to enable and support active and strengthened participation of children are being provided. In all communities across the nation, lots of activities are being undertaken through childrenis parliaments and childrenis rigths clubs. 
 
Objectives of the Childrenis Parliament: The main objective of Childrrenis Parliament is to enable children to have their voices heard so that they can safeguard themselves and other children from environmental and family oppressions, to enable them raise petitions in an organized way on matters concerning them, to have discussions and advance their joint positions, to use the childrenis parliament to get their voices heard among their families, in the society and at the various levels of government and judicial bodies such that their rights are respected and they would be able to discharge their rights and responsibilities.       
 
Childrenis Parliamnet-Institutional mechanism and Organization: The childrenis parliament is organized into six standing committees (SCs). These are: 1) Standing committee for safeguarding Childrenis Right 2) Standing Committee for Social Affairs 3) Standing Committee for Environmantal Conservation and Protection 4) Standing Committee for Culture and Sports 5) Standing Committee for Gender Afffairs and 6) Standing Committee for Ethics and Childrenis Education. The Childrenis Parliament is led by the Speaker of the Parliamenti; the Standing Committees each have a chairman, a secretary and two members. The standing committee is accountable to the speaker of the Childrenis Parliament. The Childrenis Parliament has 8428 members, of which 4424 are girls. 
    
Main activities of the Childrenis parliament are: 1) Giving support to children socially vulnerable to hardships by engaging in fund raising program and performing activities pertaining to improvement of childrenis education, health care and environmental protection. 2) Giving awareness creation trainings around chidrenis rights related themes, around family, environment, society and schools; giving trainings and orientations on harmful traditional practices and 3) joining hands with the Commercal Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) to foster the culture of savings and to be able to purchase bonds for the construction of the GERD. 
 
7.2.3 Road Safety and Traffic Management 
 
Policy Directions: In order to provide transport services required for the increasing population, expanding cities,industries, trade, education, health etc. and to be able to join the level of the lower middle Income Countries Economy by 2025, expanding the road infrastructure and traffic safety are critically important. To this end, expanding quality road infrastructure, building the capacity to prevent and reduce traffic accidents, preparing legal frameworks, appropriate management of traffic accidents and casualties constitute the priority policy directions adopted. Thus, there has been a strong government committement to render the traffic management of the country and to reduce loss of lives, injuries and damages to properties by making use of information technology, by building the capacities of professionals in state-of-the-art road transport system and by building modern road transport system. 
 
Performance: With respect to road infrastructure development the government allocates considerable resources for road construction. In order to increase road accessibility, to ascertain road safety and to improve economic and social services, the government has built express roads which reduced traffic jams and accidents. Subsequently, the length of all-weather-roads in FY 2015/16 reached 113,067 km. 
 
A Ten years-National Road Safety Action Plan has been prepared and is being implemented; a National Road Safety Council has been established by the CoM to oversee the implementationof the National Road Safety Action Plan. Ammendment to the Proclamation for the Certification of Traffic Worthiness of Vehicles and 
Drivers has been produced and submitted to the government for endorsement; trainings for road safety awareness creation are being given; curriculum pertaining to awareness of traffic accidents has been made parts of curriculum. Third party vehicle insurances have been made obligatory. It has been targetted to reduce fatal traffic accidents to 27/10,000 and this is being implemented; currently fatal traffic accidents are quite high. 
 
  7.2.4. Participatory M&E System of the SDGs 
 
One other way of ascertaining the principle of Leaving No One behind when implementing the SDGs is ensuring all the people of Ethiopia is aware of the SDGs such that they participate in the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation actively and with full transparency. Consistent with these in Ethiopia through the Sustainable development and Poverty reduction program (SDPRP-2002/03-2004/05), Plan for the Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty (2005/06 to 2009/10) and through the first Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP I: 2010/11 to 2014/15) stakeholders participated in the preparation, implementation, monitoring and review of these plans.  
 
Similarly, the private sector, the civil society, government and non-government organizations (NGOs), members of the Parliament, members of the opposition political parties through their representatives actively participated in the consultation organized by the government on the performance report of GTP I and on GTP II. These stakeholders were also participated in the review of the 2017 draft VNRs through national consultation held at national, regional and city administration levels. Relevant feedbacks from these consultations were incorporated in the 2017 draft VNRs report.  
 
7.3. Analysis of the Main Theme: Eradication of Poverty and bringing about Prosperity: 
 
Policy Directions of the FDRE: The main objectives of the national development agenda are all inclusive rapid economic growth, development of infrastructure and environment, and building of democratic systems in order to be able to eradicate poverty and bring about the prosperity of the people. The year 2025 has been marked as the target year to attain the National Vision for Ethiopia to join the Lower Middle Income Countriesi Economy. All government policies and strategies, plans and programs focus on ensuring accelerated Renaissance-Journey of the nation, eradicating poverty and bringing about prosperity. The Ethiopia people has benefited from the successful development results in the last 15 years during which time government policies, strategies, plans and programs have been implemented in well organized and coordinated manner. The development results were coupled with reducing unemployment. Achievements in education, health and infrastructure were remarkable.  
 
Critical roles were played in poverty eradication efforts and in unemployment reduction up to the end of FY 2014/15. A lot remains to be accomplishing though. Women and youth unemployment is still very high indicating the need for continued effort to accelerate all-inclusive economic growth in infrastructure and social developments and in building democratic systems.  
 
Methods of Implementation: Consistent with the Ethiopian constitution, the government uses equitable wealth/resources distributionary allocation systems for the implementation of the development activities nationwide. The House of Federations (HoF) employs equitable allocation formulae to attain equitable wealth/resources distributionary allocation. The development works are envisaged to bring about broad-based and all-inclusive economic growth, social and infrastructure development, environmental development and democratic systems in light of eradicating poverty. The Expenditure budget allocations prioritize investments that are envisaged to bring about capital formation. Seventy per cent of the total government expenditure budget is allocated to finance five development sectors; these sectors are: education, health, agriculture, water and sanitation, and rural roads construction.  
The Constitution of the FDRE showes that the government shall make concerted efforts in order to be able to provide all Ethiopians with education, health, water and sanitation, shelter, food and social security. The government has been responsive by allocating progressively increasing resources and ensuring that the resources are utilized effectively to enable the people of Ethiopia access health, education and other social services. Achievements in record thus far have been satisfactory. 
 
The government of the FDRE has been endeavoring to expand investments and to raise finances from domestic sources in order to be able to meet financial needs for the all-inclusive economic growth, for the social, environmental and infrastructure development and for building democratic systems. The vision to join the middle income countriesi economy by 2025, the determination to eradicate poverty and the continuation of the transformation and renaissance journey, all call for concerted efforts to pull domestic resources and expand investments.   
 
Across the nation organized and coordinated efforts towards increasing the volume of savings have been made to capture and practice the culture of saving. To such end, motivational and awareness creation efforts have been made. Efforts such as (1) expanding financial institutions (increasing accesses to financial services) (2) Strengthening the social security institutions in both the public and private sectors (3) marketing bonds nationally and internationally to finance the construction of the Grand Renaissance Dam (GERD) (4) instituting and strengthening financial instruments for special savings to finance housing constructions and the procurement of machineries for investments and (5) prioritizing the allocation of government expenditures to finance capital forming investments were some of the initiatives, just to mention a few. 
 
Gender Equality: The Constitution of the FDRE in Article 25 indicated that all persons are equal before the law. Article 35 of the Constitution decreed that women have the right to equality to those of men in engaging in all activities in economic development, social development and the political sector. Womenis Policy and Strategy and Womenis Development Package have been produced specially to ensure that these decrees are implemented. Legal backings providing support for Affirmative Actions for Women have been formulated. Institutional forms and mechanisms equipped with essential human resources have now been realized through implementing the Womenis Policy and Strategy and the Womenis Development Package in development interventions. Women have been encouraged to actively participate in organized and coordinated ways in the economy, the social and political spheres all over the country.  
Similarly, Youth Policy and Development Package were prepared, appropriate institutional forms and mechanisms laid out equipped with the essential human resources to implement the Youth Policy and the Youth Development Package. Youth and women unemployment rate is higher. GTP II implemented expeditiously is hoped to reduce the youth and women unemployment. Out of due concern for the rather high unemployment issue, the government has over and above the normal budget allocated per GTP II FY requirements, has  allocated addition 10 billion Birr as a revolving fund for job creation . The revolving fund has now been legally established and is intended to benefit all the youths of the nation through engaging them in systematic and coordinated deployment of the youth on development interventions. 
Infrastructure development has a critical role in expediting the implementation of economic, social and environmental development interventions. It enables the creation of strong relationship among the people, the regions and their environment. Social services could be accessed quickly; it has appreciable role in the development of the environment too. Its role in the eradication of poverty and achieving the SDGs is significant. In general, infrastructural development would enable the attainment of the SDGs and that of eradication of poverty. The private sector has meaningful role in driving the economic growth and the structural transformation from agriculture-led economy to industry-led economy and to speed up infrastructure development. Infrastructure development (energy, roads, railways, irrigation systems, information technology) have been considered critically important development interventions.  Thus far, impressive results have been obtained in infrastructure development and it is hoped that these shall continue in the years ahead.  
   
Capitalizing on the various reliable infrastructures in particular the renewable energy sources, productive industries have lately been expanding across the country organized in clusters and in industrial parks and benefiting from pollution-free electrical energies. This new initiative accelerated transformation of the economy and industrialization and are hoped to produce broader employment opportunities thereby increasing individual income. 
    
Ethiopia is endowed with enormous ground and surface water. The Ethiopian Water Management Policy, which is under implementation, aimed at bringing about optimal harnessing and utilization of the water resources of the country. Sustainability of the water eco-system calls for well-coordinated economic, social and environmental developments and these are being implemented.  Massive public mobilization has been made possible in order to engage them in large scale water and soil conservation and watershed management.  Results achieved are remarkable by way of increasing forest-coverage, reducing sediment transportation and deposits in large dams, preserving genetic diversity, replenishing surface water and recharging sub-surface/ ground water etc. Potable water supply, small scale irrigation development, increasing agricultural productivity, improving food security and reducing poverty are all the commendable results of these endeavors.  
 
Ensuring the equality of the human and democratic rights of the people of Ethiopia has been the governmentis commitment over and above eradicating poverty. Ethiopia showed also remarkable benevolence by keeping open border for immigrants who fled their country to escape man-made and natural disasters. Indeed, these have been acknowledged internationally there by attesting to Ethiopiais respect for keeping peoples human and democratic rights and following principles of equality. 
 
Committed to achieving the internationally set goal of eradicating poverty in all its manifestations by 2030 is exerting its most effort to realize this goal. Policies and enabling mechanisms and conditions all provided with legal backings do enable the attainment of the goal. The government has been engaged in in-depth civil service/public reform program and it is hoped that this would add extra impetus to eradicate poverty by 2030.     
The government of the FDRE has embarked on the preparation of long term (2015/16 to 2029/30) national development plan that would integrate the SDGs into the plan. It envisages continuation of the national Renaissance-Journey, eradication of poverty in all its manifestations through the long-term envisioning of the national economic growth, social and environmental development and building of democratic systems. The first phase of the long-term development plan (2014/15- 2019/20), the SDG-integrated GTP II, is showing encouraging results.   
   
Challenges: Severe drought occurred over broad regions of Ethiopia near the launch of the implantation of the GTP II (2014/15 FY). Causality in terms of human-life have been avoided through concerted efforts of the government of Ethiopia; these challenges were responded to effectively and systematically based-on appropriate studies made to scrutinize the situation and by planning the responses very well. The national development plan implementation could continue thanks to the effective quick responses. The climate change negative effect continued over the second year in water-stressed regions which happened to belong to pastoralistis communities. This challenge has posed considerable risks by way of threatening the full-capacity implementation of GTP II and SDGs.   
 
Implementation capacity-gaps comprising (perceptions, technical know-how, technology, finances, etc) are also considered series challenges to be dealt with in the effort to eradicate poverty in all its manifestations by 2030. The In-depth Renewal and Reform Movements lately being conducted among the leadership and management of public service personnel at various administrative levels are envisaged to correct any misperceptions and malpractices and to institute corrective measures to enhance efficiancy and effectivenss among the civil service. Increasing saving rate, coordinated and systematic tax-revenue collection and infrastructure development financing and ensuring international partnership are among the issues to be given priority attention. 
7.4 Detail review of the SIX SDGs  
The 2030 SDG Agenda comprises 17 goals and 169 targets. The 17 SDG goals are: 
1. Goal 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
2. Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
3. Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
4. Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 
5. Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
6. Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
7. Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
8. Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
9. Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
10. Goal 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries 
11. Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
12. Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 
13. Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
14. Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 
15. Goal 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 
16. Goal 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
17. Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development. 
 
The SDGs integrated in the GTP II are now under implementation. With regard to the monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs internationally, the July 29/2016 UN General Assemblyis resolution A/RES/70/299) recommended eradication of poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world as the main theme for use in the 2017 VNR SDG. Discussions thus far in this report pertained to general reviews of the main themes. The six SDGs for the 2017 detailed VNRs are (1) Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere) (2) Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture) (3) Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages (4) Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls (5) Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation) (6) Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development), while the Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development has been reviewed in concurrent with each of the six goals.  
 
7.4.1. Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
 
Policy Directions of the Government:  The Principal development agenda for Ethiopia is poverty eradication. The government policies, strategies, plans and programs aim at ensuring broad-based and inclusive economic growth, social and infrastructure development, environmental development and building democratic system. These ensure continuation of the Rain naissance and Transformation-Journey that the nation started already.  
The last 15 years progresses proved that the implementation of the policies, strategies, plans and programs  have shown and documented  success-records in the economic growth, in the social and environmental development, in the development of infrastructure and in building democratic systems. For 15 years, the economic growth has been fast-paced. Expansion of social and infrastructure development have been realized. For long, awareness creation centering on environmental development have been given; under the leadership and coordinated social mobilization of the rural communities in particular have successfully been deployed to soil and water conservation works, to works for the preservation of genetic diversity and to watershed management works. Results were exemplary and served as show cases for other countries for as well. These works have caused the agricultural productivity to rise and food security to be ensured. 
Democratic institutions have also been strengthened so us to lay strong foundations for sustainable and stable democratic systems and to foster public participation and to bring about national consensus around principal national issues.    
 
Participation of the public at all levels and enabling them to reap benefits equitably have been made possible during the last 15 years of development interventions and achievement of fast-paced economic growth, infrastructure and social development. The gross domestic product per person (GDP/C) showed high growth rate. Level of poverty reduced appreciably. The Central Statistics Agency (CSA) reported that poverty in Ethiopia progressively reduced over the years; it was 44.2 percent in 1999/10, 38.7 percent in 2006/07 and 29.6 percent in 2010/11fiscal year. In 2014/15, the poverty level has been estimated to decline to 23.4 percent and projected to further reduce to the level of 16.7 percent by the end of the GTP II period (2019/20).  
 
Concerted efforts being made to increase deployment of human resources, to improve productivity, to ensure quality and competitiveness are believed to bring about structural changes and to enable the attainment of targets of GTP II. Thus, the implementation of the GTP II and its constituent part SDGs, is anticipated to maintain the fast-pace of economic growth that have been achieved already and also it does increase human resources deployment rate, reduce poverty meaningfully, improve overall livelihood of the people such that the national vision of becoming lower middle income country by 2025 will be successfully achieved.  
Performances: Ethiopiais economy grew by 8 percent in real terms in 2015/16 against the target of 11.2 percent set for the fiscal year. During the same period, agriculture, industry and services grew by 2.3 percent, 20.6 percent and 8.7 percent respectively. Economic growth registered in 2015/16 was rapid, broad-based and well above the annual average growth rate target of 7 percent set for the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in the 2030 Agenda to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for alli and about three times the average growth rate of about 2.5 percent registered by SubSaharan African countries for the same period (World Bank Report 2016). By all measures, the rate of GDP growth registered during 2015/16 was remarkable, despite the fact that the effects of a slowdown in the global economy and hence the decline in international prices of major commodities as well as the incidence of climate change induced drought in most parts of the country which were critical challengs for the national economy. Reducing poverty in all its manifestations shall remain Ethiopiais commitment. This is demonstrated in the allocation of a massive 70 percent of the national budget to key sectors that play great role to eradicating poverty in all its manifestations and to those accelerating the economic growth. These sectors are agriculture, education, health, water and sanitation and rural roads. 
 
The national expenditure budget is predominantly allocated for capital investments presumed to create capital accumulation; the allocation takes into consideration the need to balance development of the regional states. Over 50 percent of the national expenditure budget is allocated for capital expenditures; the remaining goes to recurrent expenditures. Records show that government expenditure-allocation do foster savings and are allocated for capital investments that are believed to bring about capital accumulation. Expenditures allocated to sectors pertaining to poverty eradication in the 2015/16 increased by 26.3 percent compared with that allocated in 2014/15 fiscal year. The national budget deficit at the beginning of the fiscal year was 2.4 percent and inflation has been kept below 10 percent.   
 
In 2016/17 fiscal year, implementation of GTP II and SDGs has continued in an even more organized and coordinated manner across the nation. At all levels, close monitoring of the implementation progress of GTP II has been done along with regular review. Despite, the adverse impacts of the drought that struck Ethiopia during 2015/16 and the lingering of the drought in the normally water-stressed pastoralist-communitiesi areas in 2016/17, the 6-monthsi performance review report for the 2016/17 fiscal year  projected attainment of 11 percent GDP growth rate.  
 
Continuous efforts are being made in (1) ensuring the development of agriculture sector that still remains the principal source of the economic growth (2) Bringing about the expansion of the manufacturing industry through encouraging private investments and coordinating the investments (3) Expanding small and medium enterprises (4) Increasing the efforts to conserve and develop the natural resources (4) Strengthening the implementation of the governmentis development programs (5) Paving the way for the growth of smaller companies to larger ones. The endeavors indeed created employments and benefitted the society in particular the youth and women who are presumed the most vulnerable parts of the society.   
Social Security and Protection: Existing social systems/institutions have been anchored well; further social security related services have been provided that benefits the society. The Social security coverage has grown and has been made to include the elderlies, the disabled, and other vulnerable parts of the society and these shall continue with utmost attention as well. There now exists a great plan for offering direct developmental safetynet- supports; the plan is drawn for use in the coming 5 years to alleviate poverty from those parts of the society who have lost their abilities to engage in productive works. Planned beneficiaries from the rural community shall be 1,113,676 & from urban communities 115,120 totaling 1,228,796. The elderlies, the disabled, those parts of the societies who are most vulnerable altogether (women and children) could be in the order of 886,000 & shall all receive the direct safety-net supports. Among the rural communities, the elderlies and the disabled receiving direct support is close to 1,113,676. 
Parallel to the safety-net programs, social protection services have been offered for those vulnerable to social problems. These have been in the order of 584,849 in 2015/16 and 196,801 in the first six months of 2116/17 adding up to 781,650 (51 percent women) altogether. They received various social protection services (management and counseling, skills training, materials/equipment/utensils & financial supports). The beneficiaries comprise 224,703 elderlies, 78,739 disabled, 20,367 home-less, 7350 sex-workers, 7655 beggars, 274,334 children and families, 113,819 others (living in difficult situations). 
 
Physical rehabilitation (for the Disabled): Physical rehabilitation services were offered in the last one and half year for 99,397 disabled people; 76,978 of those who received the services could now be productively engaged.  The services rendered comprised such services as providing wheel-chairs (5,108), crutches (29,724), man-made body parts (13,847), repair services for crutches and manmade body parts (12,185), physiotherapy services for the disabled (13,274), Brails (1074) and white-canes for the blind and the visually impaired (1,623).  Physical rehabilitation centers have increased in number from 16 to 18 (the two newly built are near commissioning in Afar and Somali regions). Six more shall be built in the remaining period of GTP II; the distribution of the centers shall be across the nation to create access to the centers at closer proximity for all.  
 
Urban and rural unemployment has reduced consequent upon the endeavors made to alleviate poverty and maintain fast-paced economic growth. Results of CSAis National Labor Survey issued for 1998/9, 2004/05 and 2012/13 indicate progressive decrease in the unemployment rate from 8 percent to 5 percent to 4.5 percent respectively. Urban unemployment of women and youth is disproportionately high. The government has a policy directive to create urban employment and establish food security agency and in selected towns to launch safety net programs for employment generation and food security purposes. These are all intent on effectively addressing the issues of urban food insecurity and vulnerability in the short term and in the long run to improve livelihoods, alleviate poverty, and bring about self-employment opportunities. Ten billion Birr has been earmarked for this purpose in 2016/17 and all regional states and city administrations are now busy with preparatory arrangements and with identifying the essential institutional forms and mechanisms.   
 
GTP II intended to give the essential supports to increase demand for deployment of citizens to jobs. In 2014/16 fiscal year, about 1,050,000 jobs were created and in 2015/16, just in the 1st half of the fiscal year, about 595,000 citizens were involved in various employment activities. Moreover, from the 1,645,200 citizens who deployed to various jobs in 2015/16 and in the first six months of 2016/17, and 1,410,340 job-seekers were given career and employment advice.   
In the last six years (2010/11 to 2015/16), the GDP per capita showed an average increase of 13.8 percent. In 2010/11 the GDP percapita was US$ 373, it futher increased to US$ 794 in 2015/16 fiscal year. This encouraging performance of the economy assures the huge possibility of joining the lower-middle-income countriesi economy by 2025. Records do evidence successful achievements in the growth of the Ethiopian economy, in social and infrastructure development, and environmental development and in building democratic systems as a result of its policies and strategies and plans and programs which focused in poverty alleviation and which were fully supported with the allocation of budgets and with the coordinated deployment of development actors. 
Governmentis agriculture-led policy and strategy, foreign affairs and Security policy and strategy, policies and strategies of social development,  directions to building the democratic systems of Ethiopia, infrastructures and developmental safety net programs all and in concert enable equitable wealth distribution, ensure benefits reach all and thus play critical roles in alleviating poverty. In addition to the performances of the past, performances of the last 18 implementation months of GTP II affirmed that correct policy and strategies have been adopted.   
Implementation mechanisms for poverty eradication: All government policies and strategies, plans and programs that aimed at eradicating poverty are principal mechanisms to alleviate poverty from Ethiopia. These mechanisms include (1) Building increased capacity to collect inland revenues (2) Priority allocation of government budget expenditure to sectors relatively most pertinent to poverty alleviation (3) Effecting decentralized administrative system (4) Coordinated and organized leadership of a developmental and democratic government with high political commitment (5) Selected interventions in the free-market economy in areas where markets failed (6) Encouraging increased participation of the private sector in the economy 
 
GTP II envisaged allocation of 70 percent of the total budget for interventions that accelerate economic growth but more importantly to those sectors (health, education, clean water and sanitation, agriculture and rural roads) that impact on poverty alleviation more effectively. This amounts to 1.61 trillion ETB of the total budget of 2.3 trillion ETB envisaged to be allocated for the whole of GTP II over the 5 years period (2015/16 to 2019/20). This shows to the high level of commitment the government of Ethiopia has made to implement the SDGs in a manner consistent with the Constitution and laws of the country.  
 
Through effectively implementing the fiscal and tax policies of the country, collection of revenue has been a critically important task for the government. High target for the collection rate of the revenue was set for GTP II at target level of 17.2 percent of the GDP. This shall cover 96 percent of the total budget of the GTP II (1.93 trillion ETB out of the 2.01 trillion ETB totals). Revenue collection has risen by 24.2 percent to ETB 231.8 billion for the FY 2016/17 from the 186.6 billion ETB collected for FY 2015/16. Capacity building through research in particular through researche in agriculture and industries and through innovating technologies and importing and adopting/adapting technologies that pertain to the objective realities in the country, in light of increasing productivity, are highly desired and are envisaged to happen.     
 
Considerable efforts in the coordination, organization & mobilization of communities for engaging them in savings and investment and in natural resources conservation and watersheds development works under the leadership of the government do indicate that poverty would be eradicated sooner.  The Ethiopian people now appreciative of the value of the countryis development efforts and good sense of ownership and confidence have risen against poverty. 
 
Impressive results of poverty reduction have been achieved through the overall governmentis peace, security and reconstruction programs; through the poverty centered policies, strategies, plans and programs. The impressive results were reported by CSAis surveys on Households Expenditures, Incomes and Well-being.The reform programs among the public servants in particular the leadership and management of the executives and implementing agencies are believed to create conducive situations for correcting malpractices and pitfalls and bringing about competencies to achieve the 2030 sustainable development agenda and eradicate poverty. 
 
Challenges: The 2015/16 climate change caused drought on some parts of the country and the 2016/17 drought over the water-stressed regions of the pastoral communities. Responding to the drought impacts needed resources that competed with the limited national resources. The drought impacted adversely the livestock resources and the agricultural development in general. The world economy slowed down impacting adversely the export trade and has kept on. These evidently posed risks on the effort to eradicate poverty and the risks might linger on.  
 
Lessons learned: The lessons drawn in the courses thus far taken to eradicate poverty from Ethiopia include (1) the government policies centered on poverty predominantly (2) the government administration system has been decentralized (thereby conveniencing access, participation, addressing of local issues closely) (3) there exist high level of government commitments (4) the public could be mobilized for development in a coordinated and organized way based on awareness and national consensus on common/shared affairs.   
 
7.4.2 Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
 
Policy Directions: The national and sectoral policies and strategies that Ethiopia adopted ensure at all levels that citizens participate in and benefit from the economy. Ensuring food security at the national, community and household levels could be attained through the efforts to accelerate economic growth, by expanding infrastructure and social development and by building democratic system. The principal directions set in the Ethiopian Rural Development Policiy and Strategy are (1) Developing and utilizing the knowledge and skills of the countryis human resource (2) Effectively exploiting the land resources (3) Preparing and implementing environment and eco-system compatible Rural Development Package (4) Ascertaining market-led agricultural development (5) Improving the rural financial systems (6) Encouraging the private sector to invest in agricultural development (7) Expanding rural development (8) Strengthening other non-agricultural rural based economic activities.  
Impressive results in ascertaining food security was obtaind through the implementation of development works across the nation in well coordinated and organized ways during the last 15 years.  
Productivity of food crops in Ethiopia has been on the increase assisted by efforts made to increase produces and productivity of the agricultural sector through trainings, research and the supply of agricultural extension services. Main food-cropsi produces reached 270.3 million quintals in 2014/15, a volume well over the national food self sufficiency requirements. In the 2019/20 which marks the 5th year of the implementation period of the SDG the volume of main food-cropsi produces are planned to reach 406.32 million quintals.  
 
GTP II required the adoption of Climate-Change-Resillient Green-Agricultural Development in the endeavor to increase productivity and produces. To achieve  the goal of eliminating hunger as set in the 2030 sustainable development agenda, most attention needs to be given among others to (1) the strategy to expand agriculture (2) increasing the productivity and produces of small-holder farmers and pastoralist and (3) encouraging increased engagement of the private sector in agricultural development 
 
Details of Performances: To ascertain food security at various levels, increasing agricultural productivity to desirable levels and attaining structural transformation in the economy through predominantly moving into the productive industries are critically important. Agricultural productivity, disaster prevention and preparedness and prioritizing and effecting urban employment generation and the implementation of food security programs received utmost attention in the implementationof the SDG inlight of attaining the 2030 sustainable development goal of eliminating hunger. 
Encouraging results were obtained from FY 2014/15 with regard to improving the produces and productivity of the agricultural sector, ascertaining food security at communities and househods levels, strengthening rsearche in agriculture, expanding the agricultural extension services and increasing the supply of agricultural inputs. Supply of agricultural inputs in 2014/15 reached 752,282 metric tons of fertilizer and 2, 203,541 quintals of improved seeds. In 2015/16, agricultural extension services given to the farming and pastoral communities reached an impressive number of 15,791,000 households. It is remarkable and importnat to notice that whereas the performances are very encouraging, actually these performances occured despite the serious adverse impacts caused by the severe drought that occured in Ethioopia during the  2015/16.     
 
Considerable adverse impact occured on the agricultural sector by the severe drought that occured during  2015/16. The volume of main food-crops produced reduced to 266.8 million quintal from the volume produced  in FY 2014/15 which was 270.3 million quintals. Meat produces reduced to 669 thousand tons from the tonnage produced  in FY 2014/15 which was 1321 thousand tons. The volume of milk produced reduced to 4466.7 million litres from the volume produced  in FY 2014/15 which was 5304 litres. On the otherhand, performances in the diverse natural resources development works (physical and biological soil and water conservation works) executed through mobilizing communities were reported to have reached 1.028 million hectares in FY 2015/16.   
 
Households suffering from chronic food insecurity have been made beneficiaries of safety-net programs enabling them to build family-assets and preparing them to graduate from the safety-net program. The government rolled out the safety-net programs along with family liverlihood improvement systems from which 108,228 heads of households received loans for family-asset building. Furthermore, in relation to disaster prevention and preparedness and to generate rural employments 105,300 metric tons of food crops could be availed from food security programs.  
 
Implementation mechanisms for ascertaining food security and end hunger: Critically important are accelerating the transformation of the economic structure to productive industries through implementing the Agriculture-led-Industrial development policy, through fully implementing the food security strategy and by increasing the productivity and produces of agriculture.  Increased efforts in rural and urban employment generation and increasing reserve food and non-food stock are engagements aiming at ensuring food-security.  In the agricultural sector development interventions, major implementation mechanisms relied on availing agricultural extension services and on enabling extensive human resources to knowlegeably and effectively utilize complete packages of agricultural inputs appropriately.  
 
It has thus been a major engagment to build the capacities of the farming and pastoral communities  in order to be able to make fundamental changes in the agriculture sector. Other endevors include agricultural research, crops and livestock husbandry, supply of agricultural inputs and financial loans, marketing of agricultural produces, supply of education, health potable water, road infrastructure, telephone services and electrical power. 
 
Small scale irrigated agriculture is expanding following and in observance of climate change resillient green agricultural development strategy which is in turn in harmony  with supply of agricultural inputs that have reduced Green-House-Gas effects (GHG). In 2015/16, a remarkable 15 million members of the farming and pastoral communities were served by agricultural extension services. Sustainable natural resources management system are utilized; the private sector has been encouraged to invest in agro-ecology compatible agriculture; Agricultural inputs identified through agricultural research have been supplied to increase the national agricultural productivity and to increase the volume of agricultural produces.  
 
Challenges: Climate-change-caused drought that occured in 2015/16 and 206/17 FYs has had severe adverse impact onthe agricultural sector in particular. Drought victims in 2014/15 were 10.2 million while in 2016/17 the drought lingered on but number of victims reduced to 5.2 million. Consequently the national performance target set for volume of agricultural produces for the FY 2015/16 reduced by 5.9 percent which reduced the GDP by 
3.2 percent. Livestock resources were severely impacted; responding to the drought effects needed resources that competed with resouces needed for development works. The encounters shed light on the need to even more efforts to strengthen the economy such that food-security at all levels is ascertained.  
  
Lessons learned: The lesons drawn include (1) the availability and implementation of the Agriculture-led Industrial development Policy (2) the availability and implemntation of the Food-Security Strategy (3) Ability to deploy massive human resources and exploit massive land resources (4) Implementing rural and agricultural centered development activities (5) Rolling out and utilization of the National Policy on Disaster Prevention and Management (6) Ability to pull sufficient domestic resources to respond effectively to the drought incidence in such a way that human life could be spared without a single loss to the drought impact. Continued development efforts shall capitalize on the lessons learned and proceed with more efforts to increase agricultural productivity, to expand labor-intensive manufacturing industries, to expedite the transformation of the structure of the economy, to ascertain food security at national, communities and household levels and to attain the 2030 sustainable development goals of eradicating poverty and eliminating hunger.   
  
7.4.3. Goal 3:  Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
 
Government Policy Directions: The Constitution of the FDRE in Article 90 sub-article 1 says \0xEBto the extent the countryis resources permit, policies shall aim to provide all Ethiopians access to public health and education, clean water, housing, food and social securityi.  Article 41 sub article 4 decreed \0xEBthe State has the obligation to allocate ever increasing resources to provide to the public health, education and other social servicesi.  
 
Government policies, strategies, programs derive from the Constitution. Health policies, strategies and programs are basically preventive rather than curative and addressed the anticipated and present health issues and problems in the country. Health services policies, strategies and programs have been formulated accordingly.  The main objective of the National Health Policy is to create reality where all citizens of the country have easy access to basic health services. To realize these objectives expanding health infrastructure and improving the human capital in the health sector espeial the health extension program has been implemented in rural and urban areas of the country in order to be able to implement the health policy in a coordinated and organized way. Thirty eight thousand trained health extension workers (HEW) have been deployed to implement the program.  Health sector development activities, reaching all communities and aiming at providing basic health care services are under implementation inline with the 2030 sustainable development goal of ensuring healthy life and wellbeing and access to health services for all.  
 
Details of Performance: The government of Ethiopia has implemented the health sector policy, strategy and program along with other pertinent development policies across the nation over the past years. By establishing health institutions, training the human resurces and deploying them to give health services, the health service coverage of Ethiopia in 2015/16 reached 98 percent. Maternal and children health improved considerably. Incidences and spread of communicable diseases have been highly retarded. Healthy workforce as would be required in good number to increase productivity has been positively impacted.   
 
Reducing maternal mortality: Reducing maternal mortality was one of the MDGs and there has been already a lot of achievement. At the end of 2014/15, maternal mortality reduced to 420/100,000. With the support of  health development workers and through providing prenatal, neo-natal and post-natal cares maternal health improved. In FY 2015/16 maternal mortality reduced to 412/100,000. Trained midwives, labor and delivery-care coverage rate increased from 60 percent in FY 2014/15 to 72.7 percent in 2015/16.  
 
Reduction of maternal mortality may be attributed to: -the society becoming increasingly aware of the benefits of maternal care; awareness creation services given to the communities by the governmant and NGOs and the increased accessibility of Ambulance and health services.  Improved Manual for Health Sector Gender Issues was prepared using some study outputs and has been rolled out.  It is envisaged that the 2030 SDG target on maternal mortality is achievable. 
Performances of Health Care Services and Nutrition: Under five child mortality increased from 64/1000 in 2014/15 to 67/1000 in 2015/16 fiscal year. This suggests the need for corrective measures. Infant mortality increased from 28/1000 in 2014/15 to 29/1000 in 2015/16. Stunting of children under 5 years of age decreased from 40 percent in 2014/15 to 38.4 percent in 2015/16. Wasting of children under 5 years of age increased from 9 percent in  2014/15 to 9.9 percent in 2015/16, suggesting the need for corrective measures.  Infant mortality is exacerbated partly by lack of coordination among infants health-Care institutions and shortage of meals for the infants. The Sekota Agreement signed July 2015 set a goal of eliminating stunting of infants under 2 years of age by 2030 and to such end it has already  launched a 1000 days Nutrition Service Program  & commenced services from October 2016 across the nation. 
 
Prevention and control of communicable diseases: Prevention and control of communicable diseases is among the types of health services which received increased attention. HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberclausis are the main communicable disseases. The government has shown concerted effort to prevent and control these communicable diseases by coordinating and leading all forces of development all over the country. Results achieved were remarkable. Activies involved included health sector capacity building, awareness creation, pooling of resources, setting institutional and coordination mechanisms, incorporating afffairs of HIV/AIDS in various sectors plans and programs and monitoring and evaluation of the programs.  
 
HIV/AIDS: Number of patients newly contracting HIV reduced considerably. Only 0.03% contracted HIV newly in the FY 2015/16. To eliminate HIV incidence, the government arranged for upto 10 million people to get tested for HIV and for the positive ones among these to receive antiretroviral drugs treatment. Those tested negative are consulted about the essential preventive care they have to adopt.  
 
Tuberculosis: According to the 2014 international report on tuberculosis, Ethiopia has achieved international goals set to prevent and control the spread of tuberculosis as detected and as measured with the target indicators of mortality and prevalence. The Ethiopian Health Sector Performance Report of the FY 2015/16 ellicited that the TB detection rate has reached 61.3 percent. Patients that received and completed treatment in FY 2015/16 reached 92 percent. These commendable performances are attributed to the implementation of \0xEBCommunity TB Detection Programi, to the implementation of Synchronized TB-HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control and the Expansion of Services for the Supply of Anterotrovial drugs free of charge.  
    
Malaria: Malaria has been a serious threat to the majority of the people of Ethiopia. Nevertheless, the government has managed to achieve impressive results in implementing well coordinated and organized prevention and control programs. Malaria incidence reduced from 22/1000 in FY 2014/15 to 21/1000 in 2015/16. Control and Prevention of the Malaria-Mosquito involved the extensive use of chemical-treated mosquito-nets and complete coverage of mosquito-insecticide-spray in the communities (households).  On the otherhand, efforts have been made to prevent and control non-communicable diseases (heart cases, cancer, diabetics, etc) systematically  by incorporating them into the plans of other development sectors. Specialized centres for treating heart-cases and cancerous diseases have been opened and health care services in these areas are expanding. 
  
Teen-ages fertility: Teen-ages fertility rate could be controlled lately at 12/1000 through efforts made to give teen-ages sex-education and enable them make behavioural changes. The sex-eduction shall continue in light of achieveing the relevant SDG. The implementation of the preventive health care policy has been made possible largely due to the supports obtaind from development partners in particular for research and basic health services.   
 
Implementation mechanisms for ensuring Healthy life and Well-being: Implementing laws, policies, programs and projects are critical to ensure healthy-life and well-being. The health sector system in coordination with development partners engages the society at large with full sense of owership of the health services, builds capacities at all levels, disseminates results of studies and research and provides higher educational institutes with technological capacities.  Further health sector endeauvors include completing the full implementation of the second phase of Health Extension Services, harmonizing basic health care services and hospital services, encouraging the private sector to engage in the health sector services and supporting the expansion of the rather neglected traditional medical services.  Domestic resources are being pooled to finance schemes for the realization of  satisfactory public health services through increasing the allocation of resources and through utilizing donor supports efficiently and effectively.  Concerted efforts in this regard and inlight of achieveing the pertinent SDG-GTP II integrated goals are being made.  
 
Challenges: The health sector has been adversely impacted by incidence of epidemics and by climate change caused drought and flood. The health sector services were also over stretched (stressed) because there has not been prior strong system put in place to prevent trans-boundary health problems and also immigrants coming through the border have been increasing over the years.  The quality of health services are also compromised in favor of coverage/accessibility. 
 
Lessons Learned: The National Health Extension Program launched since 2010/11 FY which mobilized the society at all levels has been remarkably successful in preventing and controling health problems. The program covered mainly family health, hygiene and sanitation, environmental health and health education. Health extension workers close to 38,000 have been trained and deployed to implement the program. \0xEBVoluntary Women Health Armyi were organized and deployed on health services. In this regard, 439,497 Women Health Teams and, each team with 5-persons, numbering 2,125,190 were organized enabling the improvement of critical and basic maternal and infants health care services. In light of  ascertaining healthy life and well being, continued efforts in areas including resuming the training of health professionals, implementing transformational agenda at all levels, implementing effient and effective health sector monitoring and evaluation system, resuming the moblization of \0xEBArmies of Health Sector Developmentiand ascertaining sense of ownership, preventing trans-boundary health issues in cooperation with neigbouring countries and engaging in international health-diplomacy affairs. 
 
7.4.4. Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
Government Policy Directions:  Article 25 of the Constitution of the FDRE states that all persons are equal before the law. Article 35 made it more clear \0xEBWomen have equal rights with men in all economic, social and political activities. Women Policy and Development Package have been prepared based on these articles of the Constitution of Ethiopia. Institutional mechanisms and the implementation of the Women Policy and the Development Package have been rolled out across the nation. The main objective of the Women Policy is creating enabling environment for women to activily participate at all levels in the economic, social, and political activities.  
 
The national and sector policies, strategies, plans and programs have provisions for the ascertaining of the rights and benefits of women. Fostering the women and youth participation and ensuring that they remain beneficiaries are principal undertakings envisaged in the SDG. Creating strong women and youth organizations and involving them in the national development interventions and in the building of democratic system through co-ordination with pertinent government organs shall remain major undertakings. The national development plans embraced women and youth agenda and their implementation is being monitored in a manner ensuring accountability. To reduce maternal and infant mortalities measures need to be taking including family planning, pre-natal and postnatal health care services, maternal delivery services in health institutions, awareness creation around nutrition, health care and impact of climate change, services for detecting breast and uterine cancers (cancer of the womb). Regional states including the federal state shall work together to have infants data-base to improve the data management activities and enhance social services for infants.  
 
Detail performances: Policies and development packages for both women and youth1 have already been produced and are being implemented. The youth policy under implementation gives priority to women and provided for enabling the youth to benefit from, and to participate in democracy and good governance. It also provided for the youth to get organized so that they could get their rights observed and to build their capacity through education and various professional/skill trainings. To enhance the level of economic benefit of women, in the last two years we have seen various development interventions. In this regard, rural women have been supported to enable them get employed in various sectors and have been provided with land title-deeds. 
 
Women recieved trainings in various agricultural skills and were made aware of benefits of engaging in agriculture. In the FY 2015/16, 4,324,000 women benefited from agriculture (backyard vegetable farming, poultry, bee-keeping, cattle fattening, etc) and 895,188 women benefited from the use of irrigated agriculture. Same fiscal year, 9,520,763 women particpated in watershed development works and 89.8 thousand youths were deployed to farming on rehabilitated and fertile lands. In 2015/16, 1,371,062 women farmers from female headed households and from those living with their husbands and 218,000 female-headed households from pastoral communities benefited from agricultural extension services; potable water supply could reach 2,568,920 women. In the 1st 6 months of 20116/17, 2,487,951 rural women were deployed to farming works and 923,226 women were deployed to non-farming works/services. In 2015/16, second level land-title-deeds were issued to 276.1 thousand women jointly with their husbands and to 61.7 thousand single-women. In 2016/17 second level land-title-deeds were issued to 432,011 women jointly with their husbands and to 71,169 single-women.  
 
In 2015/16 capacity-building trainings and supports were delivered to women in the industry sector; about 99, 833 micro and small business women-owners transited to join the medium enterprises levels and 755,942 women joined the micro and small business enterprises. In the first six months of 2016/17, about 57,431 women received facilities and spaces for marketing their products. In 2015/16, 883,421 women received time and energy saving implements. In the first six months of 2016/17, 563,765 women received solar lamps and became beneficiaries of bio-gas energy. About 7,629,320 women saved 2.9 billion ETB in 2015/16. In the same fiscal year, 1.8 million women could be provided with loan services. In the first six months of 2016/17 fiscal year, 1,222,097 women saved 1,046,852,489 ETB and 1,073,833 women benefited from short and long-term loans, in particular from revolving funds. 
 
The government is constructing urban houses to alleviate housing problems of the society as a whole and those of women in particular. Thirty percent of the urban condominiums are allocated for women; the remaining 70% are distributed to the other men and women members of the society via lottery draws. Women are also made beneficiaries of social services (education, health, etc). In 2015/16, about 5,529,128 members of the society were introduced to adult education and 2,325,821 women benefited from functional adult education programs.  
 
Womenis political participation in Ethiopia is growing. About 38.7 percent of members of the HPR are women. At lower levels, 50 percent of the representatives are women. In the regionals states, womenis participation in the regional-HPRs has reached 48 percent. Representatives of women organizations could exploit government arranged platforms and government councils to voice their concerns/issues and opinions. A policy of favoring women to improve the competency and participation of women  in the federal government institutions whenever employment, promotions and job allocations required merit points, has been formulated in the Ethiopian federal Public Service Proclamation no. 515/99  in Article 13/3. Gender inclusiveness is assured; plans of civil services organizations are to be prepared in a manner that assures that women and youth benefit from the plans. 
 
Implementation mechanisms to ensure Gender equality: Major implementation strategies in the Women Policy and Strategies of the government include elimination of harmful traditional practices like Female GenitalMutillation (FGM) and childhood marriage, female youths have the right to get admission to any educational institutions of their choice at all levels, women-biased regulations are repealed and replaced by rules and regulations that promote benefits for women and traditional anti-women perceptions are removed progressively.  
 
There has been estblished at a ministerial rank level an office for guiding and implementing womenis affairs. Womenis affairs work processes have been instituted in all government executive organs at the level of departments. Women affairs are incorporated into the development plans under the categories of cross-cutting sectors. One of the implemmentation methods of the GTP II is that of ensuring the growing participation of women and youth. Affirmative action pertaining to increasing participation of women and women instructors have been effected.    
 
Challenges during implementation: Abolishing harmful traditions, those pertaining to ensuring equality of women encountered challenges. There existed limitations among government institutions at all management levels in providing the essential support, and capacitating womenis organizations and development teams. Agricultural extension services coverage of women and quality of services have not been satisfactory;  Supply of farm and agricultural inputs were unsatisfactory; failure to respect the rights of female-headed households to the use of land resources have been observed; shortage of loan services in particular to poor women have been experienced. Male-biased attitudinal behaviors and practices exist in every section of the society which needs to be addressed. 
Lessons learned: Women and youth policy, and development packages have been prepared and implemented by the government primarily to help women have their rights in all sectors, to give rural women social services and to increase the decision making opportunities of women. The women development package made it clear that women should be able to resolve their issues primarily on their own. Forums for women associations to actively participate have been established. Training and other capacity building services have been offered by the government inlight of maintaining strong women institutions and associations. Gender issues have been mainstreamed in all development sectorsi plans and programs; Women have been brought to leadership; affirmative action have been instituted for women to be compensated for opportunities denied them in the past by the previous governments. Preparatory secondary education (grade 11 & 12) enrollements and university entrances have to this end been increased by lowering threshold pass marks for females than those of males.  Results were encouraging.  
 
Ethiopia wishes to learn from other countries experiences inlight of achieving SDGs pertaining to women. In this regard, some of the lessons the country wishes to learn from other countriesi experiences are (1) ways of increasing participation of women in secondary and higher education (2) Practical ways for regional states to bring about institutional competence of women and (3) Successful experiences in generating, collecting, capturing and utilizing gender-disaggrergated data.  
 
7.4.5  Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive & sustainable industrialization & foster               innovation  
 
Policy Directions: Transformation in the economic structure of the nation would be expedited by removing the bottlencks of the economic infrastructures, by increasing societal access to quality infrastructure, by improving the business environment through installing fit-for-the-purposes infrastructure, by expediting industtrial and technological development, and by encouraging the public-private-partnership in infrastructure development. Regional and international post-2015 sustainable development goals-compatible infrastructure development areas shall be implemented. 
 
The policy directions are such that the manufacturing industry shall be made to surpass others in the industry sector in such aspects as productivity and products, share of exports, technology transfers and employment generation. Development of strong human resources,  creating enabling environment for developmentalinvestors, building a green-manufacturing industry compatible with sustainable environmental development which supports social development and does not harm the environment are the policy directions set by the government.    
 
All eyes are in getting the country to reach its vision of joining the Lower-Middle Income Countries and for the purpose to work towards realizing competitive, quality, speedy and comprehensive economic growth.  Manufacturing industries development in industrial parks and clusters formats are being expedited in a manner integrated with infrastructure development. The SDGs which is mainstreamed in GTP II is under implementation and comprised various infrastructure developments integrating industrial development activities and the manufacturing industries. The following performances have been registered.   
 
Performances of infrastructure development  
 
Roads: Considerable resources have been allocated to implement all-weather-roads construction serving all \0xEBKebelesi [smallest administrative units in Ethiopia]. In 2015/16 total all-weather-roads length increased to 113,067 km from that of 2014/15  which was 110,414 km. Average time to reach all-weather-roads reduced from 1.7 hours in 2014/15 FY to 1.6 hrs in 2015/16. Percentage of communities located over 5 km away from allweather-roads reduced from 36.6 percent in 2014/15 to 35.8 percent in  2015/16. Density of roads increased from 100.4 km/sq. Km in 2014/15 to 108.2 km/sq.km. Remarkable successes registered in the road sector development are envisaged to accelerate the economic and social development of the country and enable the eradication of poverty and bring about the prosperity of the people of Ethiopia.    
 
Railways: Railways infrastructure development is being expedited following policy directions to expand passengers and freight transport and regional transportation connections with energy-conserving and non-air polluting means of trasport. Phase-1 of the Addis Ababa light-railways construction project was completed and started operation in 2015/16. Nationwide railway construction has also progressed; the stretch from Addis Ababa to Sebeta to Meeso-Dewole has reached a 99.2 percent completion; Mekele-Hara stretch and Awash-Hara stretch reached 36.03 and 46.8 percent completion depicting performances as planned. However, to start the other proposed  railway lines, financing is a challenge that need to be addressed. 
  
Energy Infrastructure: Substantial efforts are being made to meet the energy demands of the industries and those required for agricultural development. Development works to harness energy from renewable sources (hydropwer, geo-thermal, wind and solar) have resumed. The construction of a huge solid wastes based energy generation plant in Addis Ababa, perhaps surpassing the biggest sizes in Africa hitherto has reached near completion. This project basically recycling solid waste to generate energy has an appreciable role for Addis Ababa cityis clean and green development. The energy generated is intended to be utilized via energy conserving implements in both the urban and rural settings. It would replace use of fire wood and agriculture, Industries and service sectors would benefit from electricity supply generated by clean energy.  
 
National capacity in electric power generation increased to 4,269.5 MW in 2015/16 fiscal year. Construction of electric power generating projects progressed as planned. Implementation progress of the Grand Ethiopian Rennaissance Dam (GERD) being constructed on the Abay River reached 57 percent in 2016/17. The Dam construction activities are non-stop using three 8-hours shifts in a day. Power transmission and distribution construction works increased from 14,065 km in 2014/15 to 15,137 km in 2015/16. Customers of electric power utilities increased from 2.31 million in 2014/15 to 2.49 million in 2015/16. Nation-wide access coverage of electricity increased from 54.25 percent in the 2014/15 to 56 percent in 2015/16 suggesting the need for increased efforts yet. Construction of medium tension/voltage electric transmission lines increased the transmission lines length to 94,351.8 km in 2015/16 from the length of 88,266 km in 2014/15 fiscal year; similarly, the low tension/voltage transmission lines has increased to 105,687.8 km in  2015/16 from the 100,939 km which was in FY 2014/15. 
 
The Digital infrastructure: Number of customers for mobile telephone services, broad-band internet services, narrow-band internet services and land-line telephone services in 2014/15 were 40.0, 1.6, 8.0 and 0.084 million respectively and increased to 46.0, 4.9, 8.7 and 1.2 millions respectively in the 2015/16. In fiscal year 2016/17, this pace has been increased. Internet data density in 2014/15 was 3.3 percent and increased to 15 percent in 2015/16; International linking-capacity increased from 27.9 GB/s to 37.3 GB/s in the fiscal year under review.    
 
School-net services reached 1,510 public schools in the first six month of 2016/17 fiscal year. Five hundred sixty five of these tapped on broad-band internet services. In light of implementing the national plan of the government to enable the rural communities to benefit from information and telecommunication technologies, 1,600 rural multi-purpose communication centers have been estabished; over 5400 youth were employed in the centers. The benefit of the rural community from this intervention greatly helped them in getting important data/information they needed for selling their produces in the markets and for improving their livelihood.  
 
Ethiopia has actively participated in international activities pertaining to the information technology (IT) sector cooperation and support-agreements during the first six months of the 2016/17 fiscal year. International gateways have been made to Ethiopia via Kenya, Djibuti and Sudan; Satellite based international communication facilities have been provided. Five hundred Roming partners, 26 Internet Voice Partners and five Internet Communication Partners jointly operate with Ethiopia.   
  
Air Transport: The institutional capacity of air transport services have been strengthened; the air transport service has been rendered competent and competitive and aviation security have been brought to international standard; air transport services coverage have been expanded.  Passenger seats supply has reached 39.2 billion for international flight and 666 million for domestic flight totalling 39.866 billion passenger seats. Similarly freight capacity reached 1.4 billion ton-km and  71.5 million ton were transported abroad from Addis Ababa.  
 
Passenger seats supply in the first six months of 2016/17 fiscal year reached 42 billion. freight capacity reached 9.5 billion ton-km. The institutional form of the Airlines has been made more robust; market promotion and development has been effective; international flight coverage has expanded to 98 destinations; domestic destinations reached 22 in 2015/16. The rate of accident at the Addis Aababa Bole International Airport has been kept within the standard of the International Civil Aviation Organization; Accidents have been reduced to 0.505 per 10,000 flights.   
 
Transport and Logistics: The sectoris services are being expanded; freight vehicles travel-distances reached 100,000 km per vehicle per annum in the first six months of 2016/17, increasing from the 99,000 km/vehicle/annum of 2014/15 data; Corresponding data for buses has reached 95,000 km. Annual passengers volume has reached 400 million.  Mass transprtation accounts for 36 percent at an average waiting time of 18 minutes. Efforts to reduce death rates due to vehicle traffic accidents materially have not been encouraging; The 2015/16 fiscal year data showed accidents per ten thousand vehicles stood at 63/1000 increasing from 2014/15 fiscal year, which is alarming and special efforts have yet to be made to meaningfully control traffic accidents in Ethiopia. In response, the government is resolving to root out the causes of the increasing vehicle traffic accidents has prepard a 10-years National Road Safety Plan of action and has launched the implementation of this plan. The Road Transport Traffic Monitoring Rule has been amended and has been under implementation; the proclamation to amend vehicles and transport traffic worthiness certification has been drafted ready for endorsement and ratification by the government.  
   
Water supply/sewerage and irrigation infrastructure development: Huge development works have been underway with respect to expanding services of potable water supply and sewerage ; improving potable water supply service standards and expanding their accessebility ; assesing the national water resources potential including its quality, appraising its potential impact upon the national economy and expanding the development of small and medium irrigated agriculture to bring about food security at the national level. In 2014/15 coverage of potable water supply services for rural and urban was 59 percent  and 51 percent respectively averaging 58 percent nationally. In 2015/16, coverage of potable water supply services for rural and urban areas increased to 61.1 percent and 52.5 percent respectively averaging 61 percent  nationally. The 2015/16 fiscal year performance showed supply expansion to cater for 4.54 million rural population and 0.7 million urban population, in total 5.24 million nationally. Achievements in irrigation infrastructure development at the medium and large scale categories with regard to studies, designs and construction reached 71,291 ha and 39,875 ha respectively. 
 
Performance of industrial innovation: In 2015/16, the industry sector grew by 20.6 percent showing a 1.1 percentage point decine from the performance registered in 2014/15. Value added in manufacturing industry increased from 15.8 percent in 2014/15 to 18.4 percent in 2015/16. The share of industry in GDP increased from 15.1 percent in 2014/15 and increased to 16.7 percent  in 2015/16. Similarly, the share of manufacturing industry in GDP increased from 4.9 percent in 2014/15 to  5.4 percent in 2015/16. This has been a slight improvement but overall the share is low suggesting increased efforts to attract more investments in this sub-sector. 
 
Implementation Mechanisms: Mechanisms for implementing infrastructure and industry sector development relied primarily on national capacities. To implement the infrastructure and industry development policy mechanisms include establishing institutional arrangements and systems and utilizing them efficiently and effectively pooling and utilizing domestic resources, increasing rates of domestic savings and mobilizing the society based on shared awareness and national consensus for development activities. Finance and technology and technical supports could be obtained by strengthening International partnership and these resources would be utilized effectively and appropriatey. 
 
Expanding the manufacturing industry investment through the formats of industrial parks and clusters calls for attracting quality foreign investment; foreign companies that showed interest were being screened and in particular those aiming at export-items are being encouraged to deploy their resources and commence operation at the industrial parks and clusters; this shall resume. Economic diplomacy that the government pursued served this end very well. Domestic investments have been encouraged and there have been some efforts made to increase productivity and competitiveness, technological capacity and quality. Implementation of the KAIZEN management philosophy should extend to small and medium industries as well as large industries. Increased productivity, quality and competitivenss, cost effectiveness are expected to comeforth through education and training and research organizations along with the help from extension support-giving institutions. Occupational safety and bringing about behavioural changes deserved due attention.      
 
Intent on expanding the implementation of of Climate Change Resillient Industrial Development and Greenindustry development with little adverse environmental impact with respect to manufacturing industries various development activities are being undertaken which among others include providing laboratories complete with their equipment and consumables (chemicals, reagents); providing energy from renewable energy sources ; reducing green house gases (GHG); using modern solid wastes disposal and recycling systems ; making use of wastewater treatment plants (up to second cycle); training and coaching in the use of international standards, agreements and guidelines ; reducing quantity of solid wastes generated and recycling them and determining baselines and extent of emision-based air pollutions caused by the industry through studies and using study results effectively. 
Challenges: Limitations in capacities to execute and implement GTP II targets and its integral part SDGs in infrastructure and industry development posed serious challenges. Incompetencies in project management (planning, delivering, controlling and contract administration) in particular posed serious threats. Resources used to respond to the drought impacts that occured in 2015/16 and 2016/17 competed with the resources allocated for implementing the GTP II targets in infrastructure and industry development. Though some compensatory efforts were being made to deal with these challenges the need for international and regional coordination to come together to the climate change caused challenges by allocating increased resources for appropriate develpment interventions are ever more evident.     
 
Lessons learned: Availability of infrastructure in sufficient quantity and quality is one of the prerequisites for rapid and sustainable economic/industrial development and for eradication of poverty. Policies prioritizing infrastructure development have been formulated and the government of the FDRE mobilizing domestic resources has engaged in infrastructure develeopment in particular energy infrastructures development. The construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) is an outstanding example. Experiences with such developmental policies are instructive. Adoption of the industrail parks and clusters format which enabled a one-window-shopping for investors in industries is well inline with the desire to  transform from agriculture-led economy to industry-led economy and evidently one of the important lessons learned.   
  
7.4.6 Goal 14. Conserve & sustainably use the oceans, seas & marine resources for sustainable development   
 
In framing the context for considering Goal 14 in the 2017 VNRs report of Ethiopia, an understanding needs to be made on the part of the international community that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its SDGs are applicable taking into account different national realities. To this effect, though Ethiopia is landlocked and has no any teritorial link with oceans, seas and marine resources, it has its own water bodies such as lakes and rivers. Therefore, the government has continued its effort to effectively implement all the 17 SDGs including Goal 14 in the Ethiopian context. 
 
Policy Directions: The water resources policy and strategy of the country give the directions for the efficient and appropriate harnessing of the water resources of the country including embarking on development interventions that would respond to droughts and flood control effectiely. Such would bring about rapid and sustainable economic development and hence have been undertaken as major development interventions. Since water resources use and development on the one hand and their conservation and protection on the otherhand  go in parallel, such schemes as potable water supply schemes, irrigation development water related infrastructure development  watershed management and protection, etc are all undertaken in a coordinated way. Water resources administration are also undertaken in coordination and harmony with other sectorsi goals (agriculture, health, mines, energy etc). The SDG comprised outputs for potable water supply development schemes, irrigation and drainage infrastructure development, hydropower development, ground water development, and integrated watershed management are under implementation. 
 
Sustainable development of the water eco-system enhances economic and social development. To this end, the principal resources of the nation such as land, water and human resources are being developed consistent with the government policy directions.  Extenseive watershed conservation and development works which have been under implementation have advantages such as replenishment of surface water; recharge of ground water, preservation of bio-diversity, prevention of soil erosion, reduction of sediment loads (potentially transportable) to hydropwer dams under construction and to lakes, maintenance of perennial supply of water to dams and lakes and control of agriculatural inputs related chemical pollutants. 
 
The water resources policy under implementation gives directions for the harnessing of the water ecosystem sustainably and with respect to regions trans-boundary rivers or riverine regions. It gives guidances on the regionsi equitable harnessing of the water resources for various uses. Studies have been conducted in the water resources of the country both national ones and trans-boundary ones.  With respect to the transboundary ones, international treaties were scrutinized inlight of increasing the capacity to effectively negotiate their shared use. The federal government undertook studies for expanding the development of medium and large scale irrigated agriculture schemes including their designs and ultimately constructing them.  
 
Detail of the performances: Extensive watershed development including soil and water conservation is under implementation. Watershed development works in 2015/16 covered 130,446 hectares. Soil erosion is the main challenge for shortage of surface and ground water and efforts  to prevent further depletions have been made. In  2014/15, 1.71 million hectare was preserved for rehabilitation purposes. Same budget year, 1.03 million hectare have been rehabilitated through biological and physical soil and water conservation treatments.  Rehabilitated watersheds were then availed for sustainable (eco-system sensitive) usage of the land resources to 89.8 thousand youth in an organized way. Besides benefiting the youth, these measures created a reliable situation for  soil and water conservation.    
 
Small scale irrigated agriculture development in 2014/15 reached 2.72 million hectares; beneficiaries were 6.8 million farmers and semi-pastoralists (5.9 million males and 0.92 million females).  Achievements in irrigation infrastructure development at the medium and large scale categories with regard to studies, designs and construction reached 71,291 ha and 39,875 ha respectively. Riversi pollution monitoring works are being implemented; monitoring stations were established, samples were taken and laboratory tests conducted; results are yet to be compiled and disseminated for use in taking measures to control river pollution.  
 
Institutional implementation mechanisms have been rolled out well along the policy directions set by the government to conserve and develop natural resources appropriately. Water ecosystems protection and increasing the production of fishes nationally have received due attention. The Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Climate Change is engaged in activities mainly contributing to the water eco-systemsi sustainable development. Livestock and fisheries development institution has now been established at a Ministerial level. The sector shall remain responsible for water ecosysystemsi sustainable development in particular in preserving fish species found in Ethiopia in their water ecosystems (lakes, rivers and dams) and developing them and increasing their share in the economy. In 2015/16 fish production nationally had a 0.1 percent share of the GDP. 658 tons of dried fish and  1975 tons of salted fish were exported in 2015/16. Total yield was 48,295 tons. 
 
Challenges: Limitations in availability of data on the water ecosystems posed serious challenges. Extensive studies and researche have to be made to avail the data. Funds for research and studies have to made available. Capacity limitations have thus been a challenge. 
 
Lessons learned: Rural communities, the farming communities in particular, who received capacity building services could be mobilized in mass for watershed conservation and development works with their full conviction and sense of ownership. Capacity building efforts include education, training, creating shared understanding on the protection and use of natural resources, organizing them,etc. Successful results were registered in water ecosystemsi development, raising productivity in agriculture, enhancing the capacity of  food security, expediting the eradication of poverty and working on the fulfillment of the transformation and renewal journey of the country. The full conviction of the farming communities, their sense of ownership they retained both while engaged in the national natural resources conservation and development are lessons learned from the Agriculture-led Industry Development experiences of Ethiopia. 
8. Institutional mechnisms for implementing the SDGs 
 
Ethiopia adopted decentralized government administrative systems. The nations, nationalities and peoples of the country ratified the decentralized administrative system based on the constitution of the FDRE. The decentralized government administrative system devolved more power to local government units located in close proximity to the communities rather than at the central government.  This has helped mobilizing the communities to engage in the economic, social and political activities and in providing government services satisfactorily through increased access.  When the nations, nationalities and peoples of Ethiopia ratified the constitution of the FDRE through their representatives, they also made covenants to create one common economy and one common country. To such ends, the constitution mandated the federal government to prepare and execute the national development policy, strategy and plans. Accordingly, the SDG-Integrated GTP II has been prepared and endorsed and ratified for implementation. 
 
During the GTP II preparation SDGs goals and targets were included in the detail. Stakeholders participated in the preparation; ministerial committees and other members of the society participated in the draft GTP II review workshops. The NPC played a principal role in the coordination of the plan preparation. It also monitored and supported the consultation workshops to review the draft GTP II.  GTP II covers the five year period 2014/15 to 2019/20 and as mentioned earlier-on its preparation involved all stakeholders. It was endorsed by the council of ministers first and then ratified by the House of Peoples Representatives. Implementation of SDGs at all government administrative levels is thus legally backed (has become binding) and the existing institutions, human resources and the resources of the 3 development forces (the ruling party, the government, and the people) shall be fully tapped to implement the GTP II.  The legislative and executive organs shall monitor and support the performance of the SDGs and GTP II making use of performance reports that are compiled from official administrative data, documents, sample surveys and inventories obtainable from the federal, regional states and city administrations.  
  
9. Means of Implementation of SDGs  
 
The 2030 Sustainable Development agenda is well in harmony with the development needs of the people of Ethiopia. It is in line with the Ethiopian renaissance journey and expedites the broad-based, all-inclusive and rapid economic growth, social and economic development, environmental development and building of a democratic system. The government of Ethiopia had therefore good reasons to have committed at international level to implement the SDGs adapting it to the objective reality in the country. Nationally it has already been ratified and implementation has commenced.  
 
Domestic resources pooling and utilization have been undertaken as primarily recourses to ensure the implementationof the SDG-integrated GTP II at all levels. Efforts are ongoing to modernize the taxation system in order to be able to collect revenues generated by the rapidly growing economy. Revenue collecting institutions have been assisted to have the right perceptions, procedures, institutional forms and human resources. Citizens are educated and trained on reporting their revenues correctly and paying due taxes. Building the tax structure and overall institutional capacity shall continue to be able to get to the capacity to collect tax revenues more efficiently during the GTP II period.  Gross domestic revenue of the country in 2009/10 was 53.9 billion Birr and after five years in 2014/15 it reached 186.6 billion Birr. In 2015/16, the gross domestic revenue collection grew to 231.8 billion Birr. Ethiopia managed to finance mega development projects from its own resources. Nevertheless, the tax revenue of the country is low at 13.3 percent share in GDP in 2014/15. The plan is to increase this share to 17.2 percent by the end of the GTP II period (2019/20).    
Other efforts to pool domestic resources included (1) Promoting the tradition of saving among the people at large, (educating, motivating) (2) Expanding institutional-financial services (3) Improving interest rates (4) Expanding private and public social security coverage and (5) Utilizing saving facilities like savings for housings, selling bonds (like that of the GERD). National saving rate increased from 9.5 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to 21.8 percent of GDP in 2014/15. The rate grew to 22.4 percent in 2015/16. The plan is to raise the savings rate to 29.6 percent of the GDP by the end of the GTP II period (2019/20).  
 
The massive natural resources conservation and watershed development works shall resume maintaining the full conviction of the rural community and under the leadership of higher government officials with all the monitoring and supports they need supplied. Cost effective usage of domestic resources on capital-generating investments on the one hand and increased efforts to pool domestic resources shall resume. Ethiopia strengthening its partnership with the international development partners envisages more investment finances to flow in and seeks opportunities to benefit from science and technology. The details are presented in the section covering finance and economy. More efforts would be made to support all sector development  plans with the required budget each FY,  and to enable the existing institutional forms and mechanisms deploy essential human resources as would be called for to implement GTP II and its integral part SDGs for each target.  
  
10. Next Steps to Implement SDGs 
 
\0xEBProfound Renewal and Reform Movementi among the political leadership and the public service have lately been launched in light of assuring successful achievement in the implementation of  SDG. In the fiscal year 2016/17, at the political leadership level and in the various government administrative organs, strong administrative measures are being taken to eliminate rent-seeking behavior, to bring about developmental good governance, and to remove undesirable behaviors such as chauvinism, narrow-mindedness, religious extremism, etc. The movement shall resume taking corrective measures against erroneous perceptions and institutional practices.       
Similarly, the public service across the nation has gone through profound renewal movements that aimed at eliminating rent-seeking behaviors, unethical work ethics, lack of motivation and commitments to serve the public in a manner that could build consensus around the objectives between the public service, the people and the leadership. Building a reformed and renewed public servant that is free of all the undesirable/unproductive work-characteristics is an important ingredient to implement the SDGs, and GTP II general.     
 
The national development initiative is critically important to build the economy and the initiative has fully rolled out. The development initiatives while expediting the transformation and renaissance journey of Ethiopia aiming at reaching the Lower-Middle-Income Countries Economy by 2025, enables the engagement of the broader citizenry on equal terms in the development initiative and that they benefit equitably from the gains. The development initiatives incorporated the SDGs and via the SDG-integrated GTP II made the first 5-years phase of the new long term (15 years) national development plan which is currently under preparation. The long-term national development plan spans the period 2014/15 to 2029/30 and shall be the framework-guide to the economy on the longer term bases with sufficient far-sight. It would completely embrace the SDG goals with respect to both the implementation period and substantively with regard to contents. The preparation of the longterm national development plan is near finalization.  
 
Studies have been commissioned to conduct needs assessment for implementing the SDGs including financial needs. Preparatory works including preparation of terms of references (TORs) for the SDG financial needs assessment has been completed. Consultants have been selected to conduct the study; The UN country-office coordinated the process in response to the governmentis request to the UN to avail the services. The government of Ethiopia and the UN Country Team (UN-CT) shall monitor the consultancy service delivery per the TORs. It is anticipated that for each sector with respect to SDG-financing-needs-assessment, analysis and recommendations with regard to the existing enabling environments, the challenges and the essential measures/steps to be taken would be reported on, in the deliverables.    
 
Preparation for conductiong SDG needs assessement and SDG finance strategy is on progress. Terms of reference (TOR) have been prepared. The UNDP Ethiopia Country office has upon request from the Ethiopian Government selected the consultants already. The government of the FDRE and the UNDP Ethiopia country office shall jointly see to it that the consultants deliver on the assessements and the financing strategy development timely and to a satisfactory standard. In the SDG financing needs assessement challenges, opportunities and measures to be taken in each sector to achieve the SDGs shall be identified complete with recommendations; this is hoped to help the preparation of the all inclusive long-term comprehensive national 15years development plan under the macro-economic framework. 
 
Further, the preparation of the national Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework document is at its final stage. It shall address transparency, accountability issues and more importantly the M&E system requirement for performance monitoring of the long-term national development plan and its 1st phase. Like the other national policies, the national M&E framework needs to be endorsed by the government before rolling it out for implementation in a manner reflecting the objective realities across the nation. Strategic and technical level orientations and capacity building trainings are envisaged to be offered to assist the effective implementation and usage of the M&E framework. Capacity building trainings shall resume across the nation with respect to development planning, performance monitoring and evaluations.  
11. Monitoring, Reporting and Review 
 
Performance monitoring is carried out with existing institutional mechanisms and forms and human resources at the national, regional states and city administrations.  
 
National level implementation performance monitoring: Sectorsi executive organs compile, analysis and produce sector performance reports to the National Planning Commission (NPC); these reports are analyzed, reviewed for consistency, for harmony among other sector reports, for data validity, for completeness, before they are consolidated and submitted to the the prime minister office.  
  
Regional states performance monitoring: The M&E of regional states follow similar processes like the federal institutions. Sectors of the regional states at all levels of administrations produce reports to be submitted to the regional states plan institutions. The plan institutions in a similar manner as that of the national level review consolidate these sectoral reports before submitting them to the regional cabinet office and get them endorsed.  
 
In Ethiopia, implementation performance monitoring relied on two major data sources; the first one from government sector executive organs, the second ones are sourced from the CSAis sample survey reports, study/investigation, census reports and inventories. Implementation performance monitoring is done making use of the indicators of the targets of GTP II every fiscal year. Accordingly, those SDGs selected for the 2017 VNRs and the sectors pertaining to the selected SDGs have been identified and the 2015/16 performance data as well as implementation progresses in the first six months of the 2016/17 have been used in this report.  
 
Data inputs included official administrative data, sample surveys/studies and performance reports produced officially by each sector. The performance reports were subjected to reviews with reference to the data on the GTP II-Policy-Matrix especially with reference to the fiscal yearis targets and indicators. Disparities and issues are spotted and reported. Corrective measures are then taken and arrangements are made to expedite the next plans.  
 
11.1 Data, Statistics and Indicators  
 
Monitoring and review, and decision making cannot be done without data. Monitoring and reviewing the progress of GTP II and SDGs as an integral part of GTP II, relied on timely and quality data for policy-decisionmaking based on the monitoring and reviewing findings. The government of the FDRE having realized the importance of quality and timely data for development planning including policy formulation, project preparation and implementation, had been able to establish a national institute to handle statistics and to also produce and utilize the national strategy of the development of statistics. 
 
The CSA and the EMA (Ethiopian Mapping Agency) are thus national institutes established with the mandates to generate and disseminate data based upon studies and surveys.  CSA generates and disseminates to users socio-economic data pertaining to national development needs through sample surveys, studies and censuses. Likewise, EMA generates and disseminates geo-spatial data to users. CSA and EMA are discharging their responsibilities consistent with their institutional mandates; on account of them mandated with generating data critically important for the preparation of national development plans and for monitoring and evaluation. Both CSA and EMA have been made legally accountable to the National Planning Commission (NPC). This reinforced the national capacity of the NPC to prepare, monitor and evaluate the national development plan effectively.    
 
The 2017 VNRs relied on data from sample surveys, studies and inventory. The data was generated in a manner compatible with indicators of all the targets of GTP II as depicted in the GTP II Policy Matrix. The National Strategy for Statistics Development has been followed. Both direct and proxy-indicators data were generated, analyzed, evaluated and utilized in the production of the main report. Detail data have been annexed to the main report.  
 
11.2 Monitoring and Review Methods Utilized 
 
Ethiopia adopted decentralized government administration systems; yet in order to ensure the building of the common economy as clearly indicated in the preamble of Constitution of the FDRE, it was decreed in Article 51 sub-article 2 that the government of Ethiopia shall formulate and implement the countryis policies, strategies and plans in respect of overall economic, social and development matters. The government therefore had to establish the NPC through the Council of Ministersi proclamation No. 281/2005. NPC was mandated to lead and coordinate nation-wide all pertinent national institutions in the preparation of the national development plan.  
 
The NPC is directly accountable to the prime minister of the FDRE and has the responsibility of producing and implementing plan preparation and implementation guidelines. During the preparation of SDG integrated  GTP II, programs of the different sectors (e.g. Education Sector Development Program, Health Sector Development Program, Road Sector Development Program, Agriculture Sector Development Program, Water and Sanitation Sector Development Program,etc) have also been considered. The implementation performance monitoring, reporting and evaluation are done sector-wise. NPC issues directives to all federal sectors-executive organs for the latter to submit performance evaluation reports on the SDG-integrated GTP II. The various federal economic sectors and macro-economic executive organs do submit the reports accordingly. 
 
These reports are then systematically and appropriately evaluated by the NPCis directorates of Economic sectors, macro-economy and monitoring and evaluation. Incomplete, untimely, defective and inconsistent data/reports are corrected in consultation with the concerned sectors. The macro-economy, the economic sectors and the cross-cutting sectors reports are also evaluated. Analyzed and evaluated comprehensive national performance review report are then produced by the NPC and submitted to the office of the prime minister. 
    
11.3 Challenges  
 
Challenges encountered during the implementation of GTP II and its integral part SDGs over the last one and half years are: 
 
1. The severe drought caused by climate change during the 2015/16 turned 10.2 million people to be aiddependent to survive; responding to the drought impacts required the re-allocation of the resources originally allocated for development works thus competing with these already scarce resources available for the latter. The drought lingered through the 2016/17 in some regions of the country and 5.2 million people wich could probably go up to about 7.8 million remained a challenge. The response made to alleviate the drought impact competed whith the resources for development. The drought adverse impact on livestock population has been severe. 
  
2. In the 2015/16, revenue from export items and therefore foreign currency based revenue decreased. These may be due to the fact that international economy slowed down and caused commodity prices to decline and that the export destinations got fewer and fewer, exacerbating the situation in Ethiopiais case has been that Ethiopiais export items are not diversified and are mostly agricultural produces. The trade imbalance has increased in consequence, clearly showing and the slowdown in the global economy has been a challenge to the Ethiopian Economy.  
 
3. Other challenges to the Ethiopian economy included rent-seeking behaviors and lack of good governance all of which adversely impacted implementation capacity. Rent-seeking and lack of good governance hinder and retard implementation of social and economic services. Different reform programs are underway to minimize rent seeking behavior and to provide effective and efficient service delivery to the Ethiopian people. 
 
12. Summary of the Report  
 
12.1 General 
 
Integrating with its national development frameworks, Ethiopia has implemented the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which spanned the period 2000 to 2015 and registered remarkable achievements. The MDGs were implemented through effective government leadership and coordination of all stakeholders.  Lessons have also been drawn from the experience of implementing the MDGs and indeed, Ethiopia has made significant contributions by sharing these lessons as inputs to the preparation of the 2030 Global Agenda for Sustainable Development.  
 
Ethiopia has been pursuing  pro-poor policies, implementing  development  plans and programs with in  which  global development agendas  such as the MDGs, the Brussels Program of Action and  its succcessor the Istanbul Program of Action for Least Developed Countries have been maintreamed with remarkable acheivements in economic growth, social development and environmental management. This, in turn has, helped  in  gaining replicable development experiences over the last decade and half. Informed by these experiences and having recognized  future opportunities, Ethiopia has accepted  and endorsed the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with national commitments and ownership to implement the 2030 Agenda and its sustainable development goals (SDGs) as integral part  of its national development framework. Accordingly, with full sense of national ownership, implementation of SDGs has been and is well in progress in Ethiopia.  
 
Based on the invitation from the United Nations Economic and Social Council (UN-ECOSOC) Ethiopia has been volunteered to prepare the 2017 Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) on SDGs, and this summary report has been extracted from the full report of the 2017 VNRs on SDGs of Ethiopia. 
 
12.2 Purpose, Methods and Processes of the VNRs  
 
A number of consultations on the 2017 VNRs have been conducted at federal, regional and city administration levels. The purpose of these consultations is to ensure participation of all development actors and stakeholders including representatives of the government, the private sector, the civil society and non-government organizations, professional associations, women and youth associations, farmers and pastoralists, the parliament, political parties, and development partners in the 2017 VNRs of SDGs to improve both contents and quality of the draft VNRs report.  
 
The government led 2017 VNRs on SDGs conducted in Ethiopia has followed three approaches/methodologies. These included the following. 
 
1. Review of existing government laws and development policies and plans and collection of statistical data/information from official sources including the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) and other government institutions. In this regard, survey and census related statistical data were collected from the CSA, while administrative data on the implementation of SDGs were compiled from pertinent federal ministries which are responsible for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of their respective sector development plans, i.e., the Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) with which SDGs have been mainstreamed. 
 
2. Organizing and analyzing statistical data and/or information collected from official sources and drafting the 2017 VNRs report as per the proposal for voluntary common reporting guidelines of the Secretary General 
of the United Nations for VNRs at High Level Political Forum (HLPF). The draft VNRs report has been used as the basis for national consultations at the federal, regional and city administration levels.     
  
3. Conducting inclusive national consultations (federal and regional levels) on the draft 2017 VNRs.  Government officials and senior experts from relevant ministries as well as other key stakeholders representing the private sector, the civil society institutions and the professional associations were consulted on the purpose, the methodology and the data requirements of the VNRs at the beginning of the review processes. All actors and stakeholders including representatives of the government, the private sector, the civil society and non-government institutions, professional associations, women associations, youth associations, farmers and pastoralists, the parliament, political parties and development partners were also participated in the national consultations. The national consultations conducted at regional levels were complemented by group discussions on four topics (1) Leaving no one behind (2) Eradication of poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world (3) achieving gender equality and  empowering all women and girls and (4) strengthening the means of implementation for SDGs in Ethiopia.   
 
The VNRs processes recognized Ethiopiais contribution to the formulation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Just like it did in the course of implementing the MDGs, Ethiopia has integrated   the SDGs with in its Second Five Year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) spanning the period 2015/16-2019/20 with full sense of national ownership. All Stakeholders at all levels of government administration had participated in the preparation of GTP II through their representatives. The GTP II is, therefore, an integrated medium-term national development plan which has been financed from one national budget and facilitating more harmonious leadership and coordination for its effective implementation nation-wide. Thus, in the context of Ethiopia, implementing the current Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII) and its successors means implementing the SDGs. There is and will be one national development plan in which the SDGs are mainstreamed. This will be further pronounced in the formulation of Ethiopiais 15 Years Perspective Development Plan spanning the period 2015/16-2029/30  currently under preparation  and fully  aligned with the period of the SDGs. Awareness on integration of SDGs with GTP II and the process the 2017 VNRs on SDGs of Ethiopia was created to all regional government officials through a two daysi workshop jointly organized by the Government of Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UNDP Country Office in November 2016. 
   
All the SDGs have been integrated with ten of the priority areas of the GTP II.  All SDGs targets which reflect the objective reality in Ethiopia have also been integrated with GTP II. Those SDGs targets that may not match the objective realities are being identified. Ethiopia has deployed existing institutional and organizational arrangements as well as human resources and no new and/or parallel efforts have been made to implement SDGs.  
 
The national reviews have confirmed that there exist enabling policies and environments to effectively implement the SDGs in Ethiopia. Political commitments at the government level are quite high. SDGs having been integrated with the GTP II, approved by the council of ministers and ratified by the House of Peoples Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE) has become legally binding to implement the SDGs in Ethiopia. This is an evidence for the high level political commitment and national ownership exhibited by government of the FDRE.  
  
Evidences have shown that in the last decade and half, well-coordinated and integrated implementation of pro-poor national development policies, strategies, plans and programs benefitted the broader citizenry at all levels of government administration. The outcomes of these policies manifested as economic and social development which in turn exhibited by significantly reduced national poverty. Reports of the Central Statistical Agency on Household Income and Consumption-Expenditure Survey and Welfare and Demographic Health Surveys have confirmed that Ethiopiais poverty-level have shown significant reduction. Remarkable achievements have also been registered in infrastructure development (road, rail, energy, irrigation, etc.), education and health. It is, therefore, promising that Ethiopia will eradicate poverty by 2030 and there by realize its national development objectives and its global commitment.  
12.3 Review Findings 
 
Findings of the 2017 VNRs on SDGs of Ethiopia are summarized under four main headings: government commitment,  national ownership, performance trends and lessons & challenges in the implementation of SDGs. 
 
12.3.1 With respect to national commitments on SDGs:  
 
The high level of national commitments and transformative leadership that the government of the FDRE has exhibited to effectively implement SDGs are evidenced by (a) pro-poor policies, strategies, plans and programs which have been implemented since the last decade and half (b) decentralized administrative system with power devolution to regional states (c) fulfledged institutional and organizational arrangements (federal and regional) to effectively implement the pro-poor policies, strategies, plans and programs within a decentralized administrative system which is the main mechanism to closely identify and address the needs of the citizens and by equally engaging them in economic, social and political matters. These commitments have created conducive environment for effective implementation of SDGs.   
 
12.3.2 With respect to national ownership on SDGs:  
 
(a) Mainstreaming SDGs into GTP II and getting approved by the council of ministers and endorsed and ratified by the House of Peoples Representatives (the parliament) (b) Inclusive engagement and participation of all actors and stakeholders in the prearation, implementation, follow up and annual progress review of the SDGs (c) addtional allocation of finacial resource to increase the 70 percent poverty-oriented sectors spending to 75 percent for accelerating the achievement of SDGs through effective mobilization of domestic resources (d) effective coordination of GTP II implementation both at the federal and regional level are concrete evidences for strong national ownership of the Ethiopian government to effectively implement SDGs. 
 
12.3.3 With respect to performance trends of SDGs:  
 
Early performance trends on the principle \0xECLeaving No one Behind, on the 2017 Thematic Analysis: \0xECEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity and on the six sets of sustainable development goals for the 2017 in-depth review of SDGs, which include Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 14 have been assessed and the findings included in the 2017 VNRs report on SDGs of Ethiopia. 
 
12.3.3a Leaving No One Behind:  The Ethiopian constitution provides equal development opportunities to all its citizens. Accordingly, Ethiopia follows a decentralized administrative system with devolution of power to local administrative levels which are very close to the communities in light of better addressing local communities and engaging them in economic, social and political activities; government services are better accessed in decentralized system of administration. The government has also undertaken affirmative action particularly to support women and girls and to build capacities of those who and/or which have been left behind. The pro-poor policies of the government, the productive safety net program in rural and urban areas, the micro & small enterprises initiatives in urban areas with priority focus on women and youth are a few of the many showcases to address Leaving No one Behind in Ethiopia. With regard to financial inclusiveness, the countryis financial system is being modernized, being made efficient to provide access to the citizens to equally participate in and more equitably benefit from the development across the nation. By expediting sustainable development in a coordinated and structured way, opportunities for leaving no one behind and eradicating poverty have become more evident.  
 
12.3.3b Eradication of Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a changing world: The core development objective of the Ethiopian government is poverty eradication, while economic growth is the principal, but not the only means to achieve this objective. All development policies, strategies plans and programs are geared towards eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity. This is evidenced by inclusive rapid economic growth, countrywide infrastructure development, remarkable social development, well organized, integrated and community based environmental development as well as building democratic systems in order to be able to eradicate poverty and bring about the prosperity of the people. The year 2025 has been marked as the target year to attain the National Vision for Ethiopia to join the Lower Middle Income status. The combined efforts of the nation are focusing on ensuring accelerated transformation and renaissance- the journey of the nation towards eradicating poverty and bringing about prosperity. The annual regular national budget allocation (about 70 %) has been focusing on poverty oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water & sanitation and rural roads.  GTP II has a target to attain a national poverty level of 16.7 % by 2019/20.  
 
12.3.3c Early performance trends of the six sets of SDGs (1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 14)   
 
1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere: Though unemployment and poverty in Ethiopia are still high, performances in economic growth, economic infrastructure development, social development and environmental development have been impressive. High unemployment rate of women and youth in particular requires special attention for increased and concerted efforts to continuously build capacities of women and youth,  accelerate the all-inclusive economic growth, infrastructure development, social development and building of democratic systems that would lead to eradicate poverty in all its forms and adequately address unemployment issues more expeditiously. In this regard, the SDG-integrated GTP II has prioritized unemployment issues of women and youth for addressing through integrated and organized approaches. In 2015/16, the Ethiopian economy grew on the average by 8 percent. This average real GDP growth rate was registered in the 2015/16, despite the fact that climate change caused drought and despite the slow-down in the global economy; in all fairness it is a remarkable achievement.  Compared with economic growth rate of 7 percent, the threshold that low income countries should maintain to achieve the creation of desirable work opportunities and sustainable economy, the growth performance of  the Ethiopian economy in 2015/16 is considered to be high. The GDP per capita has also significantly increased from 373 USD in 2009/10 to 691 USD in 2014/15 and further to 794 USD by 2015/16.  According to the poverty analysis based on the Household Income and Consumption Expenditure Survey (HICES)  of  the  Central Statistical Agency, national poverty level has declined  from 44.2 % in 1999/00 to 38.7 % in 2004/05, and to 29.6 % in 2010/11. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line was estimated to decline from 29.6 % in 2010/11 to 23.4 % in 2014/15, and at the end of the GTP II period (2019/20), poverty level (head count poverty rate) is projected to decline  to 16.7 %. With effective implementation of GTP II, and its next generations five year development plans to be implemented  in the coming  decade through integrated and coordinated manner. All indications show that it is possible to eradicate poverty by 2030. 
 
2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture: The government of Ethiopia has strived to expand agricultural productivity through continous capacity development of smallholder farmers and pastoralists, ensuring access to improved technology and agricultural extension services and  transform the economy from that of agricultural development led to industrial economy with a realization of food security while aid-dependency ceases to exist. Agricultural productivity, preparedeness for disaster prevention and managment, urban employment generation and food security program have recieved priority attention in light of eliminating hunger, acheive food security & improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture.  
 
Priority is also given to Climate Resillient Green Agriculture Development in an endeavor to increase productivity and ensure sustainability of agricultural development. Though climate change induced drought-the worest everseen in the last 50 years, had occured  in some parts of the country during 2015/16, 10.2 million people became victims of the drought. However, the government of Ethiopia has succefully manageged the effects of the drought without any loss of human life largly through effective domestic resource mobilization and the supply of nutritious food items to mothers and children. The government has also registered an average real GDP growth rate of 8 %, despite the worst drought ocurred in the country.  The productivity of food crops was affected by the drought, as  a result, production of major crops (cereals, pulses and oils seeds) declined from 270.3 million quintals in 2014/15 to 266.8 million quintals in 2015/16. However, the decline in crop production due to the effects of drought was compensated by irrigation in non drought victim areas of the country. On the other hand, in light of ascertaining food-security, massive natural resources development works were executed by mobilizing the rural communities in 2015/16.  
 
3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages: It has been proclaimed in the constitution of the FDRE that government has the obligation to allocate ever increasing resources to provide to the public health, education and other social services. The national health sector policy, strategy, plan and program of the government have threfore, emanaeted from this constitutional provision and they are focusing on preventive rather than curative health services to addresse critical issues and problems of the health sector in Ethiopia. With the main objective of ensuring easy access to and quality of basic health services for all Ethiopian citizens, the Ethiopian government has made massive investment in expanding health infrastructure and building the human capital in the health sector. Health Extension Program has been operatonal and rolled out to all rural and urban areas of the country for effective implementation of the national health sector policy by deploying about thirty eight thousand trained health extension workers.  Accordingly, the national health services coverage reached 98 % through expanding health institutions, training, and deploying sufficient human resources and increasing health service accessebility. Maternal and infants health has improved significanrly with reduced maternal mortality rate per100,000 live births to 420 in 2014/15 while that of under five child mortality rate declined to 64/1000 live births in the same period.  Incidences & spread of communicable diseases have been restrained and life expectancy has shown tremendous progress. Healthy and productive labor force is thus availed for the economy to maintain its accelerated pace and achieve the goal of eradicating poverty in all its forms by 2030.    
 
4. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls:  As per the constitution of the FDRE, all persons are equal before the law and that women have equal rights with men in all economic, social and political affairs. On the basis of this constitutional provision, the Ethiopian government has formulated and put under implementation of womenis policy and development packages and youthsi policy and development packages. These policies and development packages aim at ensuring women and female youthsi equality and ensuring that they benefit from the economy. Youth policy gives priority to female youth and is focusing on educating and training them in various professions and skills such that they equally participate in and equitably benefit from economic & social development, good governance and democractic affairs.  
 
Affirmative actions have also been taken by the government to compensate women and girls for what they lost historically in areas of civil service employment schemes and entrance of tertiary education.  Rural women were made to own lands. During 2015/16 alone, 276.1 thousand women jointly with their husbands and 61.7 thousand women headed households have received second degree entitlment on rural land ownership. Furthermore, 442,011 women jointly with their husbands and 71,169 women headed households received second degree entitlement for rights to land use during the first six months of 2016/17. In Ethiopia, women participation in the political sphere has been increasing. Their representation in the house of peoplesi representatives (parliament) reached 38.7 percent, while at lower level of government administration, i.e. at regional and woreda (district) levels, representation of women reached 48 percent and 50 percent respectively.  Gender parity index in primary education (grades 1-8) reached 0.91 in 2015/16.  This clearly shows that women in Ethiopia are getting empowered to achieve gender equality in all sphere of development. 
 
5. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation: Ethiopia has set a new vision of becoming a leader in light manufacturing in Africa and one of the leaders in overall manufacturing as well. The vision on manufacturing sector is set to sustain the rapid economic growth over the previous years. Accordingly, in GTP II, a priority has been set to ensure rapid, sustainable and reliable industrial growth by building climate resilient green industry through developing national capabilities in technological searching, selection, and adaptation and by enhancing quality infrastructural capacity to support the manufacturing sector to become competitive in the international market. Sustaining infrastructure investment by promoting export expansion and import substitution of goods and services so as to reduce the strain on foreign exchange demand and meeting the infrastructure need of the economy through building strong institutions, utilizing infrastructure delivery as a vehicle to create jobs, and addressing the financial constraints in investing in infrastructure development are also the focus of GTP II.  
 
With regard to road infrastructure development, the total length of all weather-roads increased from 110,414 kms in 2014/15 to 113,067 kms in 2015/16 and the average time taken to access all-weather roads has been reduced to 1.6 hrs in 2015/16. Remarkable progresses have also been made in rail infrastructure development, digital infrastructure development, air transport, etc. With regard to road transport, though passengers and freight transport services have been on the increase, traffic accidents are also increasing and reaching at 63/10,000 deaths during 2015/16, which requires critical attention to address the problem.  
 
Construction of renewable energy generating infrastructure (hydropower, geothermal, wind and solar) has also been progressing including the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam on Abay River with electric power generating capacity of 6000 MW, which is the largest in Africa, and the new  electric power generating plant based on solid waste which is second to none in Africa. While the national electric power generation capacity in Ethiopia has reached 4,269.5 MW in 2015/16, renewable energy generation from renewable sources has been prioritized in SDGs and the government is aggressively working to increase the existing national capacity to 17,208 MW by 2019/20. Ethiopia is working to become East African power hub and currently exporting electric power to Dijibouti and Sudan and in the pipline to export power to Kenya while memorada of understanding were signed with other African countries. With regard to industrial development, the Ethiopian government is aggressively working in developing strong and able human capital, creating enabling environment to attract developmental investors, fostering Green-Industry development and encouraging socially responsible and environmentally safe sustainable manufacturing industries through building of industrial parks and clusters which are envisaged to provide single-window shopping and suitable access to the required infrastructure and services in facilitating and expediting efficient and effective deliveries of the manufacturing industries.  
  
6. Conserve and sustainably use the water eco-system for sustainable development: Extensive soil and water conservation works as well as massive reforstation have been under implementation in the country. Depletion of surface and ground water is largely due to impacts of erosion and deforestation.  Physical and biological soil and water conservation measures envisaged to remedy and prevent soil erosion and denudation of the earth have been implemented. In 2015/16, about 20.3 million people (9.5 million women and 10.8 million men) were participated in community watershade development all over the country. These measures have  preserved the biodiversity, helped maintain perennial baseflows to dams and curbed excessive sediment transport to hydro dams. The natural resources conservation and watershed development works as well as building green industry particularly those manufacturing industries with zero liquid discharge technology also curbed pollutions of water bodies such as lakes, rivers and springs from chemicals generated by agricultural inputs and industrial wastes.  
 
12.4 Main Lessons and Challenges		
 
Main Lessons: The main lessons drawn from the 2017 VNRs on SDGs implementation of Ethiopia include existence of and actively functioning pro-poor and pro-growth development policies of the government which have expounded capabilities to mobilize and utilize the community for development, coupled with decentralized administrative system with power devolution to the lower administrative units of the government and the corresponding institutional and organizational arrangement for effective implementation of SDGs as an integral part of  GTP II to realize the principle \0xECLeaving No One Behind and  the 2017 Analytical Theme \0xECEradication of Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a changing world under the Ethiopian realities.  
 
Main Challenges: The most critical challeges, the Ethiopian economy is encountering during the implementation of SDGs include climate change induced drought with negative impacts on the economy and human capacity, declining market prices of major Ethiopiais export commodities in international market, lack of commitment on the part of international community in mobilizing financial resource for implementation of SDGs, particularly for infrastructure financing , and global unpredictability of peace and security which can affect aid, loan and foreign direct investment flows.  Addressing these challenges requires more integrated and coordinated national effort and strong and effective global partnership. 
In conclusion, from the one year and half implementation progress of SDGs and the good track record that the Ethiopian government had from MDGs, Ethiopia is going well in achieving SDGs. 
 
13. Statistics Annexes 
 
In section 10 of this review report, Data, Statistics and Indicators were discussed. It was described that data inputs for the 2017-SDG-VNR were sourced from the CSAis sample surveys, studies/investigations, censuses and inventories and also from the official administrative data obtained from the various executive organs of the government. In light of this, official data generated from CSA data and all-sectorsi official administrative data on the performance monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the SDG-Integrated-GTP II are presented in Section 13.1-Annexes 1 & Section 13.2 Annex-2 herewith. These performance M&E data were generated guided by the direct and proxy-indicators depicted on the Policy Matrix of the SDG-Integrated-GTP II and based on the National Strategy for the Statistics Development.    
 	 

13.1. Annex 1. Performance Indicators on selected SDGs 
 
S/No. 
SDGs 
Indicators 
Base Line  (2014/15) 
Performance  (2015/16) 
 
SDG-4 Quality 
Education for all 
 
 
 
 
 
Pre- school enrollement in percent (%) 
39 
49.6 
 
 
Male enrollement (%) 
40 
50.8 
 
 
Female enrollment (%)
38 
48.3 
 
 
Elementary school (1st grade to 8th) net enrollment (%) 
96.9 
97.12 
 
 
Male enrollement (%) 
100 
100 
 
 
Female enrollement (%) 
93.2 
93.6 
 
 
Gender Party Index in primary education (Grades 1-8)  (%) 
0.93 
0.91 
 
 
Secondary school ( first level: grades 9-10) gross enrollement  (%) 
39.8 
44.8 
 
 
Male gross Enrollement (%) 
41.3 
46.2 
 
 
Female gross Enrollement (%) 
38.4 
43.4 
 
 
Secondary school (second level: grades 11-12) gross nrollement  (%) 
10.6 
12.6 
 
 
Male gross Enrollement (%) 
11.3 
13.4 
 
 
Female gross Enrollement (%) 
9.9 
11.6 
 
 
Adults functional education gross enrollement (in millions) 
6.0 
6.9 
 
 
SME with a capacity for technology transfer/manufacturing 
0 
2,751.00 
 
 
Higher Education-uder-graduates gross enrollement ( number) 
729,028 
778,766 
 
 
Share of males (percent) 
68 
66 
 
 
Share of females 
32 
34 
 
 
Annual Intake growth rate (percent) 
9.4 
10.4 
 
 
Number of graduate of Higher EducationUnder-graduates Program 
107,567 
130714 
 
 
Share of males (percent) 
71 
66 
 
 
Share of females (percent) 
29 
34 
 
 
Postgraduate Admission-Second Degree (Number)  
37152 
52611
 
 
Share of males (percent)  
75 
75 
 
 
Share of females (percent) 
25 
25 
 
 
Postgraduate Admission-Third Degree (Number)  
3135 
2725 
 
 
Number of graduate in postgraduates program-second degree (Number) 
10203 
8588 
 
 
Share of Males (percent) 
84.2 
82.8 
 
 
Share of females (percent) 
15.8 
17.2 
 
 
Number of graduate in postgraduate program-Third Degree (Number)  
485 
263 
 
 
Share of males (percent) 
87.4 
90.9 
 
 
Share of females (percent) 
12.6  
9.1 
 
 
Proportion of traind 1st cycle (grades 1-4) primary school  teachers (percent) 
71.4 
73 
 
 
Proportion of trained 2nd cycle (grades 5-8) primary school teachers (%) 
71.4 
94 
 
 
Proportion of trained secondary school (grades 9-12)  teachers (%) 
87.3 
96 
 
SDG-6: Potable water &sanitation 
services 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural potable water supply coverage by GTP II standards (%) 
59 
63.1 
 
 
Urban potable water supply coverageby GTP II standards (%) 
51 
52.5 
 
 
National potable water supply coverage by GTP II standards (%) 
58 
61 
 
 
Non-functional rural water stations (%) 
11.2 
11 
 
Affordable renewable energy 
 
 
 
 
 
National electric power generation capacity (MW) 
2,399.5 
4,269.5 
 
 
Number of Customers (millions) 
2.31 
2.49 
 
 
Access coverage of electricityy supply (percent) 
54.25 
56.0 
 
 
Electric power transmission lines (km) 
14,065 
15,137 
 
 
Medium electric power distribution lines (km) 
88,266 
94,352 
 
 
Share of GDP (Electricity and Water) (%) 
0.7 
0.6 
 
 	 
13.2. Annex2. Performance of SDGs reviewed in detail  
 
SDGs 
SDG-Targetsi Indicators 
Baseline  (2014/15) 
Performance (2015/16) 
Planned targets (2016/17-2019/20 fiscal year) 




 2016/17 
2017/18 
2018/19 
2019/20 
SDG-1 
Ending Poverty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
National poverty headcount (%) 
23.40 
 
 
 
 
16.70 

Share of poverty oriented sectorsi2 expenditure in total Government expenditure (%) 
66 
67 
72 
72 
71 
88 

The share of pro-poor sectorsi expenditure in GDP (%) 
12.3 
12.9 
13.5 
14.1 
14.8 
15.4 

Govit expenditure for institutions benefitting women, the poor, the vulnerables (Share in GDP in %) 
17.3 
18.4 
19.3 
20.2 
21.4 
22.6 

Number of beneficiaries (50 % females) from safety-net based social security services (Millions) 
1.2 
1.54 
0.81 
0.90 
0.98 
1.01 

Number of beneficialries (the disabled) from physical rehabilitation services (thousands) 
236.19 
78.74 
70.00 
75.00 
80.00 
85.00 

Number of households who received 2nd-degree  rural land entitlement licence (millions) 
0.33 
0.33 
1.40 
1.60 
1.80 
1.30 

Number of Male Family Heads 
0.26 
0.27 
1.12 
1.28 
1.44 
1.04 

Number of Female Family heads 
0.07 
0.06 
0.28 
0.32 
0.36 
0.26 

Disaster prevention Strategy\0xF3prepared/not-prepared 
prepared 
prepared 
prepared 
prepared 
prepared 
prepared 
?? 2 
End Hunger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Major food-crops production (in mlns of quintals) 
270.08 
267 
319 
346 
375 
406 

Average productivity of major-food crops (Qt/ha) 
21.05 
19.0 
25 
27 
29 
31 

Number of households (farmers) who obtained general agricultural extension services (\0xEB000) 
13950 
15,735 
16,406 
17,038 
17,692 
18,237 

Number of households (farmers) who obtained Improved agriculture extension services (\0xEB000) 
14,014 
14,549 
15,105 
15,685 
16,287 
16,776 

Total number of Male-headed rural households who received agricultural extension services (\0xEB000) 
8,343 
8,594 
8,852 
9,118 
9,392 
9,674 

Total number of Female-headed rural households who received agricultural extension services (\0xEB000) 
4,253 
4,466 
4,689 
4,924 
5,170 
5,325 

Total number of rural youth (agriculturalists) who received agricultural extension services (\0xEB000) 
1,418 
1,489 
1,564 
1,643 
1,725 
1,777 

Total number of Pastoralists who received extension services (\0xEB000) 
690 
718 
755 
794 
826 
858 

Total number of Male-Pastoralists who received extension services (\0xEB000) 
414 
427 
449 
472 
487 
502 

Total number of Female-Pastoralists who received extension services (\0xEB000) 
207 
218 
229 
241 
254 
267 

Total Number of youth Pastorals who received extension services (\0xEB000) 
69 
73 
77 
81 
85 
89 

Total number of agro-pastoralists who received extension services (\0xEB000) 
450 
420 
487 
507 
527 
547 

Quantity of compost utilized ( in metric tons) 
1,025,231 
752,282 
1,355,868 
1,559,248 
1,793,135 
2,062,106 

Quantity of improved seeds supplied (\0xEB000 Qt) 
1,874 
2,617 
2,795 
3,052 
3,296 
3,560 

Areas covered by soil and water conservation structures in community watersheds (\0xEB000 ha) 
20170 
1,062 
1,168 
1,284 
1,412 
2,134 

Extent of GHG (CO2) removed using biological methods from community watersheds (mln mt CO2e) 
- 
5 
6 
6 
7 
8 
 
Land developed through medium sacale modern irrigation schemes (million-hectares) 
2.35 
3.0 
3 
4 
4 
4 
 
 
Meat production (\0xEB000  tons) 
1,321 
1,990 
1,652 
1805 
1966 
2103 

Milk production (cow, camel, goat) (in million liters) 
5,304 
4,467 
5,938 
6610 
7051 
9418 
SDG 3 
Healthy lives and Well-being 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maternal Mortality Rate per 100,000 
420 
412 
 
 
 
199 
 
Deliveries attended by skilled health personnel (%) 
60 
72.7 
72 
78 
84 
90 
 
Under 5 mortality per 1000 children 
64 
67 
 
 
 
30 
 
Neonatal mortality rate per 1000 children 
28 
29 
 
 
 
10 
 
Under-5 Stunting rate (%) 
40 
38.4 
 
 
 
26 
 
Under-5 wasting rate (%) 
9 
9.9 
 
 
 
4.9 
 
HIV/AIDS incidence rate (%) 
0.03 
0.03 
 
 
 
0.01 
 
Detection rate of all forms of TB (%) 
61 
61.3 
81 
83 
85 
87 
 
Incidence of newly contracting hepatitis B (in \0xEB000) 
21.63 
23.2 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of people in need of treatment for priority lowland diseases (millions) 
75 
66.6 
 
 
 
14.9 
 
Mortality rate of heart disease, cancer, diabetics and respiratory infections 
476 
287 
 
 
 
 
 
Deathe rate from traffic accidents (per 10,000) 
60 
63 
 
 
 
27 
 	 
13.2. Annex2. Performance of SDGs reviewed in detail contid  
 
SDGs 
SDG Indicators 
Baseline  (2014/15) 
 Performance  (2015/16) 
Planned targets (2016/17-2019/20 fiscal year) 




2016/17 
2017/18 
2018/19 
2019/20 
SDG 3 
Healthy lives and Well-being\0xD6contid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Mothers utilizing modern birth control methods (%) 
40.4 
35.3 
 
 
 
50 

Teen-age (Adolecent) fertility rate per 1000 
 
12 
 
 
 
 

Critical heallth services coverage (%) 
96 
98 
 
 
 
100 

Number of people with health insurance coverage (per 1000) 
72 
125 
 
 
 
 

Number of Health professionals per 1000 population 
 
0.84 
1.2 
1.3 
1.5 
1.6 

Kebeles (lowest administrative units inethiopia) that implemented Health Extension program (%) 
92 
93 
 
 
 
100 
SDG 5 
Gender Equality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fullfledged implementation of Women Policy and Women Development Package and Youth Policy and Youth Development Package 
Women Policy 
&  Devit 
Package Prepared & put under implementation 
 
 
 
 
 

Full-fledged implematation of national and sectoral development policies and programs, proclamations (eg. Education, Health policies and programs, family law..) 
Policy formulated and laws 
promulgated. 
 
 
 
 
 

Number of women trained on different professions (millions) 
1.13 
1.89 
2.40 
2.88 
3.37 
3.87 

Number of women benefited from vocational adult education program (millions) 
2.97 
2.35 
3.66 
4.98 
6.29 
7.60 

Number of institutions/organizations that institutionalized women's affairs 
8 
69 
19 
20 
21 
22 

Number of structures in higher education institutions that provide counseling services for female students 
31 
111 
119 
127 
135 
143 

Number of Hostels (boarding schools) established and strengthened 
10 
16 
24 
26 
28 
30 

Percent of women at parliament 
38.8 
38.8 
 
 
 
50 

Decision-making role of women at the Federal Executive bodies (%) 
9.2 
 
34 
36 
38 
40 

Laws and regulations issued to ensure access to female reproductive health data and education 
Procedures rolled out and under implementation 
 
 
 
 
 

Number of women who received certificates of Land Use Right 
8,647,118 
9,492,772 
12,086,907 
14,681,042 
17,275,177 
19,869,312 

Availability and usage of Legislation backing Womenis equal right to land ownership and use 
Women policy was produced and is under mplementatin 
 
 
 
 
 

Monitoring mechanism to ensure effective usage of budget allocated to enhance Womenis Equality 
Monitoring mechanism 
rolled out 
 
 
 
 
 
SDG-9 
Build infrastructure, promote industrialization and foster innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
Areas 5 Km further away from all-weather roads (%) 
36.6 
35.8 
 
 
 
13.5 

Supply of passenger seats per flight distance (in billions kilometers ) 
32 
39.9 
 
 
 
68 

Value-added growth in MSE (%) 
3.8 
2.5 
21.3 
22.60 
23.00 
23.50 

Shae of Medium and Large Industriesi Products  in 
GDP (%) 
3.8 
4.4 
4.4 
4.8 
5.3 
5.9 

Shae MSE Products in GDP (%) 
1.1 
1 
1.3 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 

Value-added growth in Manufacturing Industries (%) 
15.8 
18.4 
 
 
 
21.9 

Value-added growth in Medium and Large Industries (%) 
23.1 
22.9 
21.3 
21.8 
22.6 
23.4 

Mobile services Penetration (%) 
43.9 
49 
68.2 
79.4 
90 
100 

Number of mobile services users (\0xEB000)  
40,000 
45,963 
65,465 
78,197 
90,930 
103,662 

Construction  of A.Ababa Light Rail (34 km)  (%) 
80 
100 
 
 
 
 

Construction  of A. AbabanMeiso-Dewnle Rail  (%) 
86.5 
99.2 
 
 
 
 
 
  	 
13.2. Annex2. Performance of SDGs reviewed in detail contid  
 
SDGs 
SDG Indicators 
Baseline  (2014/15) 
 
Performance  (2015/16) 
Planned targets (2016/17-2019/20 fiscal year) 




2016/17 
2017/18 
2018/19 
2019/20 
SDG 14 
Conserve and sustainably use the water resources for sustainable development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium & large irrigation study and design (ha) 
 
71,291 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium & large irrigation deveopment (ha) 
 
39,785 
 
 
 
 
 
Value added of fishery products (GDP share %) 
0.1 
0.1 
 
 
 
 
 
Production of Fishes (tons) 
 
48386 
55158. 
 
 
 
SDG 17 
International Partnership for Sustainable Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Share of GDP\0xF3of Total Revenue (%) 
15.4 
16 
16.4 
17.4 
18.4 
19.7 

The share of tax revenue in GDP (%) 
12.7 
12.5 
14 
15.2 
15.9 
17.2 

The share of Foreign-aid in GDP (%) 
1 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 

The share of FDI, Foreign-Aid and South-South 
Cooperation Aid  in total Government Budget (%) 
21 
24 
 
 
 
 

Share of Budget Deficit in GDP (%) 
1.9 
2.4 
2.8 
2.8 
3 
3 
 
 
  
 
Customs- Tariff (average rate (%) 
17.5 
17.5 
 
 
 
 

No. of clusters of factories built in Industrial parks 
19 
52 
 
 
 
 

Internet Services Users (Millions) 
9.6 
13.6 
25.3 
37.9 
47.0 
56.0 

Broad-band Internat Service Users (Millions) 
1.6 
49 
16.4 
24.1 
31.6 
39.1 

Share of Export (commodity + service) in GDP (%) 
9.4 
8 
15.5 
15.7 
18.1 
20.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methods to harmonize Sustainable development with the Development Policy 
National 
Development Plan harmonized with Sustainable 
Development 
 
 
 
 
 

Competency to produce SDG Review-Reports utilizing SDG-performance M&E Formats. 
The SDG M&E 
System rolled out. 
 
 
 
 
 

Adopting national SDG performance Indicators compatible with SDGs and with standard statistics principles 
Plan and M&E Policy Matrix for the Plan-- compatible with SDGs prepared 
 
 
 
 
 

Adoption of Statistics-law compatible with National Statistics Guidelines 
Statistics-law in effect already 
 
 
 
 
 

Statistics plan supported by Budget 
National 
Statistics Strategy prepared. 
 
 
 
 
 

National Population census at least once every 10 years 
Population census taken in the 
FYs1983/84, 1994/95 and 2014/15. 
 
 
 
 
 

Infants that received Birth Certificates 
Official 
Issuance of 
Birth 
Certifcates newly commneced 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 According to the Policy the Youth are btween 15& 19 years of age inclusive. 
2 Include Agriculture, Education, Health, Water & Sanitation and Rural Roads 
