VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW
FOR THE HIGH-LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM  ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT




VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW 
FOR THE HIGH-LEVEL POLITICAL 
FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Basis for a Long-Term Sustainable 
Development Vision in Mexico
Progress on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals
SUMMARY
Mexico has undertaken many initiatives to implement the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with a long-term vision, including but not limited to the following:
 In 2015, the National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI) created the Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals (CTEODS), which is responsible for coordinating research on indicators that track progress on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the national level. 
 INEGI has mapped the global indicators for the 2030 Agenda, identifying that Mexico can domestically track 169 of the 232 indicators.
 In 2016, the Senate created a working group to monitor the implementation of the SDGs at the legislative level.
 In 2017, the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was created as the coordinating mechanism for the implementation of the SDGs at the highest level of the federal government; it is overseen by the president and includes participation of many sectors.
 At the subnational level, the National Governors' Conference (CONAGO) created the 2030 Agenda Executive Implementation Commission, led by the governor of Colima. 
 As of June 2018, 31 of Mexico's 32 states have implementation and follow-up mechanisms (OSIs) for the 2030 Agenda. Some municipal governments have similar mechanisms as well.
 With the goal of increasing the amount of information available on the importance of public investments on development issues and the opportunities they represent, an analysis was conducted on the contribution of Budgetary Programs (BPs) to the SDGs, identifying that 80.7% of BPs address issues connected to the SDGs.
 In 2018, congress approved the president's proposed reform of the Planning Law, which incorporated the three dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the principles of equity, inclusion and non-discrimination, into national planning. To ensure a long-term vision, this reform also established that the National Development Plan (NDP) must incorporate projections and considerations for 20 years out.
 During the 2017-2018 electoral process, Mexico's main political parties and coalitions came out in favor of the 2030 Agenda in their position papers and electoral platforms.
 At the multilateral level, Mexico signed on to Resolution 77/242, "Impact of Rapid Technological Change on the Achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals," which establishes that the United Nations, in collaboration with academia, civil society and the private sector, must analyze the impact of rapid technological change, artificial intelligence and automatization on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
 The National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda is currently in the public review phase. By proposing priorities, goals, indicators and challenges, the National Strategy could become an essential tool for the preparation of the 2018-2024 National Development Plan.
 
In Mexico, important progress has been made on the adoption of the 2030 Agenda. The Foreign Affairs Secretariat, for example, has organized four thematic discussions. Furthermore, during the development of the National Strategy, five regional dialogues were held with civil society organizations (CSOs) --in Mexico City, Colima, Mazatlan, Monterrey and Tuxtla Gutierrez-- in order to introduce the 2030 Agenda and adopt its perspectives, priorities and concerns. 
The government is in constant dialogue with the private sector, conducted through the Business Coordinating Council (CCE) and its associates. Other communication channels have also been established, such as the Alliance for Sustainability (AxS), created by the Mexican Agency for International Development Cooperation (AMEXCID). The AxS has established five working committees in strategic areas.
20
The academic and scientific community has begun to reflect on proposals for sustainability policies and has contributed to the development of information useful to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. With the support of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), a Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) is being created to orient and support the implementation of the SDGs. A team of researchers at the Ibero-American University is also exploring some of the policy implications of the five pillars of the 2030 Agenda, while the National Public Policy Lab (LNPP) at the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics (CIDE) is working on local development indicators. Finally, important contacts have been made with the National Association of Universities and Higher Education Institutions (ANUIES), the Science and Technology Consultative Forum (FCCyT), the Mexican Academy of Sciences (AMC) and universities from across the country to make progress on tasks related to the implementation of the SDGs.
Despite this progress, there are still many major challenges associated with ensuring the effective participation of different actors, such as that of guaranteeing interinstitutional coordination, both vertically and horizontally; institutionalizing effective participation and co-creation mechanisms for the development of policy through innovative spaces for multi-stakeholder dialogue and action; consolidating the adoption of the Agenda by different sectors of society; expanding strategies for the communication and dissemination the Agenda; training actors at the federal, state and municipal levels of government; guaranteeing mechanisms for following-up on and reviewing actions and policies beyond the limits of any given administration; having a long-term plan with intermediate goals, budgetary resources available for implementation and robust systems for measuring and evaluating their success; as well as using new technologies and big data1 in combination with other sources of information that have the proper level of disaggregation to guarantee that all sectors of society are represented.
1 Big data refers to data of such great volume, variety and velocity that specialized programs are needed to process it. It can be of tremendous use in studying trends and associations.





I. INTRODUCTION


Three years have gone by since the 2015 United Nations Sustainable. Since then, Mexico has undertaken major transformations to move towards a development model that harmonizes social inclusion, environmental protection and economic growth. Achieving the SDGs requires innovation and forces us to think and act differently. For Mexico, to leave no one behind has meant understanding the SDGs in a comprehensive and holistic fashion, exploring methods to integrate human rights and gender approaches and utilizing participatory implementation mechanisms. These elements define Mexico's vision for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, representing the enduring path by means of which the country will advance towards 2030 and onward into the future.
Mexico's first Voluntary National Review (VNR), from 2016, presented the preparatory measures aimed at creating an adequate environment for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It also mentioned the steps to be taken to ensure adoption and compliance in Mexico.
This second VNR seeks to reflect the advances, challenges and lessons learned from the first three years of the 2030 Agenda. The participation of all social actors and levels of government is necessary to confront current challenges and assume the Agenda as a state commitment. For this reason, this review is not limited to the actions of the government. It also presents the contributions of a variety of actors that are key to sustainable development.
This review includes an overview of the opportunities and challenges of implementing the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. In particular, the "Review of Goals" section contains advances, emblematic actions and challenges. The valuable contributions of CSOs and the United Nations System are summarized in boxes labeled "Complementary Positions for SDG X Expressed in the Review Process." The data and sources included therein are the responsibility of the participants.





II. DESIGN OF THE 
VOLUNTARY NATIONAL 


REVIEW
The monitoring and review of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda has meant recognizing challenges and sharing best practices and lessons learned. As one of the 47 countries that will present its VNR at the 2018 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), Mexico seeks to contribute to a global dialogue that allows us to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The objective of this review is to describe the path that Mexico has taken in implementing the 2030 Agenda at the national and subnational levels; it details the domestic progress made on each of the 17 SDGs and contributes to the domestic dissemination and adoption of the 2030 Agenda.
While the Office of the President of the Republic (OPR) coordinated the preparation of this document, it includes valuable contributions from other sectors, which were the product of an enriching dialogue among federal agencies, CSOs, representatives of the private sector, scientists, academics, the United Nations System and members of vulnerable populations.





III. MEASURES AND 
COMMITMENTS FOR  
THE IMPLEMENTATION  
OF THE 2030 AGENDA


3.1 INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
Ensuring the continuity of efforts over the long term is essential to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Nevertheless, factors such as changes of government, legal and budgetary restrictions and temporary contingencies can jeopardize continuity.
To address this challenge, Mexico has made it a priority to guarantee the continuity of the 2030 Agenda over time, creating new planning, implementation and follow-up mechanisms and transforming national and subnational institutions.
Some of these measures have included the transformation of the Specialized Technical Committee for the Millennium Development Goals (CTESIODM) into the Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals (CTEODS) in late 2015, the creation of the Senate Working Group for Monitoring the Legislative Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, the creation of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in April 2017, and the creation of implementation and follow-up agencies (OSIs) for the SDGs at the state and municipal levels. 
Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals
In November 2015, the INEGI Governing Board modified an agreement establishing the CTEODS as the body responsible for generating and following up on the data and indicators needed to monitor the implementation of the SDGs. The CTEODS is chaired by the Office of the President and brings together 29 federal entities.
This committee has worked to monitor global indicators for Mexico in accordance with its statistical capacity. This process required the characterization of indicators and the organization of 15 interinstitutional working groups for the technical analysis of each. To facilitate online access to these indicators, the CTEODS --in collaboration with the OPR's National Digital Strategy Department-- designed the open data platform www.agenda2030.mx (see Appendix 1).
The process of defining national goals and indicators is currently in the review and reflection stage, which forms part of the preparation of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Senate Working Group for Monitoring 
the Legislative Implementation of the 
SDGs
In September 2016, the Senate Working Group for Monitoring the Legislative Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals was created, which has connections to over 30 congressional committees. This group has organized awareness and training forums on the Agenda that are aimed at legislators and has developed a diagnostic on the legislative capacity to address the 2030 Agenda in Mexico.
National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The decree creating the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was published in the Official Gazette of the Federation on April 26, 2017 and the Council held its first meeting that same day.
This mechanism aims to coordinate the design, execution, follow-up and evaluation of actions implementing the SDGs.2 This Council is the highest decision-making body, as it connects the executive, legislative and judicial branches of the federal government with local governments, the private sector, civil society and academia. Chaired by the president, it has an executive secretary in the OPR. It includes multisectoral working groups specializing in the 17 SDGs as grouped into four thematic axes (Free, Healthy and Safe People; Prepared, Productive and Innovative People; People Committed to Cities, Nature and the Environment; and People United to Leave No One Behind); a National Strategy Committee that analyzes and discusses actions, proposals and recommendations made by the working groups; and a Follow-Up and Evaluation Committee. (Figure 1).
As these committees are organized in accordance with the participatory and multi-stakeholder emphasis of the 2030 Agenda, they include representatives of the agencies and institutions that make up the federal government, CSOs, the academic and scientific communities, the private sector and cross- sectoral national systems.
2 In March 2018, the committee of international experts that follows up on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) recommended that "the state party take fully into account its obligations under the Covenant and ensure the full enjoyment of the rights enshrined therein in its implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the national level, with international assistance and cooperation when needed, by incorporating them into the work of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development."


FIGURE 1.  
Structure of the committees that make up the National Council for the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development


The Follow-Up and Evaluation Committee, professionals, representatives of higher edas the body responsible for monitoring the ucation institutions from every region of development and progress of policies relat- the country and members of CSOs, INEGI ed to each SDG, will be made up of research and the National Council for the Evaluation 


of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL). It is expected that the committee's evaluations, studies and diagnostics will have a focus on gender and cultural diversity, to ensure that the principle of "leaving no one behind" be both intersectional and sustainable over the long term.
The First Ordinary Session of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was held on May 31, 2018, bringing together representatives of the public, academic, private and civil sectors. The accomplishments of this meeting include the approval of its operating guidelines, mechanisms for multi-stakeholder participation, the yearly program of activities and the initial draft of the National Strategy. There were also discussions of the need to incorporate a focus on sustainable development into planning and bud-
Creation of the Council for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda  of the state of Hidalgo.
getary processes, particularly the 20192024 National Development Plan, as well as the 2019 federal budget. 
The following steps were also approved:
1. Creating OSIs in all remaining states;
2. Promoting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the municipal level;
3. Establishing working groups for the 2030 Agenda;
4. Submitting the initial draft of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda to public review via the platform www.gob.
mx/participa.
 
As a result of the open dialogue held at this session, it was also agreed to "analyze modifications to the decree creating the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 


Development to ensure the representation of civil society organizations, the private sector and academia with a voice and vote." This proposal was made by the CSO present.
Creation of Subnational 2030 Agenda 
Implementation and Follow-Up Agencies
At the subnational level, the 2030 Agenda has been implemented through two key spaces for promoting local development: CONAGO and the National Institute for Federalism and Municipal Development (INAFED). 
In June 2017, CONAGO created the 2030 Agenda Executive Implementation Commission, which serves as an organizing space through which governors can contribute to implementing the SDGs, share experiences, coordinate actions and develop state-level monitoring and follow-up mechanisms. One of the commitments of this commission has been the creation of OSIs in each state, which involve municipal authorities, federal delegates, representatives of civil society, academics and entrepreneurs. As of June 2018, 31 of the country's 32 states3 have created OSIs and 29 of these have been formally launched. Local OSIs are in charge of coordinating the design and execution of strategies, policies, 
Presentation of the 2017-2023 Development Plan of the State of Mexico (March 15, 2018). The State of Mexico has embraced the 2030 Agenda as the central axis of its planning.


3 Aguascalientes, Baja California, Baja California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Colima, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Mexico City, Mexico State, Michoacan, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Le\0xF3n, Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosi, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala, Veracruz and Zacatecas.
programs and actions for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the state level, as well as bringing together different local actors. Due to the differences in size and need between each state, there are major variations in terms of the number of members of each local OSI, as well as which sectors and government agencies are represented and made full voting members. Over 300 municipalities have also created mechanisms for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
3.2 INCORPORATION OF THE SDGs INTO NATIONAL AND SUBNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND BUDGETS
Reform of the Planning Law 
With the goal of guaranteeing the incorporation of the 2030 Agenda into national democratic planning, a reform of the planning law was published in the Official Gazette of the Federation on February 16, 2018. 
The bill proposed by the president and approved by congress includes the three dimensions of sustainable development and the principles of equity, inclusion and nondiscrimination as guides for orienting longterm national development projects. 
The modification of the Planning Law also introduced the concept of sustainability into national planning, established precise criteria for guaranteeing the human right to a healthy environment, and determined the participation of government agencies in the preparation of the National Development Plan (NDP). This reform also strengthened the long-term vision of the NDP, which must now contain:
1. Projections and considerations for 20 years out; 
2. A general overview of the current status of priority issues; 
3. Specific goals and strategies to reach them, taking their interrelations into account;
4. Performance indicators that allow for the evaluation of each objective and goal. 
 
These modifications recognize the relevance and continuity of the 2030 Agenda across presidential administrations through the definition of new criteria for the formulation and instrumentalization of the NDP, the programs that derive from it and the actions of the federal government.
Aligning the Federal Budget  with the SDGs
To increase the amount of information on the opportunities and importance of public investments on development issues, the OPR and the Finance and Public Credit Secretariat (SHCP) have analyzed the federal budget to identify which items contribute to the implementation of each SDG. (Figure 2 and 3) 
This analysis revealed that, in the 2018 federal budget, 80.7% of Budgetary Programs 
FIGURE 2.  
Number of BPs connected to each SDG
FIGURE 3.  
SDGs connected to Budgetary Programs


(BPs) are connected to the 2030 Agenda, while 156 of the 169 SDG indicators are connected to at least one BP.4
After this stage of relating the budget with the SDGs, the effectiveness or impact of public spending on compliance with the 2030 Agenda must be evaluated. This will allow us to reorient public spending to guarantee the implementation of the SDGs.
4 http://www.transparenciapresupuestaria.gob. mx/work/models/PTP/Presupuesto/Documentos_anteriores/mexico_ods.pdf
Analyzing Global Indicators 
The 2030 Agenda's targets and indicators are the central pillar of the process of measuring and monitoring the implementation of the SDGs. In June 2016, INEGI initiated a national mapping process for the 2030 Agenda's 232 global indicators to determine which indicators are applicable in Mexico, what their level of availability and dissagregation is, and which government agencies served as the sources for this information. As a result of this analysis, it was determined that 169 global indicators are applicable in Mexico, while the other 63 indicators either do not apply domestically or require additional regional or global calculations. Of the 169 indicators that apply domestically, 83 are measured periodically (although they present disaggregation challenges), 36 are not measured periodically and 50 are either not measured or do not yet have an established methodology for their measurement. Analyzing alternatives for these indicators represents a significant challenge for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. It will also be important to make progress in the analysis, proposal and collection of other domestic indicators that can contribute to monitoring high-impact policies.
Besides these measures, the 2030 Agenda has also provided a framework for structuring other development goals in different sectors and in cross-sectoral systems. One concrete example is the policy "25 by 25: National Objectives on the Rights of Children and Adolescents," which uses the SDGs to establish national goals for this demographic segment.
Subnational Strategic Planning for the 2030 Agenda 
Apart from the creation of the OSIs, several states have already made significant progress on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Twelve states have aligned their State Development Plans (SDPs) with the SDGs. One of them, the state of Hidalgo, besides aligning its strategic programs with the Agenda, has developed a regulatory framework that includes long-term planning. Mexico City, in turn, has developed a publicly available digital platform for following-up on the General Development Plan for the Capital, which includes monitoring the SDGs and other associated goals. In 2017, the Inter-American Development Bank recognized the Mexico City government's efforts on this platform. Meanwhile, the government of the State of Mexico has requested the support of the United Nations System in designing a State Development Plan that incorporates the 2030 Agenda from its earliest stages.
To make this process easier for state governments, the OPR prepared a publication titled Guide for Incorporating a 2030 Agenda Focus in the Preparation of State and Municipal Development Plans.5
Since June 2017, the INAFED has been implementing an Inter-institutional Program for strengthening the capacities of local governments with the objective of consolidating inclusive, resilient and sustainable municipalities. This program includes a Technical Assistance Model for the implementation of the SDGs at the municipal level, with 17 goals that correspond to the jurisdiction of this level of government. Starting in June 2018, this model will include a Municipal Identification Card for each municipality evaluated.
The INAFED has also raised awareness of the 2030 Agenda among government officials, held organizational manual preparation workshops, aligned Municipal Development Plans with the SDGs and analyzed police and good government proclamations.
5 https://www.gob.mx/agenda2030/documentos/guia-para-incorporar-el-enfoque-de-la-agenda-2030-en-la-elaboracion-de-planes-estatalesy-municipales-de-desarrollo
National Strategy for the 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda
In 2017, the president began development on a National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the first draft of which is expected to be completed in 2018. Its primary objectives are: defining the principal lines of action that could orient the development strategies of present and future governments; identifying existing policies that have a potential impact on compliance with the SDGs; establishing concrete commitments for areas where Mexico still has pending issues; and ensuring continuity and visibility for existing federal policies.
The National Strategy is the result of collaborative efforts between different actors with focuses that are relevant in terms of thematic priorities, challenges and proposed solutions. Its actions include: the analysis of each SDG by federal institutions; the organization of five regional forums with representatives of civil society, the National Institute of Social Development (INDESOL), the Foreign Affairs Secretariat (SRE) and the Mexican Agency for International Development Cooperation (AMEXCID); dialogues with the private sector in conjunction with the SRE and AMEXCID; an online public review process through the gob.mx/participa platform; a Senate forum on a comprehensive approach to the 2030 Agenda; the development of five analyses prepared by the Ibero-American University; and the work on national goals and indicators done by INEGI in collaboration with other actors.
The ultimate goal of the National Strategy is to ensure continuity across administrations, independently of any political changes that may occur, as well as serving as a base for the National Development Plans for the 2018-2024 and 2024-2030 presidential administrations. The National Strategy is being developed with the participation of approximately 50 federal agencies and will be brought for consultation before all sectors of society. Its contents, including challenges and barriers to implementation, will be revised periodically, as will the contributions of all sectors and specific actions that have made an impact.
As part of the development of the National Strategy, 12 units of the federal government were designated as Coordinating Units for each of the 17 SDGs, in accordance with their thematic and sectoral characteristics (the SEMARNAT coordinates 5 SDGs, for example). Each one of these units has been in charge of coordinating the collection and incorporation of inputs into the National Strategy and communicating with the Shared Responsibility Units (UGC) that directly or indirectly affect compliance with each SDG. The SRE is a key agency here, as it serves as a UGC for all 17 SDGs.
One outstanding example of this is the Agrarian, Land and Urban Development Secretariat (SEDATU) --responsible for SDG 11: "Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable"-- which has prepared a matrix for identifying and following up on those initiatives, projects and actions with which the Mexican government has contributed to the implementation of the New Urban Agenda approved at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in October 2016.


FIGURE 4.  
State coordinating units for each SDG



SEDESOL
SEP
SENER


SAGARPA
INMUJERES
SHCP 
SE / STPS


SALUD
SEMARNAT
SE








	SEDESOL  SHCP	
	SEDATU	
	SEMARNAT



SEMARNAT
SEGOB


SEMARNAT


SEMARNAT
AMEXCID





3.3 OWNERSHIP OF THE NEW DEVELOPMENT PARADIGM
Civil Society
CSOs have mobilized to develop channels for dialogue and constructive, effective participatory processes alongside the government, so that the 2030 Agenda can be implemented with a bottom-up focus.
Some of the primary demands of CSOs are for the OSIs to organically incorporate civil society; for the National Strategy to include short, medium and long-term goals, as well as to better include an explicit focus on the promotion and defense of human rights; and to develop and reinforce the SDG capacities of CSOs and public servants at the national, state and municipal levels.
The CSOs that are following up on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda issue very specific proposals and recommendations. The process of preparing the 2018 Voluntary National Review has allowed for many of these to be shared. 
In terms of measurement, monitoring and evaluation systems, this sector has emphasized the problems connected to national indicators and the disaggregation of data. To confront the challenges of redefining and updating indicators, the participation of CSOs in these processes is encouraged. Furthermore, there is a need to integrate precise measurements into the Agenda's official monitoring, including a focus on human rights, as well as a consideration of inequality gaps associated with each goal. CSOs have also insisted on the need for Mexico to participate in the definition of regional indicators.
In terms of inclusion, CSOs mentioned the importance of continuous participation and feedback in the process of designing, implementing and following up on the 2030 Agenda, as well as guaranteeing the participation of a larger number of CSOs and citizens and strengthening the capacities of organizations that work with vulnerable populations. They have identified sensitive areas in the formalization of opportune and participatory mechanisms for implementing and following up on global and regional agendas that would allow for the promotion of bottom-up policies. Regarding the National Strategy, an immediate need has been identified for its final design to include proper mechanisms that allow for the effective participation of civil society. 
In terms of CSOs' participation in the National Council, they underscored the need to increase the proportion of representation of civil society in the different working groups; to have committees that are focused on the 2030 Agenda's cross-sectoral issues; and to ensure that the participation criteria for these committees is based on the experience or impact of participating organizations.
Representatives of civil society have also recognized the mechanisms used by the Foreign Affairs Secretariat to jointly develop the country's position at international follow-up forums as being good practices. Some organizations mentioned the need to use public resources to ensure that participation is nondiscriminatory. 
As illustrations of the possible cooperation between civil society and the government, the work done for the preparation of the 2016-2030 National Strategy and Action Plan on Mexican Biodiversity (Enbiomex) under the oversight of the Mexican Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity (CONABIO) and the work on the National Strategy for the Prevention of Teen Pregnancy (ENAPEA) show the importance of using effective participation mechanisms to bring together different sectors of society.
One lesson learned through the recent talks between the government and civil society has been the need to establish a new relationship between these actors that does not just focus on providing information, but instead truly encourages political dialogue and impact.6
CSOs have also insisted on the importance of promoting a critical, active and multi-actor adoption of the 2030 Agenda. One important challenge has been the execution of a nationwide awareness campaign directed at the entire population, with an em-
6 Mexico has created a legal framework that serves as a model for government-civil society relations. The Federal Law on Promoting the Activities of Civil Society Organizations (LFFAROSC) recognizes the contributions of civil society organizations to the public interest and the country's development. Furthermore, this law brings together those federal agencies that act as liaisons with civil society to define the policies for promoting the activities of CSOs, preparing reports on these actions, providing federal grants to CSOs and operating the Federal CSO Registry.
phasis on public servants, CSOs and high school students.
The multi-stakeholder initiatives aimed at strengthening the adoption of the 2030 Agenda by the citizenry have included the 2016-17 training sessions carried out through the Social Co-Investment Project. These sessions were held in 10 states across the country during regional meetings organized by INDESOL that drew over 1,500 organizations. Another initiative was the 2016-17 Technologies for the Greater Good project, which involved training over 500 CSOs in eight states across Mexico on the 2030 Agenda and volunteerships for development, sharing technological tools offered by allies to build different capacities. In April 2018, the app Voluntariado Generaci\0xF3n 2030 was launched, which was designed and promoted under the framework of an alliance for sustainable development between different sectors, bringing CSOs and the government together with volunteers who are interested in contributing to reaching the SDGs. The SRE's Department of Outreach to Civil Society Organizations (DGVOSC) has also organized conferences and seminars on the role of civil society in defining and adopting the 2030 Agenda. These activities culminated in the publication of the book titled Citizen Diplomacy and Sustainable Development in Mexico.7
In terms of youth participation and the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, one important policy has been the creation of the Hos-
7 Luz Elena Banos Rivas (ed.), Diplomacia Ciudadana y Desarrollo Sostenible en Mexico, Mexico City, Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores, 2017, available at: www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/ attachment/file/294560/Diplomacia_ciudadana_y_desarrollo_sostenible_en_M_xico.pdf
pital of Emotions; this project provides mental health services to young people between the ages of 12 and 29. The initiative was born out of the results of the organization My World 2030: The United Nations Survey for a Better World, as well as a study of other youth trends. My World Mexico has also mobilized individuals and organizations for the implementation, monitoring, and dissemination of the 2030 Agenda in 27 states.
As part of the youth adoption of the 2030 Agenda at the subnational level, the Mexican Youth Institute (IMJUVE), in collaboration with several universities and state governments, created the Youth for SDGs project. Between 2017 and June 2018, this project has promoted awareness of the SDGs and volunteerships for development involving over 1,000 young people in nine states across Mexico. The state government of Morelos is also implementing a project known as Generation 2030, which is training 30 young volunteer leaders on SDG issues, comprehensive approaches, volunteership and methods of influencing policy. Through these leaders, around 900 young people have been mobilized across the state, sharing their knowledge with their peers. Finally, the state government of Puebla, in collaboration with other sectors, organized the Re-Design Puebla Social Innovation Hackathon, a technology fair that promoted initiatives from young people aimed at implementing the 2030 Agenda at the subnational level.
To encourage the participation of young people in the future, IMJUVE has prepared a 


proposal to incorporate the youth perspective on the 2030 Agenda in a comprehensive manner. There is currently a nationwide communication plan to inform young people of the actions that the government and other interested actors are undertaking with regards to SDG implementation.
Private Sector
The Mexican government has established different channels of communication with the private sector, including the Alliance for Sustainability (AxS) launched by AMEXCID, as well as a permanent dialogue with the Business Coordinating Council (CCE) and its members. The over 50 members of the AxS --which include companies, foundations and business associations-- have created five working groups on strategic areas of the 2030 Agenda: Affortable and Clean Energy; Sustainable Cities and Communities; Responsible Production and Consumption; Education; and Social Inclusion. Each working group established an action plan for 2017 and 2018 that identified the shared needs of their business models and the SDGs with the goal of promoting international cooperation projects that confront these challenges. The AxS and the CCE have also contributed to the National Strategy with proposals for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Academic and Scientific Community
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda requires a strong academic, technical and scientific component to ensure that decision makers promote consistent, viable and evidence-based policies.
In Mexico, communication with the academic and scientific community regarding the implementation of the 2030 Agenda has occurred through various channels. A group of researchers coordinated by the Ibero-American University, for example, has prepared policy proposals for each of the five pillars of the 2030 Agenda (people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnerships). These documents will be submitted for discussion and consideration to the National Council's working groups. These five documents present an overview of the status of each pillar in Mexico and describe policies from around the world that have worked to confront obstacles in each area, as well as identifying 24 axes of solutions and 85 specific policies that can be applied to confront these challenges.
In 2018, the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) will be launched in Mexico, which will have three lines of action: 1) Strengthening dialogue and serving as a bridge between academia and the public sector; 2) Generating technological solutions that support sustainable development; and 3) Promoting education on sustainability issues and awareness of the 2030 Agenda. To ensure the impact of this network, it will also participate in the National Council. As the network will have a national scope, the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) will be in charge of coordinating the work of the SDSN Mexico.
Parallel to this development, important progress has been made in terms of academia's contributions to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. The National Public Policy Lab (LNPP) of the 
Center for Research and Teaching in Economics (CIDE), with the support of CitiBanamex and in collaboration with the Mario Molina Center and the state government of Guanajuato, has completed a subnational mapping of SDG indicators that covers 59 metropolitan areas and Mexico's 32 states. This will allow comparisons to be made and experiences to be shared in the process of confronting shared challenges (see Appendix 2).
Furthermore, INFONAVIT's Center for Sustainable Development Research worked on the Housing and SDGs in Mexico Project. This initiative describes the role of housing as the unifying element of development and urban prosperity under the framework of the New Urban Agenda approved at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador in 2016.
International Cooperation Agencies and Funds
Many bilateral and multilateral international cooperation agencies have collaborated on the implementation of the SDGs in Mexico. In accordance with current international cooperation programs and laws, the 2030 Agenda has provided international cooperation agencies with a framework for structuring their financial, technical and analytic support and aligning it with the government's development objectives and strategies. This support is not only directed to federal institutions and local governments, but also universities, the private sector and representatives of civil society.
International cooperation has focused on issues including but not limited to the adoption and institutionalization of the 2030 Agenda and its application to different policy cycles.
International cooperation agencies have also worked with the government to create tools to measure progress on the implementation of the SDGs. The City Prosperity Initiative (CPI) used by INFONAVIT to measure urban prosperity, for example, was developed with international support. These agencies, in conjunction with a variety of CSOs, have also contributed to the definition of national indicators for SDG 16 through a study of the Mexican context that identified problems related to this goal.
Regarding the institutionalization of the 2030 Agenda, several agencies have worked with the authorities to operationalize and strengthen national systems, spaces and mechanisms, such as the National Council for the 2030 Agenda. Different international cooperation agencies have also organized regional dialogues and training sessions to raise awareness of the 2030 Agenda among CSOs and young people.
Political Parties
In a democratic country like Mexico, which has a highly competitive electoral environment, the continuity of the 2030 Agenda requires different political forces to commit to its principles and objectives.
Fortunately, in the current electoral cycle, Mexico's main political parties and coalitions have come out in favor of the 2030 Agenda in their position papers and electoral platforms. For example, in the document titled Notes for an Administrative Program, the coalition of the National Action Party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution and the Citizens' Movement mentions the 2030 Agenda and the importance of reducing inequality within and among countries.8
The Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), in turn, has incorporated the 2030 Agenda and the focus on sustainable development into the new version of its Statement of Principles,9 Action Program,10 Bylaws11 and Vision of the Future.12
The coalition of the Labor Party (PT), the National Renewal Movement (MORENA) 
and the Social Encounter Party (PES) has also referenced the 2030 Agenda in the document National Project 2018-2024."13
3.4 TO LEAVE NO ONE BEHIND
"Leaving no one behind" represents a major challenge. While the population as a whole enjoys a better standard of living than in
8 http://repositoriodocumental.ine.mx/xmlui/bitstream/handle/123456789/94343/CG2ex 
201712-22-rp-5.1-a3.pdf 
9 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/
DeclaraciondePrincipios2017.pdf
10 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/ProgramadeAccion2017.pdf
11 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/Estatutos2017.pdf
12 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/VisiondeFuturo2017.pdf
13 "Proyecto de Naci\0xF3n 2018-2024", 2017, available at: https://drive.google.com/file/d/11B0aN 
BuVpHB7GDVXhCKdYvVKw7D7Ta-x/view
previous years, it is important to ensure that all groups can exercise their rights, including rural populations, indigenous peoples, Afro-Mexicans, senior citizens, children and adolescents, people with disabilities, the LGBTI community, migrants and refugees. For example, only 46.5% of young people with disabilities go to school (INEGI, 2014), there is a salary gap of 5.1% between women and men (ENOE, 2017), 58.2% of the rural population is below the poverty line and, of a total indigenous population of 12 million, 71.9% are poor or extremely poor (CONEVAL, 2016).
To address these challenges and protect the human rights of vulnerable populations, Mexico has promoted institutional measures that range from constitutional reforms to specific projects, such as the Mexican Norm NMX-R-025-SCFI-2015 on Labor Equality and Non-Discrimination. These actions reaffirm the country's desire and political commitment to dismantle the structures that produce and reproduce dynamics of exclusion, segregation, discrimination and underrepresentation, as with other forms of social, economic and environmental injustice.





IV. REVIEW OF GOALS  (HLPF THEMATIC REVIEW)


In Mexico, we have an analysis for each SDG that utilizes a set of priority national goals and their associated indicators. This information is contained in the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda, which has the objective of consulting different sectors and orienting future actions by starting from a solid base of shared information. In the following pages of the VNR, there is relevant information for each SDG, divided into advances, emblematic actions and challenges. The information contained in these sections derives from the analyses of each SDG that were conducted by federal agencies during the design of the National Strategy. Each SDG also includes boxes with complementary positions provided independently by other actors from civil society and the United Nations System.
This section is organized into four parts. The first three belong to the thematic focuses of the 2018 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (Transformation towards sustainable and resilient societies: 
SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12, 15), the 2019 High-Level Political Forum (Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality: SDGs 4, 8, 10, 13, 16) and the 2017 High-Level Political Forum (Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world: SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14). The last section is dedicated to partnerships and means for implementing the Agenda (SDG 17).
4.1 TRANSFORMATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AND RESILIENT SOCIETIES: SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12, 15
SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all.
Mexico faces major challenges in terms of efficient and sustainable water use, in the preservation of ecosystems that are essential to the water cycle and in the supply of quality services to the entire population.


ADVANCES
 Running water coverage at the national level was 94.5% in 2015 (CONAGUA, 2017) and 95.3% of the population has continuous access to a source of water (INEGI, 2015).
 96.97% of the water supply is disinfected (CONAGUA, 2017).
 93.6% of the population living in private dwellings has drainage (INEGI, 2016).
 87.2% of indigenous households in Mexico have potable running water and 73.1% have drainage (CDI, 2015). 
 Current hydraulic infrastructure allows for the treatment of 63% of municipal wastewater (CONAGUA, 2018).
 32.8% of wastewater from the industrial sector is treated (CONAGUA, 2017).
 Mexico is the country with second highest number of wetlands at 6,331; 142 of these are listed on the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (CONAGUA, 2017).
 The volume of Official Development Assistance that Mexico receives from the OECD for water and sanitation is 120.8 million dollars (OECD, 2016).


 EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The National Rainwater Collection and Green Technology in Rural Areas Program (PROCAPTAR), operated by the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), contributes to expanding coverage of water and sanitation services.
 The National Water Reserves Program covers 295 watersheds through 13 decrees, in excess of the goals for this administration.
 CONAGUA's National Water Quality Monitoring Network operates at 5,000 sites.
 The National Water Reserves Program seeks to ensure water levels or minimum volumes in order to protect the environment and conserve ecosystems associated with surface water. Surface water reserves have also been established for sustainable use or conservation.
 The Payment for Ecosystem Services 
Program, operated by the National Forest Commission (CONAFOR), supports conservation practices and prevents rezoning; the National Wetland Inventory surveys, classifies and evaluates wetlands for their protection, restoration and use.
 The CONAGUA-led Comprehensive Water and Sanitation Agency Development Plan (PRODI) makes investments that allow these agencies to be more efficient and sustainable.
 The Indigenous Infrastructure Program (PROII-CDI) has undertaken actions to fight the underdevelopment of indigenous communities in terms of basic infrastructure (potable water, drainage and sanitation).
CHALLENGES 
 Achieving a rate of zero overexploitation of aquifers and watersheds and ecological degradation of rivers, taking the impact of climate change into account.
 Providing the human, material and budgetary resources needed to ensure the sustainability of the water supply, particularly for human consumption.
 Guaranteeing the conservation of ecosystems that depend on water.
 Reducing industrial pollution, particularly from the mining and hydrocarbon industries, as well as the over-concession of the nation's water.
 Improving the regulation of potable water and sanitation services at the municipal level.
 Improving hydraulic infrastructure to meet the country's growing needs, particularly in terms of wastewater treatment and the quality of drainage services in rural communities.
 Providing access to potable water, sanitation and hygiene services to indigenous, Afro-Mexican, suburban and rural communities.
 Increasing the reuse of water in industry and municipal services and the practice of aquifer recharging. 
BOX 1:  
Complementary Positions for SDG 6 Expressed in the Review Process14
 The potable water coverage that is currently measured does not include the three variables needed to meet the requirements of Indicator 6.1 for SDG 6: that water must be free of pollutants, that it must be accessible within dwellings or businesses and that it must be available when needed. Taking this into account, potable water access is estimated to be only slightly over 40% (WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program).
 All hydraulic infrastructure for the treatment of municipal wastewater should be operational, and all wastewater should be collected.
 Although it has been reported that 98% of the water supply is disinfected, it should be guaranteed that it is free from pollutants. In rural communities, 20% of water contains fluorides, nitrates or arsenic and 40% contains some sort of contamination.
 Access to sewage or wastewater collection systems does not guarantee that this wastewater is treated, as it could be then released into the public water supply, a septic tank, drainage ditches or rivers, lakes or seas (PAS Indicator, National Catalog of Indicators, CONAGUA, 2016).
 Exploration and exploitation of unconventional hydrocarbons should be conducted in a way that avoids the consumption and contamination of millions of liters of water.
 Laws and regulations on environmental responsibility should effectively dissuade potential infringers from committing environmental crimes instead of simply establishing mechanisms allowing them to pay to pollute.
 It is important to strengthen the criteria for aligning the budget with the SDGs so that the BPs effectively respond to precise criteria, as is the case for SDG 6.
 It is important to have information on hygiene criteria, including access to water and soap for washing hands.
 It is important to pass a General Water Law to guarantee the human right to water and sanitation, as has been recognized in Article 4 of the Mexican Constitution since February 2012.
 The exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons should not jeopardize the availability of water needed to guarantee the human right to water.
 The transparency of information on the use and volume of underground water concessions should be strengthened.
 13.4% of children and adolescents lack access to water and sanitation in their homes and schools (CONEVAL, 2015).
 Mexico needs to secure its federal spending on water and sanitation (see 2016, 2017 and 2018 Federal Budgets). Between 2016 and 2017, this 


spending reduction was over 37%.
48





SDG 7: EnSurE accESS to afforDablE, rEliablE, SuStainablE anD moDErn  EnErGy for all. 
Mexico is a country with a high degree of electricity coverage, but challenges remain in isolated rural areas. Electricity is primarily generated through fossil fuels, although the percentage of clean energy has increased and it is expected that the budget for this sector will double over the next five years.
ADVANCES
 98.6% of the population has access to electricity (CFE, 2016).
 95.6% of indigenous households have electricity (CDI, 2015).
 20% of the country's electricity comes from a clean source (SENER, 2016).
 Energy intensity fell by 5% between 2012 and 2016, which means that less energy is needed to produce each peso of the GDP (SENER, 2017).
From 2013 to 2015, 1.084 billion pesos were invested in research and development on sustainable energy (SENER, 2018).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 In terms of clean energy, the Electrical Industry Law, the Geothermal Law, the Energy Transition Law and the Biofuel Promotion and Development Law promote and regulate the sustainable development of the electric industry. 
 Clean Energy Certificates accredit the production of a quantity of electricity produced from sustainable sources.
 The Energy Management System establishes methods and processes for improving energy efficiency.
 The National Atlas of Areas with High Energy and Renewable Energy Potential promotes the use of renewable energy resources.
 The launch of the Natural Gas Market has contributed to the creation of an energy market based on the reliable and accessible supply of hydrocarbons.
 In 2018, Mexico was admitted to the International Energy Agency (the first and, to date, only member from Latin America and the Caribbean).
CHALLENGES
 Providing basic energy services to all populations. 
 Having a 100% reliable census of the population that lacks electricity.
Reducing dependence on fossil fuels, which currently represent 79.7% of the electricity generated domestically.
 Ensuring that the Energy Transition Law is tied to the federal budget and modifying current legislation that prevents energy companies from working on energy efficiency for federal institutions. 
 Expanding the executive abilities of the National Commission for Energy Efficiency and promoting investments in energy efficiency through changes to power rates.
 Setting a fixed budget for investments in energy efficiency.


SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.
In Mexico, over three quarters of the population lives in urban areas, the majority of which face many obstacles to implementing inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable urban development plans.
ADVANCES
 98% of municipalities have an urban development plan, but 84% of them have not been implemented or updated or are otherwise deficient (SEDATU). 
 In 2015, 62.9% of Mexico's population lived in cities with over 15,000 inhabitants and 77% in cities with more than 2,500 inhabitants (INEGI, 2016).
 56% of residences are located in urban areas (SEDATU/CONAVI, 2012).
 50% of dwellings already meet the necessary quality standards (SEDATU/CONAVI).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The incorporation of the Right to the City into zoning and urban development legislation.
 The launch of the Sustainable Cities Network, whose goal is to reinforce actions at the institutional and community levels that are aimed at environmental protection and social development.
Updates to urban development plans now include a focus on urban sustainability.
 The Regional Development Plans for Northern, Central and South-Southeastern Mexico have the goal of reinvigorating regional development.
 The General Human Settlement, Zoning and Urban Development Law has set the groundwork for a national zoning strategy.
 The Sustainable Cities Network is a strategy for handling solid waste, restoring public spaces and building housing that makes use of green technology.
 INFONAVIT's Green Mortgage Program grants credits for dwellings that utilize green technology to save water, electricity and gas.
 The Areas Voluntarily Destined for Conservation Initiative of the National Commission on Natural Protected Areas (CONANP) reinforces the shared responsibility of civil society and the private sector in protecting natural areas.
 The Natural Disaster Risk Reduction Program and the Urban Resilience Guide, designed by SEDATU, contribute to safe and resilient development in vulnerable regions of southeastern Mexico through capacity building. 
CHALLENGES
 Providing the financing needed for the development of urban infrastructure at the local level in a context of unplanned urban growth, environmental degradation and vulnerability 


to natural disasters.
52


 Reducing the vulnerability of communities to violence and crime in certain areas.
 Overcoming obstacles to the regularization of land rights in rural areas.
 Improving the quality of public transportation in Mexican cities to reduce its economic, environmental and social costs, which primarily affect vulnerable populations. There are efficiency, quality and safety challenges to achieving this.





SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.
Mexico has made important advances in the design of policies to promote sustainable consumption and production, but progress in terms of transforming these systems has been very limited and major changes are needed.
ADVANCES
 24% of Mexico's 66 million hectares of forests and jungles are managed under the sustainable forest management paradigm (CONAFOR, 2017).
 Mexico is the country with the fifth highest use of cardboard and paper secondary fibers.
 In 2017, 0.77% of the federal budget for administrative materials and official documents and articles was spent on sustainable purchases.
 It is estimated that 34.5% of the country's total food production is wasted (over 20 million pounds of foodstuffs). This wasted food would be enough to feed 7.4 million Mexicans (World Bank, 2017).
 Approximately 9.6% of the 42.9 million tons of solid waste generated in Mexico's cities is recycled each year (SEMARNAT, 2010).
 70% of urban solid waste ends up in landfills (INEGI, 2016).
 Investments in nature tourism, ecotourism and adventure tourism added up to 146 billion pesos (SHCP, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The National Sustainable Production and Consumption Policy promotes sustainable production and consumption patterns for goods and services through a variety of policy tools.
 Mexico, through SEMARNAT, forms part of a working group addressing food waste. This initiative was created under the framework of the North American Commission for Environmental Cooperation and is supported by the World Bank and Worldwide Responsible Accredited Production (WRAP). 
 Mexico has legislation on the comprehensive management of solid waste, solid waste management plans and decentralized Comprehensive Urban Solid Waste Management Agencies. 
 The National Chemical Substances Profile shows the country's infrastructure for the management of waste and other substances.
 The National Management Plan for Vehicles at the End of their Useful Life and the analog television collection program contribute to the proper management of dangerous substances.
 Legislative reforms on public purchases have been made that include sustainability criteria, such as (1) modifications to Article 14 of the Law on Public Sector Acquisitions, Leases and Services and Article 34 of the General Law on Equality Between Women and Men, which incorporates gender equality provisions; and (2) the Energy Transition Law, which regulates sustainable electricity use.
 Mexico has a legal framework that ensures the sustainable use of energy and water resources and environmental safeguards in acquisitions, leases and other services contracted by the federal government.
CHALLENGES
 Ensuring compatibility in the national legal framework for public purchases between the clauses on sustainability and other criteria.
 Eliminating, reforming or transforming incentives for the use of fuels that result in the deterioration of natural resources and biodiversity.
 Improving infrastructure for the transportation, storage and commercialization of food to reduce waste in the post-harvest period.
 Improving food management at strategic points of the production chain, with some food being rediverted to food banks.
 Strengthening environmental legislation on chemical substances and establishing regulatory guidelines for the prevention and mitigation of the environmental side effects of insecticides, fertilizers and other toxic substances. 
 Promoting the adoption of sustainability certificates in the tourism sector.


SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss. 
Mexico is a megadiverse country in which almost 17% of its land surface is protected through a variety of conservation methods. It also has programs to fight desertification, reduce deforestation and conserve species.
ADVANCES
 The Natural Protected Areas (ANP) System protects 10.8% of the country's land surface (CONANP, 2017). In total, 16.29% of the country's land surface is protected through systems of protected areas and other conservation methods (SEMARNAT, 2018).
 23.6 million hectares are managed using sustainable forestry practices 
(CONAFOR, 2017) and 337,735 
hectares of commercially logged forests are managed under the sustainability criteria established between 2000 and 2017 (CONAFOR, 2017).
 2.6 million hectares of forest ecosystems are covered by the Payment for Ecosystem Services Program (CONAFOR, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 Mexico has National Strategies on the Reduction of Emissions due to Deforestation and Forest Degrada-
tion, on Mexican Biodiversity, on Sustainable Forest Management and on Sustainable Land Management.
 The ANP system provides protection for the country's terrestrial surface.
 The Payment for Ecosystem Services Program has been addressing the problem of deforestation since 2003.
 The Action Program to Fight Desertification in Mexico seeks to slow and stop the advance of desertification, promote productivity in arid regions and improve the quality of life of their residents. There is also a Sustainable 
Land Management Program that seeks to improve terrestrial ecosystems.
 SAGARPA's Agriculture Promotion Program prevents changes to land use patterns in forest areas.
 CONANP's Species Conservation Action Program (PACE) focuses conservation efforts for 45 endangered species.
CHALLENGES
 Providing proper financial resources and legislation for the protection and management of ecosystems and biodiversity.
 Passing domestic legislation to properly implement the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS) to the Convention on Biological Diversity
 Ensuring policy consistency at the federal, state and municipal levels and transparency regarding practices of productive and extractive industries.
 Slowing the change of land use patterns due to agriculture and ranching.
 Reducing the overexploitation of lumber and non-lumber forest products, as well as illegal trafficking of forest resources.
 Developing capacities and methodologies to measure the economic value of natural goods and services.
 Creating opportunities to attract financing for Mexico's national and international commitments under this SDG, as well as promoting projects that make sustainable use of the country's biodiversity.
4.2 EMPOWERING PEOPLE AND ENSURING INCLUSIVENESS AND EQUALITY: SDGs 4, 8, 10, 13, 16
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. 
In Mexico, ensuring access to child development services, improving the physical infrastructure of educational facilities, guaranteeing quality education (particularly for vulnerable populations) and harmonizing the education system with the demands of the labor market, among other measures, are essential elements for meeting this goal.
ADVANCES
 In the 2015-16 school year, the percentage of students who began elementary school with at least one year of preschool was 91.9% (SEP).
 In the 2015-16 school year, the gross attendance ratio (on-site and distance learning) was 78.7% (SEP). 
 78.2% of the school age population (from 3 to 23 years of age) is enrolled in the National Education System (2015-16 school year, SEP).
 70.5% of ninth grade students were placed at the elemental knowledge level or higher of the Language and Communication section of the standardized test applied under the National Plan for the Evaluation of Learning (PLANEA/SEP, 2015).
 46.5% of disabled children, adolescents and young adults (3 to 29 years of age) go to school (SEP, CONADIS).
 31.4% of young people and adults have knowledge of information and communications technology (INEGI, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The New Educational Model, launched in 2017, is structured around five axes: curricular planning, schools at the centre of the educational model, teacher training, inclusion and equity and governance of the education system.
 The Schools at ONE HUNDRED PERCENT Program, operated by the National Educational Infrastructure Institute (INIFED), has improved the physical infrastructure of more than 33,000 educational facilities across the country.
 The SEP's Full Time Schools Program has the objective of getting the most out of the time available for academic, athletic and cultural development, as well as freeing time for parents that had been used for raising their children so it can be dedicated to other activities, particularly remunerated work.
 The SEP's Schools at the Center Strategy has the goal of improving the quality of education.
 The National Plan for the Evaluation of Learning (PLANEA) has the goal of measuring the extent to which students have mastered a set of essential skills in the fields of language, communication and mathematics.
 The INEE's Professional Teaching Service is a mechanism that guarantees teachers to have the proper knowledge and skills for their job.
 The SEP's Digital Inclusion Program, part of the Learning 2.0 strategy (@ prende 2.0), seeks to develop digital skills and computational thinking of students and teaching staff. 
CHALLENGES
 Ensuring that efforts to improve the education system are not just concentrated on preschool education, but on early education as part of an inter-institutional policy that affirms the right of all children to quality education.
 Continuing and expanding physical improvements to educational infrastructure.
 Incorporating children and adolescents with special needs into the education system, as well as those belonging to indigenous or Afro-Mexican communities and those who live in isolated areas.
 Increasing the supply of quality education, particularly at the high school and college levels, and reducing the dropout rate.


BOX 5:  
Complementary Positions for SDG 4 Expressed in the Review Process18
 14.9% of children and adolescents do not attend school; this percentage rises to 16.2% if we only look at adolescents, that is, nearly 2.2 million people between the ages of 12 and 17.
 82.2% of children between 36 and 59 months of age developed properly in at least three of the following four categories: literacy-numerical ability, physical development, social and emotional development and domination of learning (ENIM, 2015).
 The dropout rate during the 201617 school year was 0.4% in elementary school, 3.9% in middle school and 11.8% in high school.
 One major challenge is the inclusion of a gendered approach in the strategy used to lower the high school dropout rate, as at this level, girls drop out at a higher rate than boys do.
 One out of every four children between the ages of 3 and 5 does not attend preschool. 
 Five out of every ten students have not learned the necessary lessons in language and communication to a satisfactory degree, which rises to six out of every ten for mathematics.
 The average level of education among the indigenous population is elementary school, which rises to middle school in the rest of the country.
 76.6% of children and adolescents do not have access to internet.
 In 2015, one third of teachers did not have study plans and programs and one fourth of teachers did not have enough textbooks for their students (INEE).
 Two out of every three schools report that they have at least one student with special needs, while only 30% have staff trained to meet their needs (INEE, 2016).
 Enrollment in preschool needs to be increased and a comprehensive early education policy needs to be developed that recognizes and strengthens models of community intervention.
 It is a challenge to ensure a supply of teachers with initial and continuing education that contributes to the development of the knowledge and skills needed to foster positive behavior and well-being in children and adolescents.
 The Health in Your School Program needs to be strengthened, as health and education are the two pillars for enjoying a full life.
 A life cycle approach needs to be incorporated into the design of educational programs, strategies and policies.
18 This box includes information suggested by the United Nations System and a variety of CSOs that deepens the discussion on this issue. Contributors are responsible for this information.


SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all. 
In Mexico, productivity and access to financial services have increased and the unemployment rate has remained low. Despite this progress, Mexico faces many major challenges to ensuring full, productive and decent employment for all.
ADVANCES
 Between 2013 and 2017, the Mexican economy grew in real terms at an average annual rate of 2.4% (UPEHP, 2018).
 In 2017, the contribution of different economic sectors to the GDP was as follows: primary, 3.3%; secondary, 30.9%; and tertiary, 65.7% (INEGI, 2017). 
 55.8% of the population does not have social security (CONEVAL, 2016).
 According to data from the National Occupation and Employment Study (INEGI), the unemployment rate in 2017 was 3.44% and the percentage of people working in the informal economy was 57%.
 The unemployment rate for young people was 6.1% (ENOE-INEGI, 2017).
 The Labor Force Participation Rate for women was 43% (ENOE-INEGI, 2017).
 The Labor Force Participation Rate for people with disabilities was 39.1% in 2014 (ENADID-INEGI, 2014). 
 52.1 million people have access to financial services (ENIF, 2015)
 22.5% of micro-enterprise owners stated that they were unable to expand due to a lack of credit (ENAPROCE, 2014).
 16% of International Development Cooperation projects are aimed at supporting commerce (AMEXCID, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The National Productivity Committee (CNP) is a consultative body whose purpose is to identify policies and actions that will increase productivity, by working holistically, sectorally and regionally.
 The STPS's National Employment Service (SNE) provides free assistance to people looking for work through job leads and economic or in-kind support for job training or self-employment.
 Special Economic Zones (SEZs) have the goal of closing regional gaps by taking advantage of the natural and logistical advantages of a geographic area.
 The STPS's Workplace Human Trafficking Prevention and Detection Inspection Protocol establishes mechanisms allowing workplace inspectors to act to prevent, detect and eradicate human trafficking.
 IMJUVE's Youth Employment Strategy has the goal of coordinating, connecting and bringing together actors in the job market to provide better job opportunities for the country's young people.
 The STPS's Workplace Health and Safety Self-Management Program encourages businesses to ensure safe and hygienic workplaces.
 Mexican Norm NMX-R-025-SCFI-2015 on Labor Equality and Non-Discrimination incorporates the principle of non-discrimination into job recruitment procedures. It also closes the pay gap, along with other measures aimed at preventing and addressing workplace violence.
 The Tourism Connection Strategy promotes economic growth through credit incentives such as Improve Your Hotel and Improve Your Restaurant.
CHALLENGES 
 Closing the pay gap and incorporating a gender perspective into social programs.
 Creating jobs and ensuring the longterm financial sustainability of social programs.
 Democratizing and expanding access to financial services.
 Raising the minimum wage.
 Consolidating a tax system that generates enough revenue to finance a comprehensive economic development policy.
 Incorporating women, including transgender women, into economic activities from which they have traditionally been excluded.
 Guaranteeing that people with disabilities enjoy equal opportunities on the job market.
 Promoting training, resources and financing for micro-entrepreneurs and other sectors of the economy in accordance with their needs.
SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries. 
Mexico is among the 25% of countries with the highest levels of inequality in the world. It is therefore vital to reduce inequalities between both individuals and regions of the country so that no one is left behind. This means getting rid of discriminatory laws, regulations and practices and questioning and changing structures that contribute to the permanence and reproduction of inequalities.
ADVANCES
 The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) accumulated between Q1/2013 and Q1/2018 was 181.793 billion dollars (SE).
 The national GINI coefficient is 0.498 (CONEVAL, 2016). 
 As of December 2017, the income needed for a minimum standard of living was 1,491.65 pesos per month (CONEVAL, 2017). 
 There is a pay gap between women and men of 5.1% (ENOE, 2017).
 Domestic financing of the private sector represents 34.89% of GDP (SHCP, 2018). 
 Mexico receives 7.8 billion dollars in Official Development Assistance and Other Official Flows (OECD, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The tax reform has promoted a system of progressive taxation.
 The Tax Incorporation Regime (RIF) seeks out workers in the informal economy and aims to formalize their jobs, giving them access to insurance, housing, pension and credit benefits.
 SEZs have been created to encourage sustainable regional economic growth that reduces poverty, increases access to basic services and expands opportunities for healthy, productive lives.
 SEDESOL's National Inclusion Strategy (ENI) has the goal of improving access to social services and reducing deficiencies.
 In 2017, the Technical Group for the Incorporation of a Gender Perspective into Aid and Protection Policies for Migrant Women was created as part of the Interior Secretariat's Council on Immigration Policy. 
 Comprehensive Border Traffic Assistance Centers have been opened in Huixtla, Catazaja and Trinitaria, Chiapas, as have mobile social programs in municipalities along the southern border.
 Regional Visitor and Border Worker cards have been issued to immigrants from Guatemala and Belize who wish to work in one of the states along the southern border.
 SEGOB and SRE's We Are Mexicans Strategy establishes comprehensive support measures for a safe, dignified return for deported Mexicans.


CHALLENGES
 Reducing inequalities in social infrastructure and promoting the economic integration of the country's most underdeveloped regions through an approach based on universal social rights.
 Strengthening the stability of the nation's financial system when faced with shocks arising from global markets.
 Ensuring financial stability of the social security and pension systems, as well as eradicating structural discrimination against senior citizens. 
 Creating formal mechanisms that take advantage of the capacity of young migrants to act as agents of social change and economic development.





SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.
Mexico is a country that is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. It has formalized its adherence to the Paris Agreement and is carrying out a series of mitigation and adaptation measures. To fully comply with its national and international commitments on climate change, it must consolidate a green and inclusive economy that depends less and less on fossil fuels and that reverses trends towards rising emissions.
ADVANCES
 Casualties during extreme weather events have fallen, although they have caused an annual average of 186 deaths between 2000 and 2014 (CENAPRED).
 Mexico emits 683 million tons of carbon dioxide (INECC, 2015), which correspond to the consumption of fossil fuels in the transportation of people and merchandise (26.2%), electricity generation (19%) and industrial processes (17.3%).
 There were 125,000 tons of black carbon emissions in 2016 (BUR, INECC, 2016).
 Of Mexico's 2,456 municipalities, 1,071 are not considered highly vulnerable to or at high risk of extreme weather events (PECC, 2014).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The National Greenhouse Gases and Compounds Emissions Inventory allows the country to analyze its emissions by emission source.
 The National Emissions Registry (RENE) compiles information on industrial emissions of greenhouse gases and compounds.
 A tax on fossil fuel imports and sales (carbon tax) contributes to reducing carbon emissions.
 Regulations for the launch of an emissions trading or carbon market system.
 The National Climate Change Vulnerability Atlas is a structured, systematic collection of maps that shows the country's vulnerability to climate change.
 The National Risk Atlas identifies the areas that are at the highest risk of extreme weather events.
 Ecological zoning programs include criteria for mitigating or adapting to the effects of climate change.
 The 2014-18 Special Climate Change Program contributes to national planning in the face of the effects of climate change.
 Mexico is taking steps to restore and reforest coastal wetlands.
 Climate Change Adaptation Programs in Natural Protected Areas (ANPs) provide information that orients adaptation measures.
 The National Strategy for Reducing Emissions due to Deforestation and Degradation helps mitigate climate change.
 The General Climate Change Law was reformed in April 2018 to adapt it to the Paris Agreement.
 Mexico's targets for climate change mitigation are to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 22% and shortlived air pollutants by 51% by 2030.
 The National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT) and the National Ecology and Climate Change Institute (INECC) have created the Mexican Climate Change Report, which compiles a large part of the information generated on climate change over the last two decades.
Challenges
 Updating and consolidating instruments and regulations to meet the country's commitments in terms of mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change.
 Universalizing the focus on environmental protection among all levels of government.
 Launching Mexico's Emissions Trading System.
 Financing the measures needed to create a low-carbon economy. A $120-billion-dollar investment is needed over a 15-year period.
 Reducing the country's dependence on fossil fuels. Current emissions trends could make it difficult to meet our commitments under the Paris Agreement.
 Understanding, quantifying and reporting on the effects of climate change.
SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
Mexico has an institutional architecture based around the defense of human rights, the eradication of violence, transparency and support for victims, among other issues. Nevertheless, the country faces many challenges arising from its institutional weakness and the presence of criminal organizations, which condition the implementation of this SDG.
ADVANCES
 In 2015, Mexico came in second place from among 25 countries evaluated under the Management for Development Results criteria. (IDB).
 In 2016, the homicide rate was 20 per 100,000 people (INEGI, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The National Human Rights Program, launched during this administration, is the central axis of the government's policy on consolidating a rights-based society.
 The General Law on the Rights of Children and Adolescents recognizes them as subjects with rights, as well as groups that are highly vulnerable.
 Mexico's Action Plan under the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children includes the creation of a 2019-2030 Agenda of Priorities aimed at ending abuse, exploitation, torture, trafficking and all forms of violence against children and adolescents.
 The new accusatory criminal justice system guarantees better protection of the rights of both victims and suspects.
 The Violence Against Women Alert (AVGM) is a mechanism promoted by the Interior Secretariat through the National Commission for Preventing and Eradicating Violence Against Women (CONAVIM) that is aimed at confronting violence against women with coordinated actions.
 The Centers for Women's Justice (CJMs), operated by the CONAVIM, are spaces that provide legal advice and support services for women and their children.
 The National Victim Support System is in charge of defining and applying policies for supporting victims.
 The National Transparency System is in charge of coordinating efforts in terms of transparency, access to information and the protection of personal information.
 The National Anticorruption System is a body in charge of coordinating efforts between authorities at all levels of government to prevent, investigate and punish corruption.
 The National Single Window includes a participatory platform and allows citizens to access information, services and data.
CHALLENGES 
 Reducing the presence and operational capacity of criminal organizations.
 Achieving effective international coordination and collaboration in the prevention of money laundering, drug trafficking and gun running, particularly with the United States of America and other countries where Mexican criminal organizations operate.
 Consolidating the implementation of government policies on human rights.
 Coordinating actions among the primary actors working to eradicate gender violence.
 Creating societal trust in the Victim Support System.
 Establishing a unified criminal code.
 Consolidating the National Anticorruption System and making it effective.
 Consolidating and maintaining budget transparency measures.





4.3 ERADICATING POVERTY  
AND PROMOTING PROSPERITY  IN A CHANGING WORLD:  
SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14
SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere.
In Mexico, implementing this goal is both a considerable challenge and a unique opportunity to dignify the lives of the 43.6% of the population living in poverty. 
ADVANCES
 In accordance with the national poverty and scarcity indicators measured by CONEVAL (2016), of the country's total population:
 Over 2 million Mexicans have moved out of extreme poverty. In 2016, 9.4 million people were classified as extremely poor.
 53.4 million people are living in poverty.
 The number of Mexicans with access to healthcare has risen by 6.2 million people.
 The number of Mexicans with social security has risen by 3.4 million people.
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 SEDESOL's National Inclusion Strategy (ENI) contributes to securing social rights and reducing shortcomings through the coordination of policies and social programs that improve the lives of Mexicans. The results show improved coverage for people facing extreme food poverty through the National Crusade Against Hunger and the expansion of the network of community kitchens, which currently number 5,786 (SEDESOL, 2018).
 INFONAVIT and SEDATU's Papelito Habla Program serves as a tool providing legal certainty over one's prop-
erty through the regularization of land and real estate.
 In terms of inclusion in the labor force, SEDESOL's PROSPERA Program coordinates institutional efforts and social policies relating to production, income generation, economic well-being, financial and labor inclusion and nutritional and health education for people living in poverty.
 The National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples' (CDI) Program for Improving Indigenous Productivity is one example of the measures taken to increase the productivity and income of vulnerable groups.
 The SE's National Financing Program for Micro-entrepreneurs and Rural Women contributes to the creation of productive businesses and increasing the productivity of existing businesses.
 The Comprehensive Social Information System (SISI) improves articulation of institutional responses to social shortfalls.
 The Social Portfolio promotes policy dialogue between citizens and authorities, reports on access to rights and social programs and allows citizens to follow up on measures and programs and express their priorities and needs.
CHALLENGES 
 Having a mechanism in place to detect and provide immediate support for vulnerable groups.
 Creating quality jobs and sustained and inclusive economic growth on the basis of a strong internal market.
 Transforming the vision in which fighting poverty is solely the responsibility of one subset of government institutions, when the dimensions of the challenge demand coordination and holistic policies.
 Incorporating a life-cycle approach into the design of programs, strategies and policies aimed at fighting poverty.
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture.
In Mexico, the population facing food insecurity has been reduced in recent years, as has the percentage of children suffering from chronic malnutrition. Nevertheless, guaranteeing quality nutrition and sustainable agricultural production continue to be major challenges.
ADVANCES 
 The number of Mexicans who have proper access to food has risen by 2.8 million people (CONEVAL, 2016).
 Mexico is the world's 12th biggest food producer.
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The National Crusade Against Hunger includes a network of 5,560 community kitchens, feeding over half a million people every day.
 Price distortions for consumers have been regulated through legal decrees and the complementary supply of agricultural and livestock products.
 Access to financing for farmers contributes to improving logistics and the food supply.
 Mexican agricultural products have been positioned in international markets.
CHALLENGES 
 Guaranteeing effective access to varied, quality food in sufficient quantities for all people.
 Guaranteeing the access of local products to value-added markets.
 Improving planning and investment in infrastructure and transportation to increase opportunities for transitioning towards more sustainable agricultural models.
 Promoting the environmental resilience of the agricultural sector through universal insurance coverage for small producers.
SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages.
Ensuring a healthy life and promoting the well-being of the population is a basic condition for ending inequality and poverty and guaranteeing the comprehensive human development of all.
ADVANCES
 The number of people with access to healthcare has risen by 6.2 million people (CONEVAL, 2016).
 The Popular Insurance Program has 53.7 million people enrolled (SSA, 2017).
 84.5% children and adolescents have healthcare coverage (SIPINNA, 2018). 
 96.7% of children have all of their vaccinations (SSA, 2015).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The following prevention programs are in place: Health in Your School, Safe Consultation, PreventIMMS and 
PreventISSSTE and the National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Obesity and Diabetes.
 The SSA's Universal Vaccination Program and National Health Weeks prevent the primary causes of infant mortality.
 The INMUJERES National Strategy for the Prevention of Teen Pregnancy (ENAPEA) consists of inter-institutional measures aimed at preventing teen pregnancy that are coordinated with national, state and municipal policies and plans.
 IMSS-PROSPERA's Early Childhood Development Strategy promotes holistic growth, nutritional monitoring, cognitive and socio-emotional development and the timely detection and response to developmental issues.
 The Mexican Social Security Institute's mobile app allows members to schedule appointments with their doctor, saving them time and money.
CHALLENGES 
 Ensuring effective access to quality healthcare services, eliminating discriminatory barriers, closing service gaps between different social groups and regions and ensuring the generation and effective use of healthcare resources.
 Guaranteeing the existence of relevant, reliable and truthful information on sexual and reproductive health, as well as access to birth control methods.
 Having a properly implemented legal framework for the control of drugs.





SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls.
Gender inequality is a persistent problem in Mexico, with onerous consequences in structural, social and economic terms.
ADVANCES 
 In 2017, women made up, on average, 42% of local legislatures (OPPMM, 2018).
 In 2016, 17.4% of the directors of government institutions were women (National Government Census).
 Thirteen states adopted the minimum measures needed to bring state equality policies up to national standards (Equality Platform, INMUJERES).
 Twenty-eight states no longer have exceptions in their legislation allow-
ing minors to get married (INMUJERES, 2018).
 Women spend three times as much time as men on domestic work and other unpaid labor (ENUT, 2014).
 43% of women aged 15 or older have entered the workforce, compared to 78% for men (ENOE, 2017).
 There is a pay gap between men and women of 5.1% (ENOE, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The General Law on Equality Between Women and Men (LGIMH) guarantees and regulates equality of opportunities and equal treatment between women and men.
 The General Law on the Right of Women to a Violence-Free Life (LGAMVLV) prevents, punishes and eradicates violence against women.
 Financing programs such as Small 
Business Women --a project of INMUJERES, SHCP, INADEM and NAFIN-- and the National Financing Program for Micro-entrepreneurs and Rural Women --a project of the SE-- give women preferential access to credit.
 Article 41 of the Mexican Constitution requires parity between women and men as candidates for local and federal legislatures. 
 The 2013-2018 National Development Plan includes a holistic gender perspective.
 Mexico is one of the few countries to have a methodology for earmarking budgetary resources for gender equality.
CHALLENGES 
 Strengthening systems for following up on resources earmarked for gender equality and the empowerment of women.
 Developing a methodology that standardizes the data collected on femicides.
 Achieving the recognition, remuneration and equal redistribution between women and men of household labor, as well as guaranteeing full labor rights and protections for women and men who perform this work.


SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation. 
It is important for Mexico to increase the competitiveness of its businesses, consolidate a modern and resilient transportation network and guarantee the presence of quality communication infrastructure across the nation while maintaining sustainable economic development that incorporates the use of exponential technology to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
ADVANCES
 11% of Mexico's businesses are in the manufacturing sector, creating 25% of the country's jobs and representing 37% of its income (INEGI, 2016).
 2.8% of small and medium manufacturing enterprises are part of global production chains, compared to 8.4% for large enterprises (SE).
 The primary destination of direct foreign investment is the manufacturing sector, with dynamism in the automotive sector and the aerospace industry.
 The federal highway network connects 66% of the population, 73% of the economically active population and 94% of gross total production (SCT).
 Mexico came in 51st place in the Global Competitiveness Index 2017-2018.
 Total spending on research and development represented 0.50% of the GDP in 2016, triple the amount at the start of the current administration (CONACYT).
 36.4% of the business community finances research and development spending (CONACYT, 2012).
 4.2% of businesses develop technological innovations (CONACYT, 2014).
 There are 365 researchers per million people (CONACYT, 2016).
 63.9% of the population uses the internet, 45.3% uses computers and 72.2% uses mobile phones (INEGI).
 In 2016, Mexico received 910 million dollars through International Development Cooperation for infrastructure development (AMEXCID). 
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
 The National Infrastructure Program requires projects to be built in accordance with environmental, inclusiveness and efficiency criteria.
 The Law for Promoting Sustained Productivity Increases and Economic Competitiveness promotes economic growth, investment, productive infrastructure and technological content, as well as added value products.
 The INADEM's National Entrepreneur Fund supports projects for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.
 The Mexico Connected Program offers free internet connections. The Shared Network will offer 4G telecommunications services with coverage that will reach at least 92% of the population by 2024. The Mexico Connected Points Project provides training and digital education. All three are operated by the SCT.
CHALLENGES
 Having a regulatory framework that properly encourages the growth of domestic businesses.
 Regulating the microfinance sector to increase the productivity of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.
 Improving airport, aeronautic, highway, port, railway and highway capacity.
 Promoting capacity for technology adoption by businesses, as well as a culture of innovation and a long-term vision.
 Analyzing the impact of new technologies such as artificial intelligence, in compliance with the 2030 Agenda, as technological backwardness can increase inequality, affect vulnerable populations and create ethical dilemmas that threaten sustainable development.
SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development.
Oceans, seas and coasts form an essential part of the country's sustainable development. The resources they provide not only create jobs, but they also contribute to regulating global temperatures and absorbing carbon dioxide. The pollution and degradation of marine ecosystems has negative effects in terms of quality of life and the country's social and economic development. 
ADVANCES 
 There are 37 Natural Protected Areas (ANPs) on Mexico's coasts, representing 22.05% of the seas under Mexican jurisdiction (SEMARNAT, 2017).
 In 2016, 0.4% of the total research budget was destined for marine technology (CONACYT).
 Port and maritime transport activities have steadily risen at an annual rate of 6.8% over the last ten years.
 Around 65% of fisheries are at maximum output, while 10% have growth potential, 15% are in decline and 10% are recovering (SEMARNAT).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The creation of new ANPs: 14.7 million hectares in the Revillagigedo National Park, 1 million hectares in the Pacific Islands Biosphere Reserve, 5.7 million hectares in the Mexican Caribbean Biosphere Reserve and 
43.6 million hectares in the Mexican Pacific Deep Biosphere Reserve.
 Mexico has guiding documents on seas and coasts, such as the 20162030 National Strategy and Action Plan on Mexican Biodiversity, the 2016-2022 Integration Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in the Fishing and Aquaculture Sector and the National Oceanographic Research Program.
 SEMARNAT's Clean Beaches Program monitors water quality and the Let's Clean Up Mexico Initiative organizes brigades to clean up public spaces, including rivers and beaches.
 Blue Flag certification of Mexican beaches (35 beaches and 2 marinas) establishes standards on quality, safety, education and environmental information. 
 The prohibition of gill nets in the Upper Gulf of California contributes to the protection of marine fauna.
 Participatory Environmental Vigilance Committees care for and defend the natural resources of their communities.
CHALLENGES 
 Guaranteeing that national planning has a comprehensive approach to watershed management to prevent the pollution of oceans via terrestrial sources.
 Expanding the capacity for conducting inspections and demanding compliance with the law in industrial sectors responsible for pollution.
81
 Generating nationwide estimates on the magnitude of the impact and threat of coastal degradation caused by the use of agrochemicals, the exploitation of energy sources and maritime transport.
 Modifying legislation on the conservation and preservation of marine and coastal zones to ensure coherence and compliance.
 Designing a General Law on the Comprehensive Management of Coastal and Marine Areas and a Regulation for the General Law on Sustainable Fishing and Aquaculture.
 Undertaking scientific research to gather information on the health of the oceans that will help orient decisions.
 Establishing a permanent system to evaluate the management of marine Natural Protected Areas.
4.4 MEANS AND PARTNERSHIPS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE 2030 AGENDA 
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development.
Under the framework of its international development cooperation efforts, Mexico has worked on all aspects of financing for development, such as tax collection, debt sustainability, trade and investment. This has meant strengthening alliances with developed countries, international organizations and multilateral development banks, as well as other development actors, with the goal of mobilizing resources and obtaining knowledge to meet the SDGs.
ADVANCES
 Over the last five years, Mexico has granted an average of 250 million dollars each year for international development cooperation.
 In 2017, Mexico had 12 free trade agreements with 46 countries, giving it access to a market of 1.172 billion consumers around the world (SE, 2017).
 In 2017, non-petroleum exports represented 93.1% of total exports (SE, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
 The creation of the Alliance for Sustainability (AxS) between AMEXCID and the private sector.


 The Program for the Prevention of Unaccompanied Migration by Children and Adolescents in the Northern Triangle of Central America has been undertaken by Mexico and Germany to benefit the Northern Triangle of Central America.
 The Open Government Partnership promotes gender equality, transparency, accountability, citizen participation and innovation as tools for better governability.
 The Strategy for Promoting Public-Private Partnerships complements the government's efforts to develop infrastructure and provide goods and services demanded by society.
 Mexico has an Action Plan under the framework of the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children. This initiative is promoted by a variety of actors, including governments, international organizations and civil society, and aims to reduce child abuse and exploitation.
 At the multilateral level, Mexico signed on to Resolution 77/242, "The Impact of Rapid Technological Change on the Achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals," which establishes that the United Nations, in collaboration with academia, civil society and the private sector, must analyze the impact of rapid technological change, artificial intelligence and automatization on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
CHALLENGES
 Earmarking additional expenses in the budget for knowledge exchanges with other countries and strengthening inter-institutional coordination.
 Updating trade regulations and the legal framework to ensure consistency between national and international regulations, as well as that Mexican products and services meet the standards demanded in other markets.
 Strengthening the government's capacity to process paperwork and promoting closer collaborations between the government, academia, the private sector, civil society and other development actors in a way that goes beyond each presidential administration.
MEANS OF IMPLEMENTING THE SDGs
In Mexico, the first step towards mobilizing resources that contribute to reaching the SDGs has been to link public spending with the 2030 Agenda. This has allowed us to identify critical lacunae and evaluate the resources needed to delineate a budgetary planning strategy focused on sustainable development.
As part of the national strategy to mobilize financial resources in order to meet the SDGs, the OPR, in collaboration with other federal agencies, is working on three lines of action: 
1. Modifying fiscal policy in terms of revenue generation.
2. Modifying fiscal policy in terms of spending.
3. Mobilizing national resources. 
 
In a complementary fashion, the OPR is promoting a proposal to introduce green, social and sustainable bonds in Mexico, that will also contribute to compliance with the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
At the global level, with the goal of contributing to dialogue and promoting positive results at the Forum on Financing for Development and following up on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, Mexico has been the site of three retreats of the Group of Friends in Monterrey, Mexico City (2016 and 2017), and Oaxaca (2018). This is a space for dialogue that addresses international commitments that contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the mobilization of all sources of financing.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION FOR IMPLEMENTING THE SDGs
Mexico participates in international development cooperation through AMEXCID. One of its functions is to contribute to the exchange of good practices and skills through bilateral, regional, multilateral, north-south, southsouth and triangular cooperation mechanisms. AMEXCID has taken on the responsibility of aligning the cooperation accepted and offered by Mexico with the 2030 Agenda, as well as incentivizing the participation of various international development cooperation actors.
Over the last five years, Mexico has granted an average of 250 million dollars each year for international development cooperation. In 2017, Mexico carried out 595 international development cooperation projects in fields connected to the SDGs, such as climate action, education, health and energy, among others. 
Another tool that contributes to reaching the SDGs is the Catalog of Mexican Capacities, which was prepared by AMEXCID and other institutions to provide information on best practices and incentivize the offer of international development cooperation: it currently includes 110 initiatives. Mexico has also created alliances with Central American and Caribbean countries, particularly on issues such as climate change and resilience, as well as with Germany, Canada, Spain, the United States of America, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and European Union member states. It also cooperates with international agencies that have a presence in Mexico, multilateral development banks and other development actors.
Mexico has given special importance to the creation of regional and thematic strategies to increase the impact of Mexican cooperation in Latin America and the Caribbean, such as the cooperation strategy for the Northern Triangle of Central America, which was launched following the successes seen in the Mesoamerican Project and the Conference on Prosperity and Security in Central America (2017); the Hunger-Free Mesoamerica Program, which has become a reference for the rest of Latin America; the Mexico-CARICOM Strategy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management, Resilience and Reconstruction; the Franco-Mexican Initiative to support adaptation and resilience to climate change in the Caribbean; and the strategy for designing and presenting projects from Caribbean countries to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Global Environmental Fund (GEF).
In regional terms, Mexico belongs to the Forum of Latin American and Caribbean Countries on Sustainable Development (FPALCDS), a regional mechanism for following up on the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. 
Within the framework of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Mexico has promoted the establishment of a network to strengthen the ability of countries to implement and follow up on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the region. This network has the goal of sharing experiences and strengthening institutional and technical capacities of governments, which will help align international cooperation strategies with the SDGs.
Mexico participated in the OECD publication titled Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development 2018: Towards Sustainable and Resilient Societies, which collects the experiences of many countries and the institutional agreements for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Mexico also participated in the first round of the Voluntary Peer Learning Mechanism on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda. As part of this process, Mexico participated in two groups, one with Germany and China on the alignment of national strategies and policy coherence for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, and another with Norway and the Netherlands on the role of the private sector. These sessions were held between September 2017 and April 2018 and resulted in the preparation of two documents, which will be presented to the development working group at the 2018 G20 summit in Argentina.
PARTNERSHIPS
Mexico has many national alliances that fall under the framework of the 2030 Agenda, 
such as the Alliance for Sustainability, CONAGO's 2030 Agenda Executive Implementation Commission and the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), which will be launched under the oversight of the UNAM in 2018.
tional CSOs that has the goal of implement-
86
In terms of partnerships with CSOs, there is the International Coalition for Development Action Mexico (CAIDMEX), an alliance between domestic and Mexico-based internaing the SDGs. Outreach has also been made to the Civil Society Coordinating Space for Following Up on the 2030 Agenda in Mexico, among others. Despite the existence of these spaces for collaboration among CSOs, more partnerships between the government and CSOs under the framework of the 2030 Agenda should be institutionalized.
At the international level, Mexico is a member of a variety of alliances, such as the German government's Partners for Review network, which monitors the SDGs; the Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030 network, which supports public-private partnerships for the implementation of the SDGs; the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which seeks to share experiences with international development cooperation; the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children, which contributes to the implementation of SDGs 16 and 17; the NDC Partnership, which aims to improve cooperation on SDG 13; and the Pacific Alliance (which includes Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru), which is working towards the establishment of sustainability criteria for public acquisitions.





V. CONCLUSIONS 


5.1 STATE COMMITMENT AND CONTINUITY
Ever since Mexico assumed the 2030 Agenda as a state commitment, it has undertaken many measures for its implementation. Through political will at the highest level, the groundwork has been laid to ensure the continuity of these transformations over time. The process of preparing a National Strategy with objectives, goals and priorities that are defined through a shared diagnostic and the participation of different sectors has laid out the path towards the future.
Nevertheless, many major challenges remain. It is necessary to strengthen capacities at all levels to eliminate asymmetries and work towards achieving a shared vision. Sustainable development not only requires efforts from all sectors, but above all, the commitment of all parties to remain in collaboration.
Another challenge is the adoption of the 2030 Agenda by all actors. To confront this, it is essential to improve outreach, awareness and mobilization efforts for the SDGs. Mechanisms are also needed that facilitate the participation of state and municipal governments. Achieving these goals depends on the existence of partnerships and collaborations, as well as coordination between different levels of government.
Placing people at the center of all actions ensures a bottom-up transformation founded on trust and alliance-building. Only based on evidence, we will be able to find the best ways to transform our development reality. Defining, updating and disaggregating indicators for following up on the SDGs is essential to evaluating the impact of policies. Innovation requires new sources of information, technologies and big data,27 as well as comprehensive financing for economic, social and environmental development.
27 National averages may hide inequalities. For this reason, it is essential to disaggregate data when monitoring and evaluating progress on goals. Furthermore, though big data can be useful, it is vital to leave no one behind and to ensure the representation of all members of society when measuring advancement towards the SDGs. Many sources of data require literacy and access to the internet or cellular services, which can exclude vulnerable groups. Big data should therefore be used with care, and only in combination with other sources of information that guarantee the representation of all members of society. This disaggregation requires the perspectives of statistical experts, civil society organizations, national human rights institutions, service providers and marginalized populations.
90
The success of these paths will lie not only in their ability to lead to concrete actions that contribute to sustainability, but also in their capacity to constantly transform themselves in accordance with new realities. 
5.2 NEXT STEPS
In accordance with the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development's yearly program of activities, approved on May 31, 2018, the initial draft of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda will be submitted for public review. This document will define priorities, goals, indicators and challenges, as well as the roles and functions of different actors, incorporating the vision of different sectors. Inter-institutional working groups will also be created to hold discussions on goals and indicators that will be based on the inputs provided by the Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals (CTEODS) and the contributions of a variety of sectors.
The National Strategy could also be consolidated as a tool to be used as a base for elaborating the 2019-2024 National Development Plan and future federal budgets. Furthermore, to ensure that the 2030 Agenda becomes a reality at the state and municipal levels, it is important for the OSIs to have practical tools that allow them to transform the territories under their jurisdiction.
To the historic challenges of Mexico's different regions, we can add the efforts to protect natural resources and mitigate the adverse effects of climate change. The rise in global temperatures will only remain below 2C if we reduce fossil fuel use and transform systems of consumption and production around the world.
Lastly, it is also necessary to be increasingly ambitious when implementing the 2030 Agenda. To achieve this, instead of being barries, we must make accelerated technological change, artificial intelligence and automatization into enablers of sustainable development.





SDG 1: END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 1.1.
By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people living on less than 
$1.25 a day
Indicator 1.1.1.
Proportion of population living below the international poverty line, by sex, age, employment status and geographical location (urban/rural)
6.4
N/A
Percentage
CONEVAL,  
INEGI,  
ENIGH

2014



GOAL 1.2.
By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions
Indicator 1.2.1.
Proportion of population living below 
the national poverty line, by sex and age
 53.2
N/A
Percentage
CONEVAL,  MCS-ENIGH

2014



Indicator 1.2.2.
Proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions
 46.2
N/A
Percentage
 CONEVAL,  MCS-ENIGH 

2014



GOAL 1.5.
By 2030, build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters
Indicator 1.5.1.
Number of deaths, missing and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population
  2,358.5
4,469.70
Rate per 
100,000 inhabitants
SEGOB, 
CONAPO,  
CENAPRED

2015
2016


APPENDIX 1
This appendix contains 58 global indicators that Mexico is monitoring on its official SDG platform (www.agenda2030.mx). Some of them, due to their nature, have been disaggregated into more than one indicator.


SDG 3: ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES AND PROMOTE WELL-BEING FOR ALL AT ALL AGES
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
 GOAL 3.1.
By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births
Indicator 3.1.1.
Maternal mortality ratio
34.6
N/A
Maternal deaths per 100,000  live births
SSA,  
DGIS

2015



Indicator 3.1.2.
Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel
98.2
98.0
Percentage
SSA, DGIS

2015
2016


GOAL 3.2.
By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming  to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-five mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births
Indicator 3.2.1.
Mortality rate, under-5
15.1
N/A
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 
1,000 live births)
SSA,  
DGIS

2015



SDG 1: END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 1.A.
Ensure significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources, including through enhanced development cooperation, in order to provide adequate and predictable means for developing countries, in particular least developed countries, to implement programmes and policies to end poverty in all its dimensions
Indicator 1.a.2.
Proportion of total government spending on essential services (education, health and social protection)
38.0
36.2
Percentage
 
SHCP
 

2015 
2016



SDG 2: END HUNGER, ACHIEVE FOOD SECURITY AND IMPROVED NUTRITION  
AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 2.1. 
By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round
Indicator 2.1.2.
Prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity in the population, based on the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES)
23.4
N/A
Percentage
CONEVAL

2014



SDG 4: ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE QUALITY EDUCATION  AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 4.4.
By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship 
Indicator 4.4.1.
Proportion of youth and adults with information and communications technology (ICT) skills, by type of skill:
Copy files from one folder to another
35.7
N/A
Percentage
ITF

2016



Create text files
38.0




2016



Create spreadsheets
25.6




2016



Create presentations
31.0




2016



SDG 3: ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES AND PROMOTE WELL-BEING FOR ALL AT ALL AGES
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 3.3.
By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat  hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases
Indicator 3.3.3.
Incidence of malaria per 1,000  population
0.4
N/A
Per 100,000 inhabitants
SSA, 
CENAPRECE

2015



GOAL 3.7.
By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes
Indicator 3.7.1.
Proportion of women of reproductive age (aged 15--49 years) who have 
their need for family planning satisfied 
with modern methods
81.56
N/A
Percentage
CONAPO, ENADID

2014



Indicator 3.7.2.a.
Adolescent birth rate (aged 10--14 years) per 1,000 women in that age group
1.6
1.6
Number of births per  
1,000 women in this age group
CONAPO, INEGI

2015
2016


Indicator 3.7.2.b.
Adolescent birth rate (aged 15--19 years) per 1,000 women in that age group
65.5
65.4
Number of births per  
1,000 women in this age group
CONAPO

2015
2016





SDG 5: ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 5.1.
End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
Indicator 5.1.1.
Whether or not legal frameworks  are in place to promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sex
68.8
75.0
Percentage
INMUJERES, SCJN

2015
2016


GOAL 5.2.
Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
Indicator 5.2.1.a.
Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual or psychological violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months, by form of violence and by state
24.7
N/A
Percentage of women who 
suffered at least one incident of 
physical, sexual 
or emotional violence
INEGI,  
ENDIREH

2011



Indicator 5.2.1.b.
Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual or  psychological violence by a current  or former intimate partner in the  previous 12 months, by form of violence and by age
28.1
N/A
Percentage of women who 
suffered at least one incident of 
physical, sexual 
or emotional violence
INEGI,  
ENDIREH

2011



SDG 4: ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE QUALITY EDUCATION  AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 4.4.
By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship 
Indicator 4.4.1.
Proportion of youth and adults with information and communications technology (ICT) skills, by type of skill:
Create / use databases
23.5
N/A
Percentage
ITF

2016



Download content from the internet (music, videos, documents, etc.)
40.3




2016



Send and receive emails
35.4




2016



Install accessories (printers,  projectors, etc.)
21.5




2016







SDG 5: ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 5.2.
Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
Indicator 5.2.2.a.
Proportion of women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to  sexual violence by persons other  than an intimate partner in the previous 12 months, by state and place of occurrence
15.2
N/A
Percentage of women who 
suffered at least one incident
INEGI,  
ENDIREH

2011



Indicator 5.2.2.b.
Proportion of women and girls aged  15 years and older subjected to  sexual violence by persons other  than an intimate partner in the previous 12 months, by age and place of occurrence
19.4
N/A
Percentage of women who 
suffered at least one incident
INEGI,  
ENDIREH

2011



GOAL 5.3.
Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation
Indicator 5.3.1.
Proportion of women aged 20--24 years who were married or in a union 
Before age 15
3.7
N/A
Percentage
INEGI,  
ENADID

2014



Before age 18
21.4




2014



GOAL 5.5.
Ensure women's full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision making in political, economic and public life
Indicator 5.5.1.a.
Proportion of seats held by women in the Chamber of Deputies
39.8
42.4
Percentage
Chamber of Deputies

2015
2016


Indicator 5.5.1.b.
Proportion of governorships held by 
women
3.125
3.125
Percentage
CONAGO

2015
2016


Indicator 5.5.1.c.
Proportion of judgeships held by 
women
41.1
N/A
Percentage
INEGI-State 
Justice 
Administration 
Census

2015



Indicator 5.5.1.d.
Proportion of mayoralties held by 
women
9.43
14.18
Percentage
INMUJERES, Mexican 
Observatory  on Political 
Participation  by Women

2015
2016


Indicator 5.5.2.
Proportion of women in managerial positions
34.0
36.1
Percentage
INEGI, ENOE

2015
2016


SDG 7: ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE, SUSTAINABLE  
AND MODERN ENERGY FOR ALL

INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 7.1.

By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services

Indicator 7.1.1.
Proportion of population with access to electricity
98.5
98.6
Percentage
CFE

2015
2017


GOAL 7.2.

By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix

Indicator 7.2.1.
Renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption
8.8
8.6
Percentage
SENER

2015
2016


GOAL 7.3.

By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency

Indicator 7.3.1.
Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP
360.3
366.9
Kilojoules per peso of GDP
SENER,  
INEGI,  BIE

2015
2016


SDG 6: ENSURE AVAILABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT  
OF WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 6.3.
By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally
Indicator: 6.3.1.
Proportion of wastewater safely treated
42.870
N/A
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2015



SDG 5: ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 5.B.
Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women
Indicator 5.b.1.
Proportion of individuals who own a mobile telephone, by sex
Men
49.1 
N/A
Percentage
INEGI,  
ENDUTIH

2015



Women
50.9 




2015







SDG 8: PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH,  FULL AND PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 8.2.
Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-intensive sectors
Indicator 8.2.1.
Annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person
-2.4
2.4
Percentage
STPS

2015
2016


GOAL 8.3.
Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small- and medium- sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
Indicator 8.3.1.
Proportion of informal employment in non-agriculture employment, by sex
53.0
52.5
Percentage
INEGI,  
STPS

2015
2016


GOAL 8.5.
By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
Indicator 8.5.2
Unemployment rate, by sex, age and persons with disabilities
4.3
3.9
Percentage
STPS

2015
2016


GOAL 8.7.
Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms
Indicator 8.7.1.
Proportion and number of children aged 5--17 years engaged in child labour, by sex and age
7.5
N/A
Percentage
INEGI, STPS

2015



GOAL 8.8.
Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment
Indicator 8.8.1.
Frequency rates of fatal and non-fatal occupational injuries, by sex and migrant status
2.5
2.2
Percentage
STPS

2015
2016


GOAL 8.10.
Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to banking, insurance and financial services for all
Indicator 8.10.1.a.
Number of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults
14.0
N/A
Rate per 100,000 adults
IMF

2014



SDG 9: BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, PROMOTE INCLUSIVE  AND SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALIZATION AND FOSTER INNOVATION
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 9.2.
Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industry's share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries
Indicator 9.2.2.
Manufacturing employment as a proportion of total, by sex
Men
16.4
16.5
Percentage
INEGI,  
STPS

2015
2016


Women
15.5
15.9



2015
2016


GOAL 9.4.
By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities
Indicator 9.4.1.
CO2 emission per unit of value added
0.326
N/A
Kilograms  per dollar
SEMARNAT, 
INECC, 
Department of 
Low Carbon 
Development 
Models, INEGI, National 






2013


Accounting 
System of Mexico
SDG 8: PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH,  FULL AND PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 8.10.
Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to banking, insurance and financial services for all
Indicator 8.10.1.b.
Number of automated teller machines 
(ATMs) per 100,000 adults
50.7
N/A
Rate per 100,000 adults
IMF

2015



Indicator 8.10.2.
Proportion of adults (15 years and older) with an account at a bank or other financial institution or with a mobile-money-service provider
39.13
N/A
Percentage
World Bank

2014






SDG 11: MAKE CITIES AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS INCLUSIVE, SAFE,  
RESILIENT AND SUSTAINABLE
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 11.5.
By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
Indicator 11.5.1.
Number of deaths, missing and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population
2,358.5
4,469.7
Rate per 
100,000 inhabitants
SEGOB, 
CONAPO, 
CENAPRED

2015
2016


SDG 13: TAKE URGENT ACTION TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE AND ITS IMPACTS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
 GOAL 13.1.
Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries
Indicator 13.1.1.
Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population
2,358.5
4,469.7
Rate per 
100,000 inhabitants
SEGOB, 
CONAPO, 
CENAPRED

2015
2016


SDG 9: BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, PROMOTE INCLUSIVE  AND SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALIZATION AND FOSTER INNOVATION
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 9.5.
Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending
Indicator 9.5.1.
Research and development expenditure as a proportion of GDP
0.53
0.51
Percentage
CONACYT, ESIDET

2015
2016


Indicator 9.5.2.
Researchers (in full-time equivalent) per million inhabitants
362.2
365.0
Investigators per million inhabitants
CONACYT,  DAPE

2015
2016





SDG 15: PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE USE OF TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS, 
SUSTAINABLY MANAGE FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION, AND HALT AND REVERSE LAND DEGRADATION AND HALT BIODIVERSITY LOSS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
 GOAL 15.1.
By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements
Indicator 15.1.1.
Forest area as a proportion of total land area
33.78628
N/A
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2011



Indicator 15.1.2.
Proportion of important sites for terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity that are covered by protected areas, by ecosystem type
10.6498
10.5490
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2015
2016


 GOAL 15.5.
Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species
Indicator 15.5.1. Red List Index
Algae
0.041
N/A
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2010



Amphibians
50.919




2010



Birds
35.315




2010



SDG 14: CONSERVE AND SUSTAINABLY USE THE OCEANS, SEAS  AND MARINE RESOURCES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 14.5.
By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information
Indicator 14.5.1.
Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas
1.54
1.54
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2015
2016


GOAL 14.A.
Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity and transfer marine technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries, in particular small island developing States and least developed countries
Indicator 14.a.1.
Proportion of total research budget 
allocated to research in the field of marine technology
0.2
0.4
Percentage
CONACYT

2015
2016





 SDG 16: PROMOTE PEACEFUL AND INCLUSIVE SOCIETIES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT,  
PROVIDE ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR ALL AND BUILD EFFECTIVE, ACCOUNTABLE  AND INCLUSIVE INSTITUTIONS AT ALL LEVELS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 16.1.
Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere 
Indicator 16.1.1
Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 population, by sex and age
17.2
N/A
Cases per 
100,000 inhabitants
INEGI,  
CONAPO

2015



GOAL 16.6.
Develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels 
Indicator 16.6.1. 
Primary government expenditures  as a proportion of original approved budget, by sector (or by budget codes or similar)
108.0
116.2
Percentage
SHCP

2015
2016


SDG 15: PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE USE OF TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS, 
SUSTAINABLY MANAGE FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION, AND HALT AND REVERSE LAND DEGRADATION AND HALT BIODIVERSITY LOSS
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
 GOAL 15.5.
Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species
Indicator 15.5.1. Red List Index
Bryophytes
0.371
N/A
Percentage
SEMARNAT

2010



Gymnosperms and Angiosperms
3.626




2010



Fungi
1.028




2010



Invertebrates
ND




2010



Mammals
52.338




2010



Fish
7.333




2010



Pteridophytes
2.609




2010



Reptiles
50.056




2010







SDG 17: STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND REVITALIZE THE GLOBAL 
 PARTNERSHIP FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 17.1.
Strengthen domestic resource mobilization, including through international support to developing countries,  to improve domestic capacity for tax and other revenue collection 
Indicator 17.1.1.
Total government revenue as a proportion of GDP, by source
23.4
24.8
Percentage
SHCP

2015
2016


Indicator 17.1.2.
Proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes 
48.4
50.8
Percentage
SHCP

2015
2016


GOAL 17.3.
Mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources 
Indicator 17.3.2.
Volume of remittances (in United 
States dollars) as a proportion of total 
GDP
1.9
2.6
Percentage
BANXICO, INEGI

2015/I
2017/I


GOAL 17.4.
Assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability through coordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as appropriate, and address the external debt of highly indebted poor countries to reduce debt distress 
Indicator 17.4.1
Debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services
9.2
11.2
Percentage
SHCP

2015
2016


GOAL 17.6.
Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to science, technology and innovation and enhance knowledge sharing on mutually agreed terms, including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms, in particular at the United Nations level, and through a global technology facilitation mechanism
Indicator 17.6.2.
Fixed internet broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, by speed
Between 256 Kbps and 2 Mbps
0.4570
0.5552
Rate per 100 inhabitants
IFT

2015/I
2016/IV


Between 2 Mbps and 10 Mbps
9.3879
2.2513



2015/I
2016/IV


10 Mbps or higher
1.2690
10.4494



2015/I
2016/IV


GOAL 17.8.
Fully operationalize the technology bank and science, technology and innovation capacity-building mechanism for least developed countries by 2017 and enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology 
Indicator 17.8.1.
Proportion of individuals using the internet
57.43
59.54
Percentage
IFT

2015
2016



SDG 17: STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND REVITALIZE THE GLOBAL 
 PARTNERSHIP FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
INDICATOR
BASELINE
LAST INFORMATION AVAILABLE
UNIT
SOURCE
GOAL 17.8.
Fully operationalize the technology bank and science, technology and innovation capacity-building mechanism for least developed countries by 2017 and enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology 
Indicator 17.8.1.a 
Proportion of individuals using the internet, inside or outside the home
Inside the home
40.74
47.31
Percentage
IFT

2015
2016


Outside the home
16.69
12.23



2015
2016




APPENDIX 2
INTRODUCTION 
In its 2016 Voluntary National Review, Mexico stated that "local authorities contribute to guaranteeing the affordability and accessibility of services, starting with the smallest units of government and those in remote regions. It is in these places that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda becomes most important in ending the cycle of poverty and inequality and promoting economic growth and the sustainable management of natural resources."1 Converting the 2030 Agenda's projections into a reality requires an ambitious effort in which the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) should be seen holistically rather than in isolation, horizontally encompassing different sectors of society and vertically encompassing different levels of government.
Horizontal mainstreaming implies establishing coordination mechanisms between government, civil society, academia and the private sector to co-create and take shared responsibility for the country's sustainable development policies. This is crucial, given that the problems the country needs to solve have many causes and unequal effects. As such, no single actor is able to diagnose and resolve them in isolation.
With regard to vertical mainstreaming, it is necessary to recognize that sustainable development is achieved at the local level and that understanding different contexts is key to conducting an appropriate diagnostic regarding the actions to be undertaken. It is therefore important to involve subnational governments together with the federal government so that they share the responsibility for providing citizens with goods and services. Metropolitan areas also play an important role. The actions taken in metropolitan areas to reach the SDGs have a major potential impact on national progress. Monitoring at the subnational level is therefore essential, as understanding the status of the SDGs in a state or municipality can drive local authorities to take action and implement policies focused on advancing towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The 2030 Agenda also implies an emphasis on results, which requires information so that the proper diagnostics can be made and progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals can be monitored. Consequently, it is fundamental to not only build the capacity to gather information at the federal level, but also at subnational levels, involving state and municipal governments in its collection, analysis and use.
The National Public Policy Lab (LNPP)2 of the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics (CIDE) has carried out two SDG monitoring programs at the subnational level in Mexico: the Guanajuato Observatory 2040, conducted on behalf of the state government of Guanajuato; and the City Sustainability Index, financed by Citibanamex and conducted in collaboration with the Mexican Competitiveness Institute and the Mario Molina Center.3 The data contained in this appendix is the result of these two projects and represent a partnership between academia, a subnational government, a private sector enterprise and non-governmental organizations.
SELECTION OF INDICATORS
The indicators included in this appendix were selected in accordance with a series of criteria. The most important was that they match the global indicators or the official national indicators defined by the CTEODS. Of these, indicators were selected that are monitored periodically, preferably using national statistics tools, and that can be disaggregated at the state or municipal level. Finally, the indicators selected were complemented with other, non-official indicators that provide crucial information to complement the subnational SDG outlook. Together, the indicators presented herein provide information on each SDG and focus on showing subnational variations in terms of development.
The following table lists the indicators included in this subnational report and their total or partial correspondence with the 2030 Agenda's global indicators.
SDG
INDICATOR
CORRESPONDS 
TO A GLOBAL 
INDICATOR
LEVEL OF  
DISAGGREGATION
1
Lack of access to social security
No
Metropolitan Area
1
Percentage of the population that lacks access to social security
Yes
State
1
Percentage of the population living in poverty
Yes
State and Metropolitan Area
1
Percentage of the population living in extreme poverty
Yes
State and Metropolitan Area
2
Food insecurity
Yes
Metropolitan Area
2
Population with income lower than the minimum standard of living
No
Metropolitan Area
2
Percentage of the population facing food insecurity
Yes
State
2
Percentage of children under the age of five who are underweight
Yes
State
3
Infant mortality
Yes
Metropolitan Area
3
Maternal mortality
Yes
State and Metropolitan Area
3
Under-five mortality rate
Yes
State
3
Suicide rate
Yes
Metropolitan Area
4
Average educational level of the population age 15 and above
No
Metropolitan Area
4
Women who study
No
Metropolitan Area
4
Literate population age 15 and above
Yes
State
4
Population between the ages of 3 and 14 that attends school
Yes
Metropolitan Area
4
Average PLANEA score
No
State
4
Net preschool enrollment rate (age 3 to 5)
Yes
State
4
Net middle school enrollment rate (age 12 to 14)
No
State
5
Labor equity
No
Metropolitan Area
5
Wage equity
No
Metropolitan Area
5
Women in municipal governments
Yes
Metropolitan Area
5
Labor force participation rate of women
No
State
5
Prevalence of violence against married or partnered women age 15 and above by their partner in the last 12 months
Yes
State
5
Prevalence of violence against women age 15 and above throughout their lives
No
State
5
Proportion of women occupying mayoralties by state
Yes
State
5
Teenage pregnancy rate
Yes
Metropolitan Area

SDG
INDICATOR
CORRESPONDS 
TO A GLOBAL 
INDICATOR
LEVEL OF  
DISAGGREGATION
5
Unremunerated work performed by men and women
Yes
State
6
Population with access to running water 
Yes
Metropolitan Area
6
Population with access to sewage and basic sanitation services
Yes
State
6
Percentage of wastewater treated
Yes
State and Metropolitan Area
7
Energy intensity
Yes
Metropolitan Area
7
Proportion of the population with access to electricity
Yes
State
7
Households utilizing solar energy
No
State and Metropolitan Area
8
Access to financial services
No
Metropolitan Area
8
Real GDP growth
Yes
State
8
Unemployment
Yes
Metropolitan Area
8
Economic diversification
No
Metropolitan Area
8
Formal sector employment
No
Metropolitan Area
8
Informal sector employment rate, age 15 and above
No
State
9
Cellular service access
Yes
Metropolitan Area
9
Members of the National System of Researchers per thousand inhabitants
Yes
State
9
The industrial sector's share of the GDP, by state (2008 prices)
Yes
State
9
Percentage of households with Internet
No
State
9
Budget for science and technology at the state level
No
State
10
Wage inequality
No
Metropolitan Area
10
Gini coefficient
No
Metropolitan Area
10
Per capita GDP, adjusted for the Gini coefficient
No
State
11
Per capita green space
Yes
Metropolitan Area
11
Air quality
No
Metropolitan Area
11
Growth of urban sprawl
No
Metropolitan Area
11
Emissions of suspended particles
Yes
State
11
Low-income population with access to public transportation
Yes
Metropolitan Area
11
Percentage of the population lacking basic housing services
Yes
State
11
Percentage of the population without access to quality and sufficient living space
Yes
State
11
Budget for non-motorized transport
No
Metropolitan Area
11
Modal share
Yes
Metropolitan Area
12
Generation of solid waste per capita
No
Metropolitan Area
12
Regulatory framework for the comprehensive management of solid waste
No
Metropolitan Area
12
Daily collection of solid waste per capita
No
State
12
Households that separate their waste
No
State
13
Share of national carbon monoxide emissions
No
State
13
Climate action programs
Yes
Metropolitan Area
SDG
INDICATOR
CORRESPONDS 
TO A GLOBAL 
INDICATOR
LEVEL OF  
DISAGGREGATION
14
Percentage of the Federal Maritime Zone set aside for conservation
Yes
State
15
State biodiversity strategies
No
Metropolitan Area
15
Existence of forests and jungles
No
State
15
Loss of virgin forest and jungle
No
State
15
Percentage of the state's surface area set aside for federal Protected Natural Areas
Yes
State
15
Protection of key ecosystems
Yes
Metropolitan Area
16
Open Government Index
No
State
16
Municipal Budget Transparency Index
No
Metropolitan Area
16
Transparency Metric
No
State
16
Number of judges per 100,000 inhabitants
No
State
16
State and municipal police per 100,000 inhabitants
No
State
16
Homicide rate per 100,000 inhabitants
Yes
State
16
Homicide rate
Yes
Metropolitan Area
16
Rate of people age 18 and up who feel their neighborhood or town is unsafe, per 100,000 inhabitants 
Yes
State
17
Financial dependence
No
State and Metropolitan Area
17
Number of international development cooperation projects per state
No
State
17
Share of total exports, by state
No
State
SDG 1 -- NO POVERTY
Mexico was one of the countries that promoted the multidimensional measurement of poverty in the process of defining the SDGs. Along with income, the domestic definition of poverty analyzes six other social shortfalls: lack of educational, access to health services, access to social security, quality and sufficient living space (which refers to housing materials and overcrowding), basic housing services (which refers to access to water, drainage, power and the type of fuel used for cooking) and access to food. Individuals are considered to be living in poverty when their income is enough to cover their food and non-food needs but they suffer from at least one social shortfall, and to be living in extreme poverty when their income is enough to cover their food needs but they suffer from three or more social shortfalls.4
4 CONEVAL, "Pobreza en Mexico," retrieved May 16, 2018, https://www.coneval.org.
mx/Medicion/Paginas/PobrezaInicio.aspx.
PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION LIVING IN POVERTY (MODERATE AND 
EXTREME)
State Indicators5
 Metropolitan areas have a smaller population living in poverty than the states in which they are located. 


Metropolitan Area Indicators6


5 CONEVAL, "Anexo Estadistico pobreza 2016," 2016, https://www.coneval.org.mx/ Medicion/MP/Paginas/AE_pobreza_2016.aspx.
6 CONEVAL, "Anexo estadistico de la pobreza a nivel municipio 2010 y 2015", 2015, https://www.coneval.org.mx/Medicion/Paginas/AE_pobreza_municipal.aspx.
PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION THAT LACKS ACCESS TO SOCIAL 
SECURITY
State Indicators7
 Lack of access to social security is less prevalent in metropolitan areas than in the states in which they are located. 


Metropolitan Area Indicators8


7 CONEVAL.
8 CONEVAL.
SDG 2 -- ZERO HUNGER
Food insecurity is one of the components of the multidimensional measurement of poverty used in Mexico. It is measured using the Mexican Food Security Scale, which takes into account the variety of food consumed, whether individuals have skipped a meal, or whether they have suffered from hunger.9
State Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION FACING FOOD INSECURITY AND OF CHILDREN UNDER THE AGE OF FIVE WHO ARE UNDERWEIGHT10
 The states with the highest percentage of population facing food insecurity do not directly correspond to the states with the highest percentage of underweight children under the age of five. In Tabasco, for example, 45% of the population faces food insecurity, but it is below the national average for underweight children under the age of five. Chiapas, in turn, is below the national average in terms of the population facing food insecurity, but it is the state with the highest percentage of underweight children under the age of five.


9 National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy, Metodologia de la medici\0xF3n de pobreza en Mexico, second edition (Mexico City: CONEVAL, 2014), https://www.coneval.org.mx/Medicion/MP/Paginas/Metodologia.aspx.
10 CONEVAL, "Anexo Estadistico pobreza 2016"; Instituto Nacional de Salud Publica, "Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrici\0xF3n", 2012, https://ensanut.insp.mx/.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION FACING FOOD INSECURITY AND WITH AN INCOME BELOW THE MINIMUM STANDARD OF LIVING11
 In metropolitan areas, the percentage of the population with income lower than the minimum standard of living does not always correspond to the percentage of the population facing food insecurity. Less than 5% of the population of Monterrey, for example, lives on less than the minimum standard of living, but the percentage of the population facing food insecurity is similar to cities with twice the percentage of the population living on less than the minimum standard of living.


11 CONEVAL, "Anexo estadistico de la pobreza a nivel municipio 2010 y 2015".
SDG 3 -- GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
MATERNAL MORTALITY RATE PER 1,000 LIVE BIRTHS12 
State Indicators


Metropolitan Area Indicators


12 Health Secretariat, "Bases de Datos Estandar Defunciones," 2015, http://www.dgis.
salud.gob.mx/contenidos/basesdedatos/std_defunciones_gobmx.html; UNDER-FIVE MORTALITY RATE PER 1,000 LIVE BIRTHS13 
State Indicators


 
INFANT MORTALITY RATE PER 1,000 LIVE BIRTHS
Metropolitan Area Indicators


13 Health Secretariat, "Bases de Datos Estandar Nacidos Vivos Ocurridos," 2015, http:// www.dgis.salud.gob.mx/contenidos/basesdedatos/std_nacimientos_gobmx.html.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
SUICIDES PER 100,000 INHABITANTS14


14 INEGI, "Mortalidad, Tabulados", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/registros/vitales/mortalidad/; CONAPO, "Estimaciones y proyecciones de la poblaci\0xF3n por entidad federativa", retrieved May 15, 2018, http://www.conapo.gob. mx/es/CONAPO/Proyecciones_Datos.
SDG 4 -- QUALITY EDUCATION
 There is still a gender gap in terms of access to education, although it is low. On average, the difference between men and women at the preschool, elementary and high school levels is less than one percentage point. At the middle school level, the gender gap is 1.7 percentage points. Closing this gap will not only contribute to achieving educational objectives, but also to the equality and empowerment targets contained in SDG 5.
State Indicators
NET PRESCHOOL ENROLLMENT RATE 15


15 INEGI, "Caracteristicas educativas de la poblaci\0xF3n, tasa neta de matriculaci\0xF3n por entidad federativa segun nivel educativo", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/ temas/educacion/; SEP, "Sistema Interactivo de Consulta de Estadistica Educativa", 2016, http://www.planeacion.sep.gob.mx/principalescifras/.
NET HIGH SCHOOL ENROLLMENT RATE16


 
AVERAGE PLANEA SCORE17


16 INEGI, "Caracteristicas educativas de la poblaci\0xF3n, tasa neta de matriculaci\0xF3n por entidad federativa segun nivel educativo"; SEP, "Sistema Interactivo de Consulta de Estadistica Educativa".
17 INEE, "Bases de datos PLANEA, Evaluaciones de Logro referidas al Sistema Educativo Nacional. Sexto grado de primaria y Tercer grado de secundaria, ciclo escolar 20142015", 2015, https://www.inee.edu.mx/index.php/planea/bases-de-datos-planea.
LITERATE POPULATION AGE 15 AND ABOVE18
 The populations with the highest rates of illiteracy are concentrated in three states in southern Mexico: Guerrero, Oaxaca and Chiapas.


Metropolitan Area Indicators
AVERAGE EDUCATIONAL LEVEL OF THE POPULATION AGE 15 AND ABOVE19


18 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados", 2015, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/enchogares/especiales/intercensal/.
19 INEGI.
POPULATION BETWEEN THE AGES OF 3 AND 14 THAT ATTENDS SCHOOL AND WOMEN WHO STUDY20
 The percentage of women who study closely corresponds to the population that attends school, indicating that the country is approaching gender parity in terms of access to education. 


20 INEGI.
SDG 5 -- GENDER EQUALITY
State Indicators
PREVALENCE OF PARTNER VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AGE 15 AND ABOVE 
DURING THE LAST 12 MONTHS21


PREVALENCE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AGE 15 AND ABOVE AT SOME 
POINT IN THEIR LIFE22


21 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional sobre la Dinamica de las Relaciones en los Hogares 2016, Tabulados", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/enchogares/especiales/endireh/2016/default.html.
22 INEGI.
LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATE OF WOMEN23
 Despite expectations, there is no correlation between participation in the labor force and experiences of violence, whether partner violence or any other form of violence. 


PROPORTION OF WOMEN OCCUPYING MAYORALTIES24
 The proportion of women occupying mayoralties shows the role of women in decision-making and policy-making at the level closest to the citizenry.
 Only one state has, on average, gender parity at the mayoral level. In nine of Mexico's 32 states, over 40% of mayoralties are occupied by women, and over 30% are occupied by women in the remaining 26. Although women participate in making decisions at this level of government, there is still a gap. This is especially true in municipal governments, where much still needs to be done to achieve gender parity. 
23 Inmujeres, "Sistema de Indicadores de Genero, Tasa de participaci\0xF3n econ\0xF3mica", 2015, http://estadistica.inmujeres.gob.mx/formas/fichas.php?pag=2.
24 INEGI, "Censo Nacional de Gobiernos Municipales y Delegacionales 2015", 2015, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/censosgobierno/municipal/cngmd/ 2015/.
PROPORTION OF WOMEN IN MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS
State Indicators
 	

Metropolitan Area Indicators
WOMEN IN MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS25


25 INEGI, "Censo Nacional de Gobiernos Municipales y Delegacionales 2015".
UNREMUNERATED WORK PERFORMED BY WOMEN AND MEN26
State Indicators
 Women dedicate considerably more time to unremunerated work. Men dedicate approximately 9-14% of their time to unremunerated work, while women dedicate 22-36%. When the total time dedicated to unremunerated work increases, both men and women dedicate more hours to it each week. 


26 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
Metropolitan Area Indicators
LABOR EQUALITY AND WAGE EQUALITY27
 In metropolitan areas, there is no clear relationship between labor equality and wage equality. 


TEENAGE PREGNANCY RATE28


27 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ocupaci\0xF3n y Empleo 2016, Tabulados", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/enchogares/regulares/enoe/.
28 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
SDG 6 -- CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION 
 In metropolitan areas, access to running water is common. In 55 of the 59 cities examined, over 90% of the population has access to running water. The same is true with access to sewage and basic sanitation services, which is over 90% in 26 of Mexico's 32 states.
 Wastewater treatment, however, varies considerably between both states and metropolitan areas. As wastewater treatment is a municipal service, the percentage of wastewater treated can vary between different cities in the same state. 
State Indicators
POPULATION WITH ACCESS TO SEWAGE AND BASIC SANITATION29
 These services, provided by municipal governments, have a high degree of coverage. In 26 of Mexico's 32 states, 90% of the population or more has access to these services. 


29 INEGI.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT COVERAGE30
State Indicators


Metropolitan Area Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF WASTEWATER TREATED BY VOLUME


30 CONAGUA, "Inventario de Plantas Municipales de Potabilizaci\0xF3n y de Tratamiento de Aguas Residuales en Operaci\0xF3n 2015", 2015, https://www.gob.mx/conagua/ documentos/inventario-de-plantas-municipales-de-potabilizacion-y-de-tratamiento-de-aguas-residuales-en-operacion.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
POPULATION WITH ACCESS TO RUNNING WATER31
 In 55 out of 59 metropolitan areas, 90% of the population or more has access to running water.


31 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
SDG 7 -- AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY
State Indicators
PROPORTION OF THE POPULATION WITH ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY32
 Of the basic services examined in this report, electricity is the one with the highest degree of coverage across the country. In every state, over 95% of the population has access to electricity. 


 
Metropolitan Area Indicators
ENERGY INTENSITY33


32 INEGI.
33 Indicator calculated by the Mario Molina Center based on information from INAI's National Transparency Platform.
HOUSEHOLDS UTILIZING SOLAR ENERGY34
State Indicators
	 	

Metropolitan Area Indicators35


34 INEGI.
35 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
SDG 8 -- DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
 This is one of the SDGs where we can best see the interactions between different goals. While it focuses on economic growth, when formulating policies to reach this goal, it is essential to ensure that they are consistent with responsible production and consumption (SDG 12), that they do not contribute to climate change (SDG 13) and that they conserve marine and terrestrial ecosystems (SDGs 14 and 15).
 In the indicators for metropolitan areas, there is a strong positive correlation between a city's economic diversification and the percentage of the population employed in the formal economy.
State Indicators
REAL GDP GROWTH36


36 INEGI, "PIB y Cuentas nacionales de Mexico", 2015, http://www.inegi.org.mx/est/contenidos/proyectos/cn/.
State Indicators
INFORMAL SECTOR EMPLOYMENT RATE, AGE 15 AND ABOVE37


 
Metropolitan Area Indicators
ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES38


37 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ocupaci\0xF3n y Empleo 2016, Tabulados".
38 CNBV, "Bases de Datos de Inclusi\0xF3n Financiera", 2013, http://www.cnbv.gob.mx/Inclusi%C3%B3n/Paginas/Bases-de-Datos.aspx.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
UNEMPLOYMENT39


 
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION AND FORMAL SECTOR EMPLOYMENT40
 In metropolitan areas, a higher degree of economic diversification corresponds to a larger percentage of the population employed in the formal economy.


100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Economic diversification
39 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ocupaci\0xF3n y Empleo 2016, Tabulados".
40 INEGI, "Directorio Nacional de Unidades Econ\0xF3micas", 2014, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/app/mapa/denue/; INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ocupaci\0xF3n y Empleo 2016, Tabulados".
SDG 9 -- INDUSTRY, INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
 The share of the industrial sector in the GDP shows considerable regional variations, as there are states with a clear industrial vocation.
State Indicators
MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL SYSTEM OF RESEARCHERS (SNI) PER 1,000 
ECONOMICALLY ACTIVE INHABITANTS41


THE INDUSTRIAL SECTOR'S SHARE OF THE GDP, PER STATE (AT CONSTANT 
2008 PRICES)42


41 CONACYT, "Informe General del estado de la ciencia, la tecnologia y la innovaci\0xF3n 2015", 2015, http://www.siicyt.gob.mx/index.php/estadisticas/informe-general/ informe-general-2015; CONAPO, "Estimaciones y proyecciones de la poblaci\0xF3n por entidad federativa".
42 INEGI, "Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de Mexico", 2015, http://www.inegi.org.mx/est/contenidos/proyectos/scn/.
BUDGET FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AS PART OF MIXED STATE 
FUNDS43


PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS WITH INTERNET44


43 CONACYT, "Estadisticas de Fondos Mixtos", 2015, https://www.conacyt.gob.mx/index.php/fondos-y-apoyos/fondos-mixtos.
44 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional Sobre Disponibilidad y Uso de Tecnologias de la Informaci\0xF3n en los Hogares 2016, Tabulados", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/ enchogares/regulares/dutih/2016/default.html.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
CELLULAR SERVICE ACCESS45


45 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
SDG 10 -- REDUCED INEQUALITIES
Mexico is consistently listed as one of the OECD countries with the highest degree of inequality. In 2016, Mexico had a Gini coefficient of 0.498.46 
 Mexico's metropolitan areas have a lower level of inequality than the national average. In 2010, Mexico had a Gini coefficient of 0.509. That same year, its metropolitan areas had a lower coefficient, that is, less inequality. According to these figures, the country's least unequal cities are comparable to the least unequal OECD countries.47
State Indicators
PER CAPITA GDP, ADJUSTED FOR THE GINI COEFFICIENT48 


46 CONEVAL, "CONEVAL informa la evoluci\0xF3n de la pobreza 2010-2016", Press release 2017, https://www.coneval.org.mx/SalaPrensa/Comunicadosprensa/Documents/ Comunicado-09-Medicion-pobreza-2016.pdf.
47 "Compare Your Country - Income Distribution and Poverty", retrieved May 22, 2018 //www.compareyourcountry.org/inequality?lg=en.
48 CONEVAL, "Mapas y cifras de pobreza State, Indicadores de desigualdad", 2015, https://www.coneval.org.mx/coordinacion/entidades/Paginas/inicioent.aspx; INEGI, "Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de Mexico".
Metropolitan Area Indicators
WAGE INEQUALITY49


 
Gini COEFFICIENT50


49 INEGI, "Encuesta Nacional de Ocupaci\0xF3n y Empleo 2016, Tabulados".
50 CONEVAL, "Evoluci\0xF3n y determinantes de la pobreza de las principales ciudades de Mexico 1990-2010", 2014, https://www.coneval.org.mx/Informes/Pobreza/ Pobreza%20urbana/Evolucion_determinantes_de_la_pobreza_urbana.pdf.
SDG 11 -- SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
State Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION LACKING BASIC HOUSING SERVICES AND WITHOUT ACCESS TO QUALITY AND SUFFICIENT LIVING SPACE51
 Despite a high degree of coverage for running water, sewage, sanitation and power services, as shown by the indicators for SDGs 6 and 7, some states have major deficiencies of basic housing services, which is considered to be a lack of running water on site, a lack of a connection to a sewer system or septic tank, a lack of electricity or the presence of a wood or charcoal stove without a chimney.
 Although the intensity of deficiencies in terms of quality and sufficient living space is lower, the states with a high percentage of the population lacking access to basic housing services also have a higher percentage of the population lacking access to quality and sufficient living space, which is considered to be housing with walls and ceilings made of non-resistant materials, housing with dirt floors or the presence of more than 2.5 people per room.


51 CONEVAL, "Anexo Estadistico pobreza 2016".
State Indicators
EMISSIONS OF SUSPENDED PARTICLES WITH DIAMETERS SMALLER THAN 
2.5 MICROMETERS AND SMALLER THAN 10 MICROMETERS52
 Monterrey, Toluca, Salamanca, Le\0xF3n, Irapuato and Silao are among the 25 most polluted cities in the Americas53, according to the concentration of particulate matter with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less in the air, which the WHO considers to be the atmospheric pollutant with the greatest effect on human health.54
250000



52 INEGI, "Catalogo Nacional de Indicadores, Emisi\0xF3n nacional de contaminantes por particulas suspendidas con diametros menores de 2.5 micr\0xF3metros y menores de 10 micr\0xF3metros por fuente.", 2011, http://www3.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/cni/ escenario.aspx?idOrden=1.1&ind=6200011962&gen=751&d=n.
53 World Health Organization, "WHO Global Urban Ambient Air Pollution Database (update 2016)," WHO, 2016, http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/ databases/cities/en/.
54 World Health Organization, "Contaminaci\0xF3n del Aire Ambiental," WHO, January 24, 2017, https://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=12918%3A2017-ambient-air-pollution&catid=2619%3Aenvironmental-he alth&Itemid=42246&lang=es.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
AIR QUALITY55


 
MODAL SHARE56
 Modal share was calculated by evaluating commutes, broken down by mode of transportation, to determine if sustainable modes predominated. The modes analyzed were private cars, public transportation, bicycles and walking. The highest scores correspond to cities where non-motorized and collective modes of transportation prevail.


55 INECC, "Informe Nacional de Calidad del Aire 2015" (Instituto Nacional de Ecologia y Cambio Climatico, 2016), http://www.gob.mx/inecc/articulos/ nuevo-informe-nacional-de-calidad-del-aire-2015-mexico.
56 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados"; BID, "Guia Metodol\0xF3gica Programa de Ciudades Emergentes y Sostenibles: Tercera edici\0xF3n", October 1, 2016, http:// publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8119.
GREEN SPACE PER CAPITA57
 	None of the 59 metropolitan areas analyzed meets the standard of 9 m2 of green space per person, as recommended by the WHO.58


GROWTH OF URBAN SPRAWL59


57 Indicator calculated by the Mario Molina Center with information from INEGI, "Marco Geoestadistico Nacional", 2015, http://www.inegi.org.mx/geo/contenidos/geoestadistica/m_g_0.aspx.
58 Fuente: United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development, "Habitat III Issue Paper 11. Public Space", 2016, http://habitat3.org/ the-new-urban-agenda/documents/issue-papers/.
59 INEGI, "Censo de Poblaci\0xF3n y Vivienda 2010", 2010, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/ccpv/2010/; INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
LOW-INCOME POPULATION WITH ACCESS TO PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION60


60 INEGI, "Censo de Poblaci\0xF3n y Vivienda 2010".
SDG 12 -- RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION 
State Indicators
PER CAPITA COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE AND HOUSEHOLDS THAT SEPARATE THEIR WASTE61
 The states that have a higher percentage of households that separate their waste are those that have lower quantities of waste collected per person. 


61 INEGI, "Encuesta Intercensal 2015, Tabulados".
Metropolitan Area Indicators
PER CAPITA GENERATION OF SOLID WASTE


REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT OF SOLID WASTE
 This indicator was calculated based on information available on the websites of municipal governments regarding their waste management regulations. Points were calculated based on an evaluation that determines if municipal waste management regulations incorporate the three principles established in the General Law on Waste Reduction and Comprehensive Waste Management (LGPGIR, for its acronym in Spanish).


SDG 13 -- CLIMATE ACTION
State Indicators
SHARE OF NATIONAL CARBON MONOXIDE EMISSIONS62


62 INEGI, "Catalogo Nacional de Indicadores, Emisi\0xF3n nacional de contaminantes por mon\0xF3xido de carbono por fuente.", 2011, http://www3.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/cni/ escenario.aspx?ind=6200011964&gen=748&d=n&idOrden=1.1.
Metropolitan Area Indicators
CLIMATE ACTION PROGRAMS
 This indicator measures the percentage of local governments that have either prepared or made progress on municipal or regional climate action plans. These climate action plans are policy programs that build capacity and raise awareness among public servants and decision-makers regarding the causes and effects of climate change at the local level. 


SDG 14 -- LIFE BELOW WATER
 Part of Mexico's Federal Maritime Zone administered by the National Commission on Natural Protected Areas. These federal zones are strategic areas that are protected to guarantee the sustainable management of marine and coastal ecosystems.
State Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF THE FEDERAL MARITIME ZONE SET ASIDE FOR 
CONSERVATION63


Baja California and Northwest and Southern Border, Yucatan Peninsula Coastal Plain and West and Central 
	Northern Pacific Upper Gulf of Isthmus and and Mexican Gulf of Mexico	Pacific
California Southern Pacific Caribbean
63 CONANP, "Prontuario Estadistico y Geografico de las \0xC1reas Naturales Protegidas de Mexico", 2016, http://entorno.conanp.gob.mx/docs/PRONTUARIO-ANP-2015.pdf.
SDG 15 -- LIFE ON LAND
State Indicators
PERCENTAGE OF THE STATE'S SURFACE AREA SET ASIDE FOR FEDERAL 
NATURAL PROTECTED AREAS64


EXISTENCE OF FORESTS AND JUNGLES65


64 Environmental and Natural Resources Secretariat, "Superficie estimada de \0xC1reas Naturales Protegidas federales por entidad federativa," 2016, http://dgeiawf. semarnat.gob.mx:8080/ibi_apps/WFServlet?IBIF_ex=D3_BIODIV04_20&IBIC_ user=dgeia_mce&IBIC_pass=dgeia_mce&NOMBREENTIDAD=*.
65 INEGI, "Uso de suelo y vegetaci\0xF3n, serie V", 2011, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/temas/mapas/usosuelo/.
LOSS OF VIRGIN FORESTS AND JUNGLES IN THE PERIOD 1976-2008 




SDG 16 -- PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS
HOMICIDE RATE PER 100,000 INHABITANTS66
State Indicators
 	

 
Metropolitan Area Indicators67


66 SEGOB, "Secretariado Ejecutivo del Sistema Nacional de Seguridad Publica, Indicencia delictiva del fuero comun", 2017, http://secretariadoejecutivo.gob.mx/incidencia-delictiva/incidencia-delictiva-fuero-comun.php.
67 INEGI, "Mortalidad, Tabulados".
State Indicators
NUMBER OF JUDGES PER 100,000 INHABITANTS68


 
STATE AND MUNICIPAL POLICE PER 100,000 INHABITANTS69


68 INEGI, "Censo Nacional de Impartici\0xF3n de Justicia State 2016, Tabulados", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/censosgobierno/State/cnije/2016/.
69 INEGI, "Censo Nacional de Gobiernos Municipales y Delegacionales 2017", 2017, http://www.beta.inegi.org.mx/proyectos/censosgobierno/municipal/cngmd/2017/; CONAPO, "Estimaciones y proyecciones de la poblaci\0xF3n por entidad federativa".
State Indicators
OPEN GOVERNMENT INDEX AND TRANSPARENCY METRIC70


 
70 CIDE, "Metrica de Gobierno Abierto, Reporte de Resultados 2017" (Centro de Investigaci\0xF3n y Docencia Econ\0xF3micas, 2017), http://rendiciondecuentas.org.mx/ metrica-de-gobierno-abierto/; CIDE, "Metrica de la Transparencia" (Centro de Investigaci\0xF3n y Docencia Econ\0xF3micas, 2014), http://www.metricadetransparencia. cide.edu/?section=Documentos.
State Indicators
RATE OF PEOPLE AGE 18 AND ABOVE WHO FEEL THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD OR 
TOWN IS UNSAFE, PER 100,000 INHABITANTS AGE 18 AND ABOVE
The perception of insecurity is not always connected to the homicide rate. The State of Mexico has the highest perception of insecurity, but it comes in 22nd in terms of its homicide rate, while Colima has the highest homicide rate, but comes in 8th in terms of perception of insecurity. 


Metropolitan Area Indicators
MUNICIPAL BUDGET TRANSPARENCY INDEX


SDG 17 -- PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS
 Measuring this goal at the subnational level proved to be particularly challenging. The national indicators defined by the CTEODS are not disaggregated at the subnational level, while the global indicators take the country as a whole as the basic unit or have a supranational perspective.
State Indicators
NUMBER OF INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION PROJECTS PER 
STATE71
This mapping of international development cooperation projects and actions by subnational governments was jointly conducted by AMEXCID and the UNDP. The results of this project will be published in 2018 in the report Mapping of International Development Cooperation Projects and Actions by Subnational Governments in Mexico.


71 AMEXCID and UNDP, "Mapeo de proyectos y acciones de cooperaci\0xF3n internacional de gobiernos subnacionales en Mexico," August, 2018
FINANCIAL DEPENDENCE72
State Indicators


Metropolitan Area Indicators


72 INEGI, "Finanzas publicas Statees y municipales", 2016, http://www.beta.inegi.org.
mx/proyectos/registros/economicas/finanzas/.
SHARE OF TOTAL EXPORTS, BY STATE73


CONCLUSION
The indicators presented in this appendix show major differences between states, between metropolitan areas and even between metropolitan areas and the states in which they are located. This highlights the importance of the local implementation of the 2030 Agenda. State and municipal governments should have the capacity to detect areas of opportunity and focus policies to address them in accordance with the priorities and programs defined at the federal level.
The central axis of this Agenda is "leaving no one behind". To achieve this, and ensure that development benefits the entire country, it is essential to have a subnational vision. Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals will be measured not only with national averages, but also with disaggregated data.









19





















19

19



19

















19

19



19

















28

19



19





28

19











19





 

 



19





 

 



19











19



19





28

19



28





28

19









28

19









28

19









28

19









28

19









28













19























19



19

















102

101



101

























