Main Messages

Bahrain's development process has been accelerating for decades and has accelerated with the overall development of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa and the Economic Vision 2030, which has dedicated sustainability, competitiveness and justice to the goal of doubling the real family income. By 2030. Under the leadership of His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa, Prime Minister and with the support of His Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, Crown Prince and Deputy Supreme Commander, First Deputy Prime Minister, paid great attention to economic, human and structural development. Which has successfully achieved the Millennium Development Goals and laid the sound foundations for the launching of sustainable development.

Achievements

\0x0646\0x0633\0x0628\0x0629 The proportion of the population below the extreme poverty line is zero.

\0x0645\0x062A\0x0648\0x0633\0x0637 \0x200B\0x200BThe average annual economic growth in the last decade was 37.4%, and the average per capita GDP is about 22 thousand US dollars in 2017.

\0x0646\0x0633\0x0628\0x0629 Expenditure on health services, education and social protection exceeds 35% of total government expenditure.

\0xF0FC Basic education is free and compulsory. The net enrollment ratio for the primary and secondary levels is 100% and 86.4% respectively, thus eliminating illiteracy, while enrollment in kindergartens is 82%.

\0xF0FC The population is receiving treatment and medicines free of charge, and maternal mortality has dropped to 28.6 deaths per 100,000 live births, compared to 226 deaths per 100,000 live births worldwide, and deaths of children under five have declined to 9 per 1,000 live births compared with 44 worldwide.

\0xF0FC The constitution establishes the equality of women and men. At the initiative of the Supreme Council for Women, equal opportunities committees were formed and budgets were applied. Bahraini women hold 55% of the supervisory positions, with 53% participation in the public sector and 33% in the private sector.

\0xF0FC The private sector is a strategic partner in development and provides equal employment opportunities with high wages which contributed to the decrease of unemployment to about 4%.

\0x062D\0x0648\0x0627\0x0644\0x064A About 65% of the population benefited from housing services and five sustainable cities are being built.

\0xF0FC Covering potable water systems, sanitation networks, clean energy 100% of the population.

\0xF0FC The Tamkeen (Empowerment) Fund provided SMEs with the skills needed to succeed. Has injected more than $ 2.5 billion into more than 47,000 institutions and has helped train more than 120,000 women, youth and people with disabilities since its inception.







No one is left behind by the development process

The Constitution and public policies guarantee universal access to basic services. Government programs and civil society projects provide support to female workers, persons with disabilities and those with limited income. It also includes expatriate public and social services, health and housing insurance, protection against arbitrary dismissal and freedom from the sponsorship system through a flexible work program that allows the expatriate to work without a sponsor. It has also launched several initiatives to protect migrant workers' rights and combat human trafficking.

Regional integration and international contribution

Bahrain is part of the GCC system. Its regional integration is strategically important for sustaining security and stability. Bahrain provides humanitarian assistance to mitigate the impact of disasters and provides more than 600,000 permanent jobs for expatriates. Their financial transfers amounted to BD 927 million (US $ 2.5 billion) in 2017, contributing to the development of their countries and alleviating poverty from their families.

Implementation mechanism

The objectives of sustainable development are implemented through government action programs in partnership with the private sector and civil society. The current program includes 6 strategic axes that intersect with the main areas of sustainable development objectives. The comparison showed that 78% of the objectives of the objectives are included in the current program. This approach will be pursued in future programs.



Prepare the report

The National Information Committee, chaired by HE the Minister of Cabinet Affairs, will monitor the goals and objectives of sustainable development and its indicators, link them to the government's programs of work, monitor programs and policies that achieve these objectives, and measure progress. The National Information Committee and the Follow-up Committee coordinated the preparation of the national report through a team that collected information and data from the sectoral reports, national reports submitted to international organizations, and held consultative workshops and took their outputs in the process of preparing the report.



Current and future challenges

As a small island developing country, Bahrain faces the following challenges:

 Climate change threatens water and agricultural resources, biodiversity, coastal installations, infrastructure and health. This requires the transfer and resettlement of appropriate green technologies, funding, national capacity-building and community awareness raising.

 Sustainability of the booming economy to provide an attractive environment for investment and rewarding and rewarding employment opportunities for citizens.

 Strengthen the role of evidence-based national statistics to improve their quality and transparency and regularly monitor indicators of sustainable development.

 Addressing the phenomenon of extremism, terrorism, conflicts and exclusion in the Bahraini society to maintain its unity and unity and preserve the national development gains.



Bahrain reaffirms its commitment to the goals of sustainable development for the well-being of citizens and the sustainability of resources for future generations.



Summary

The present review seeks to monitor Bahrain's march towards sustainable development and addresses the experiences and experience of Bahrain in dealing with the 2030 Sustainable Development Plan, the level of achievement achieved for the goals and objectives, and the inter-dimensional interdependence of related development issues and the intellectual link between its causes and effects. And policies to sustain development and human well-being. The report is a good basis for identifying opportunities, challenges and areas for future development.

The preparation of the first national voluntary report of the Kingdom of Bahrain for the goals of sustainable development 2030 is the result of a consultative and participatory process for government agencies with a wide range of community groups, particularly civil society organizations, the private sector, academics and those concerned with development issues. This has contributed to raising awareness and raising interest in the Sustainable Development Plan 2030 and national development plans And the means of their synergy and paved the way for all those interested in contributing to the preparation of the report and benefit from it in the future.

The report is based on an authentic methodology in reading the global agenda and linking it to national development plans. It not only presented the achievements, but also the chapters on opportunities and challenges in the various economic, social, environmental, cultural and institutional fields. Thus, the report is a catalyst for dialogue and discussion between various development and academic parties, and a rich material for awareness and information in a process that begins after the presentation of the report at the United Nations, and does not end with it.

The Kingdom has been competing for sustainable development awards, and has launched international awards for initiatives that serve and accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The King Hamad Award for Youth Empowerment to Achieve Sustainable Development Goals, His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa for Urban Development and Housing, His Highness Award for Sustainable Development, and the Princess Sabika Bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa International Women's Empowerment Award, a catalyst for competition to achieve sustainable development goals 2030.

The report addressed a number of good practices, most notably the establishment of the National Information Committee, which helped to facilitate and update the exchange of data and indicators of the 2030 agenda among the providers of such data and used them. Which has increased the quality and reliability of official information. It has enabled decision-making on sound scientific grounds and in a comprehensive manner, without losing sight of the direction and foundations of development issues, as well as looking at future trends, ensuring sustainable development and achieving the principle of partnership and consultation.

The Economic Vision and Structural Strategic Plan 2030 is an important step in the planning of sustainable development in the Kingdom. Sustainable Development 2030, in its holistic, interdependent and inclusive nature and as the world's road map towards a sustainable future, presents a challenge and motivation to integrate its goals and objectives into successive government work programs to fill gaps and achieve further achievements. The approach and alignment of the 2030 Agenda and the Government's Action Program is to confirm that Bahrain has successfully integrated about 78% of the targets into the 2015-2018 Government Program. Bahrain looks forward to a more in-depth alignment and alignment of this agenda in the next government's work program 2019-2021 to enhance the sustainability of its development path.

The strategic partnership document signed between the Kingdom of Bahrain and United Nations agencies for the period 2018-2022 is an additional confirmation of the commitment of the Kingdom of Bahrain to achieve the goals of sustainable development 2030. This document includes several initiatives that drive this trend, including the cooperation initiative to support the preparation of the first voluntary national report to implement the development goals Sustainable development.

The report pointed out that the most important challenge faced by the Kingdom of Bahrain is to pursue the sustainability of a small island state in a changing climate, where population growth, urbanization and the accompanying demand for land, resources and services are putting pressure on their limited natural resources. The concentration of population and development facilities on coastal areas and the potential for sea-level rise due to climate change pose a threat to the sustainability of Bahrain's rich coastal ecosystems with its economic, social and environmental costs. The pursuit of future urbanization / urbanization and adaptations with sea-level rise are critical to sustaining development and sustaining large investments in coastal development facilities, ecosystem services and human well-being.

The integration of economic, social and environmental aspects and the recognition of the interlinkages between them is difficult unless there is international cooperation and technical and technical support. Development is cost-driven by the desire for sustainability that challenges small island States. The localization of smart technology, especially in the area of \0x200B\0x200Blarge data and cybersecurity, geospatial information systems, data modeling and forecasting is important in monitoring progress towards sustainability. Support is also required in the adoption of green technologies such as seawater desalination, clean production, waste recycling, optimization of treated wastewater, transportation networks, smart cities, etc. Bahrain's global partnerships in finance are critical to bridge the gap and achieve a sustainable development agenda. 2030. The solidarity of the international community with Bahrain in strengthening stability and security is necessary to raise the level of human development and promote human well-being and to move towards sustainability.

The Kingdom hopes that the report and the preparation of the current review will turn into a community-based process and culture of sustainability at the Kingdom level, including strengthening and facilitating participatory national statistics, expanding sustainability reporting at the sectoral and institutional level, capacity-building and community awareness of sustainability concepts, practices and behaviors. This process will facilitate societal understanding of the causes of policy-making for sustainability, both with respect to the rational consumption of resources or the maintenance of stability, peace, community cohesion, partnerships and others.



Chapter 1: Ownership of sustainable development objectives and reporting mechanism



1. 1. introduction

The Kingdom of Bahrain is presenting its first voluntary national report to the High Level Political Forum for Monitoring and Reporting on Progress in Implementing Sustainable Development Goals 2030. The report reviews national policies and recent information on various development issues in the Kingdom, progress made and steps taken to implement the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda at the national level, And challenges. The report presents the overall objectives of sustainable development with a focus on priority issues for the Kingdom and on the objectives to be discussed at the thematic sessions of the Forum under the theme "Transitions towards flexible and sustainable societies" and goals 6, 7, 11, 12, 15, Bahrain is preparing to organize three side events in the forum on housing policies and projects, labor market reforms and Tamkeen's efforts to empower Bahrainis in the private sector and entrepreneurship.

1. National ownership of the sustainable development agenda and people's opinion

National ownership of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda is reflected in the development of regulatory frameworks and institutional mechanisms to follow them; adapting the contents of this agenda to national characteristics and the Government's work program (2015-2018), citizen participation through more means of enlightenment and prioritizing the Kingdom . The results of the United Nations (2014/2015) survey and the fulfillment of 6,336 individuals showed that the interest of Bahraini citizens is focused on a number of areas, including quality education, better health care, better job opportunities and protection from crime and violence.

All surveys conducted in the framework of this report, whether for civil society organizations, the private sector, the academic sector and those concerned with sustainable development, confirm that the priority sustainable development objectives of the Kingdom of Bahrain were good education issues (Goal 4), good health 3), decent work and economic growth (goal 8), alongside security and stability to sustain gains and sustainable development is the first priority of citizens in Bahrain. This is natural. The basic sustainable development issues of the peoples of the world, such as poverty and hunger, and the availability of drinking water and sanitation services, energy reliability, availability of housing, infrastructure and others are not available to the Bahraini citizen. The State has succeeded in securing them over the years through its successive programs of work.



1.3. Institutional mechanisms

Decree No. 21 of March 2015 concerning the establishment of the National Information Committee under the chairmanship of the Minister of Cabinet Affairs and the membership of ministries and government agencies and its amendments with a view to following up the development agenda beyond 2015 and linking them to development programs and plans in line with the Kingdom's aspirations to monitor the sustainability of its development process. The Information and eGovernment Authority has been responsible for monitoring sustainable development indicators, coordinating the collection of data from different sources and disaggregating them according to sex, location and others. And succeeded in integrating 78% of the goals of the 2030 agenda into programs and initiatives for the 2015-2018 Government Program of Action. On the other hand, some destinations have been exceeded because of their lack of conformity with the Bahraini situation due to their geographical and urban nature, such as all related to forests, epidemics, the rural environment, etc., or as a result of their actual realization, such as the existence of a legal identity for every citizen and resident. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which Bahrain joined in 1989.

Institutional organization has helped the National Information Commission to adopt sustainable development objectives across all government sectors, to begin collecting and classifying its own indicators, to prepare sustainability reports and to provide them in turn to the Information and E-Government Authority, establishing a monitoring and reporting system for such indicators, Among all partners. The establishment of an electronic system to monitor the implementation of the tasks of the Government's work program on a regular basis makes it easy to obtain accurate information on the main statistics and indicators of government bodies, to submit periodic reports to the Council of Ministers, to follow up the implementation of government projects and to take appropriate decisions on projects that are in need. to her.

To complement the institutional mechanisms, the national database of indicators for sustainable development goals 2030 has been developed with a view to enhancing coordination and cooperation between data providers and users, linking government action programs and sustainable development objectives and monitoring and exchanging information thereon to complement decision makers with integrated information.



1. 4. The mechanism of preparing the report

The present report is based on the guidelines proposed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations contained in the Manual for the Preparation of the Voluntary National Reviews of 2018 prepared by the Department for Sustainable Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations, and which harmonizes with peers globally. The report reviews the progress made towards the overall objectives of sustainable development 2030, focusing on the objectives for the 2018 review, enabling policy and environment, institutional mechanisms and means of implementation.

However, the function of the present report goes beyond mere presentation at the high-level global political forum and the exchange of experiences with other regional States to a range of national functions, including enhancing national ownership of the global agenda and adapting it to Bahrain's characteristics by linking them to national plans; Challenges and future directions of the Kingdom, making it a valid report for internal evaluation as well, and guiding further steps in accelerating the achievement of development goals.

The Information and E-Government Authority (National Statistical Office) immediately informed the President of the Economic and Social Council of its intention to present the voluntary review in 2018 by developing a roadmap for the preparation of the review through a number of meetings and mini-workshops with the National Information Committee, chaired by the Minister of Cabinet Affairs 21 ministries and government bodies and identify the bodies directly related to the 17 sustainable development goals, in addition to tracking the intersections of each goal with the other sixteen goals. And then start collecting the necessary information and data, and prepared each report with the completion of their indicators from the list of indicators of sustainable development 2030.

A team of representatives of the Prime Minister's Office, the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs, the Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Information and E-Government Authority were also formed to follow up the preparation process first. The report was based on reports of stakeholders directly related to the 17 sustainable development goals and relevant national reports submitted to UN conferences. Consultations were held with the Resident Coordinator for United Nations activities and United Nations offices accredited in the Kingdom of Bahrain, as well as with a delegation from the United Nations Department for Sustainable Development who visited Bahrain in early May 2018.

Representatives of civil society organizations, the private sector, academics, research and studies centers, educational and media institutions, women and youth participated in three workshops held in April 2018. Participation was open to all those interested in sustainable development issues ; Workshops contributed to raising public awareness of the goals and objectives of sustainable development 2030.



1.5. Regional and international contribution

The Kingdom of Bahrain has played an important role in the preparation of the goals of sustainable development 2030 at the national, regional and international levels, in formulating its means of implementation, in formulating the funding framework and in the follow-up and review mechanism. The second session of the Arab Forum for Sustainable Development, which resulted in the Bahrain document, which included 19 recommendations on the most important issues related to sustainable development in the Arab States, was hosted by the United Nations High Level Political Forum in July Kingdom of Bahrain The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) States of the Expert Group (IAEG) on the identification of indicators of sustainable development goals, which hosted its fifth meeting in November 2017.

The development of the partnership with the Office of the Resident Coordinator for the activities of the United Nations in Bahrain in relation to the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030, which culminated in October 2017, Contracts between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the United Nations represented by 16 UN agencies operating in Bahrain. The aim of the agreement is to transfer Bahrain's expertise abroad, bring international expertise to Bahrain, support projects launched in Bahrain internationally, and prevent duplication of initiatives and projects within the context of the Government's Plan of Action 2019-2022, Bahrain Economic Vision 2030, Sustainable Development 2030. A coordinating committee chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Office of the Resident Coordinator for the United Nations activities in Bahrain has been set up to work on this agreement. This synergy among partners contributed to the successful coordination of the preparation of the present report.



Chapter II: Enabling policies and environment



2. 1. Introduction

The Kingdom of Bahrain is one of the pioneers in launching the development process. The government has adopted many policies and strategies to diversify the economy and raise the standard of living of citizens and achieve a balance between economic, social and environmental aspects. Since the accession of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa in 1999, the Kingdom has achieved remarkable achievements in the field of democracy, political reform, economic and human development, conservation of natural resources and the environment within the overall development process.

On February 14, 2001, the National Action Charter, approved by 98.4% of the people, laid the foundation for the stability of society. Of a constitutional monarchy that establishes the principle of separation of powers, guarantees personal and religious freedoms, freedom of expression and publication, freedom of association and trade unions, and equates citizens before the law with rights, duties and other principles; parliamentary elections were therefore held. Where the Bahraini people exercised their political and constitutional rights in full. The elections were held for four consecutive sessions in 2002, 2006, 2010 and 2014. The number of civil society organizations in Bahrain increased from 100 in 1999 to 613 currently. In the fourth quarter of this year, the 2018 elections will be held to select the members of the House of Representatives and form a new Shura Council.

The Constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain also affirms the principles of sustainable development in which the national economy is based on social justice and is based on equitable cooperation between public activity and private activity. Its objective is economic development in accordance with a planned plan and the achievement of prosperity for the citizens. In Articles 8, 9 and 11, And the need to balance between them and the requirements of development and consolidate it through laws and legislation and the work of institutions.

This progress in enabling policies and environment has been accompanied by sustained economic and social growth reflected in the high rates of human development indicators, and Bahrain is one of the first countries in the region with high human development rates. The world's average life expectancy at birth was 77 years, while the per capita GDP was about BD8,272 (US $ 22,000). Bahrain was the first among the countries in the region to settle Goals and Achievement.

In 2005, a decision was made to prepare the "National Strategic Structural National Plan" which took into account the principles of balance and flexibility between economic growth and land use to achieve sustainable development that meet the needs of the current generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs. The plan aims to reduce reliance on oil and gas revenues, reform the labor market and education and training systems, and make Bahrain the capital of the Gulf in the fields of finance, exchange and business led by the private sector. Societal openness.

In 2008, Economic Vision 2030 was launched with the primary objective of doubling the real household income by 2030. The vision was based on three basic principles: "Competitiveness, justice and sustainability" 

The Kingdom's ambition on the three main levels of "economy, government and society" and answered questions about the nature of society and the role that both the public and private sectors can play in the economic development process, which reflected positively on Bahrain's pursuit of sustainable development.

On the other hand, the Government's work program (2018-2015) focused on diversifying the economy, supporting and supporting the growth of the non-oil sectors, opening up to foreign investments and strengthening public-private partnership. Which contributed to the contribution of non-oil sectors in 2017 to more than 80% of the active activities in the Bahraini economy.

The Health Plan (2025-2016) is concerned with building confidence in the national health system, reducing diseases and inequalities in access to health care and medicines, and complements the National Plan for Reducing Noncommunicable Diseases, developed by the Ministry of Health (Goal 3) ). In the education sector, access to education was not only assured but also quality and the development of vocational skills for young people and entrepreneurship (Goal 4). In the energy sector, Bahrain's 2016 energy policy is in line with goal 7 of the sustainable development objectives of improving the reliability and efficiency of electricity and increasing energy security, increasing the share of renewable energy in the national energy mix, electricity and water connectivity with the GCC countries, Energy and food. In the water sector, Bahrain has achieved its objectives in the quality and quantity of domestic water, and its treatment and reuse in the agricultural and municipal sector and the reforestation of urban areas and barren areas. While the National Water Strategy (2035-2017) is in line with Goal 6 of the Sustainable Development Goals. The objective of the agricultural initiative is to promote sustainable agriculture, food security, improved nutrition and hunger eradication (Goal 2). Furthermore, it also takes into account other sustainable development goals related to health (Goal 3), poverty (Goal 1), gender equality Target 5), water and sanitation (goal 6), sustainable production and consumption (target 12) and climate change (target 13).

The Supreme Council for the Environment is developing a legal framework to reduce marine pollution from land-based activities, protect marine and coastal ecosystems, conserve and make fisheries more sustainable and contribute to the achievement of goal 14, air quality and waste (targets 3 and 11) and climate change Target 13), biodiversity protection, desertification and goal 15 and others.

2.2. Integration between dimensions and national adaptation

Bahrain attaches great importance to the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable economic, social and environmental development. It also takes into account the political and institutional component of the State (ie, peace and good governance), believing that "there is no development without peace or peace without development". Bahrain pays particular attention to knowledge, innovation and culture, not to sustainable development without upgrading science and knowledge without developing a system of values, behaviors and innovations that achieve sustainable development. This interdependence finds its echo in the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030, which has identified five areas: people, planet, prosperity, peace, and partnership, intersecting with the three dimensions of development mentioned above.

At the national level, the Economic Vision 2030 adopted three key guiding principles: competitiveness, justice and sustainability, which are inseparable elements to achieve their goals of achieving stable and lasting progress in the welfare of citizens by "doubling the per capita real income by 2030 with Taking into account sustainability requirements ". These three elements are understood in relation to the three dimensions of the economic vision of the Kingdom of Bahrain 2030, the economic dimension (competitiveness principle), the social dimension (justice), the environmental dimension (sustainability), and the inclusion of policies and procedures within the pillars of the 2015-2018 government work program. Six axes: the sovereign axis; the economic and financial axis; the social services and human development pillar; the environmental and urban development focal point; the infrastructure hub; and the government performance pillar. It has developed a strategic objective, policies and actions for each axis that are mutually supportive, intersecting with the five areas of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda and overall development dimensions.



2. 3. Towards a development that does not exclude anyone Leave No One Behind

The development of Bahrain has not excluded anyone, including all the groups and individuals most in need of benefiting from development revenues. This has been facilitated by the availability of statistics and indicators disaggregated by sex, age, place of residence, standard of living, type and degree of disability, etc., so that concerned parties can monitor inequality and identify social groups Of citizens with special difficulties, migrant workers in occupations and low-income jobs.

The concept of extreme poverty in accordance with international standards does not apply to Bahrain (as stated above). The Constitution and public policies guarantee universal access to basic services without exception. It should be noted that the coverage rate of the population of public services of water, sanitation and electricity is 100%, and also include expatriates. As for education, it is free for all at all stages and is mandatory for citizens in the basic stage. Health care is also free. In addition, Bahrain provides a package of social assistance programs in accordance with Law No. 18 of 2006 on Social Security and Social Assistance, which helps ensure minimum basic living conditions for citizens and their families (Such as orphans, disabled persons, widows, the elderly, families of prisoners and others). The total amount of such assistance amounted to $ 265 million in the past five years, benefiting 8% of the families.

As well as other services and assistance such as Zakat funds, the Royal Charity Organization and others (with the participation of the private sector and civil society organizations) so there is nothing that can be considered numerically social groups or groups of marginalized and excluded population from government policies and programs that provide the basic services Under whatever circumstances, and with the guarantee of the Constitution.



Financial assistance

The Government is constantly working to provide various social and development services to all members of society, creating a Bahraini society based on solidarity, cohesion and partnership,

These include:

1) direct financial assistance to families and low-income individuals, including widows, divorcees, families of prisoners, displaced persons, orphans, the elderly, children, unmarried women and those unable to work)

2) financial assistance to persons with disabilities,

3) financial assistance to families who lost their homes due to the fire,

4) Reduction of electricity and water charges for needy families,

5) monetary compensation for citizens in exchange for raising meat subsidies,

6) Housing allowance for Bahraini families until they obtain housing,

7) financial facilities in cooperation with the private sector to provide social housing,

8) financial assistance for the unemployed,

9) Direct financial assistance for retirees with low income.





On the other hand, the National Strategy for the Protection of Women against Domestic Violence and the National Plan for the Advancement of Bahraini Women (2013-2022) aims at achieving family stability for women in the context of family cohesion, protecting women from all forms of violence and their participation in national development and providing sources of knowledge, And encouraged the establishment of equal opportunity committees in state institutions and the adoption of budgets responsive to the needs of women and men to ensure justice and equal opportunities (Goal 5 and 10).

As for persons with disabilities, the Ministry of Labor and Social Development, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education, in cooperation with civil society organizations, private institutions and the private sector, provide various types of social, health and cultural care and rehabilitate and train them to integrate them into the labor market and society. With disabilities to receive all the necessary needs, where the provision of financial allowances benefiting the benefit of 10 thousand disabled, as well as providing special support to those who support them. As well as the establishment of complexes and centers of comprehensive disability for the care of people with disabilities and autism and cerebral palsy and the marketing and training of their products and develop their skills to integrate them in the labor market, and in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ratified by Bahrain in 2011.

On the other hand, it was one of Bahrain's priorities to care for children since birth. It has established a civil register since 1984 to register individuals and provide a legal identity for every citizen and resident. All births are recorded immediately after birth and in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Article 7 of this Convention provides that "the child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire a nationality and, to the extent possible, the right to know and receive care for his parents." In 1999, the National Committee for Childhood, which oversaw the implementation of the National Strategy for Childhood, aimed at providing a safe environment for all children, achieving all their aspirations for a safe and prosperous life, promoting their conditions and obtaining all their rights under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, And international agreements without discrimination by providing for the various needs and rights of the child to health, survival, learning, capacity development, protection and the right to participation and non-discrimination. In the same context, the Child Protection Center, a social welfare institution of the Ministry of Labor and Social Development, which protects children up to the age of 18 from all forms of abuse and neglect (sexual and psychological abuse and extreme neglect), was established in 2007 to protect children from abuse in the family Society and work to protect them from abuse and provide psychological, social and legal services to them, and also include rehabilitation of the family in order to keep the child in his family environment as much as possible or to find an alternative family in case of abuse.

On the other hand, the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to providing the best health, social and educational care for the youth, and takes the responsibility of educating the community on the importance of raising young people, improving their skills, enhancing their spirit of citizenship and belonging, and encouraging their participation in youth activities. The Ministry of Youth and Sports allocated sports facilities and youth centers, which reached 39 centers distributed across the Kingdom's governorates. The number of beneficiaries reached about 12 000 young men and women in 2017 and keen on partnership with the private sector (objective 17) to promote social integration among the different sectors of society Widely. The Ministry of Youth and Sports has also developed a youth strategy closely related to Bahrain Economic Vision 2030 and sustainable development goals.

As for the services provided to the elderly, since 1985, a number of day care centers or specialized day care centers have been established to provide social, psychological and health care for the elderly throughout Bahrain. The private sector and civil society organizations have also taken care of the elderly during the day to keep them within their natural community environment in their residential neighborhoods. In addition, a mobile unit was created to service the elderly in their homes, providing health care and nursing services, as well as personal care and family counseling services. Based on the principle of upgrading the services provided to the elderly in Bahrain, the project "Quality of Life for the Elderly" was launched. This project takes into account the preservation of older dignity in the first place, while enabling it to conduct its life independently and without the need for assistance to others. In this context, a field survey of the Kingdom's measures was conducted to assess the quality of life of the Bahraini elderly. Accordingly, a range of programs have been designed to support each aspect of the quality of life standard.

For expatriate workers, particularly those working in low-income jobs, these groups also benefit from public utilities and social services through public policies. There are special measures to ensure accommodation, health insurance, accident insurance, Arbitrary dismissal. In 2004, the Kingdom established the Labor Market Regulatory Authority (LMRA) within the labor market reform project. Accordingly, a number of steps have been taken to protect the rights of expatriate workers without prejudice to the rights of other employers, including the freedom of movement of workers to new employers and grace periods for rectifying violators. The flexible work permit has been launched to deal with the problem of labor abuse. The importance of flexible work permit is an innovative solution to the reform of the labor market, with the protection of the environment of dealing with expatriate workers, guaranteeing their rights along with the rights of the rest of the parties to the work, and it provides a qualitative economic addition to the national economy by providing the market needs of temporary employment without prejudice to the competitive nature of the market.

The Kingdom is keen to continuously review and develop its legislative and legal system in line with international requirements, particularly in the field of safeguarding the rights and dignity of migrant workers against any attempts at extortion, exploitation or trafficking. The Center for the Support and Protection of Expatriate Workers, which includes a shelter, has been established and the National Referral System for Combating Trafficking in Persons has been established. It regulates and clarifies the role of the various authorities involved in fighting this crime and the mechanisms of dealing with any case of trafficking or suspected trafficking.



Chapter III: Situation Analysis and Progress

3. 1. Introduction

The Kingdom of Bahrain is an archipelago consisting of 40 islands located in the Arabian Gulf, between latitudes 50.50 to 51.11, and latitudes 26.06 to 27.18. With a total area of \0x200B\0x200B8,269 km 2, of which 778 km 2 land constitute about 9% of the Kingdom. The Kingdom's largest island is the island of Bahrain, which includes the capital, Manama, and accounts for about 85% of the total land area. Bahrain is connected with Saudi Arabia through the King Fahd Causeway, which opened in 1986. The surface of Bahrain is generally low and the maximum elevation is the smoke mountain (134 meters above sea level) and the volcanic region of Bahrain is a dome structure with limited oil resources compared to other Gulf countries.

The Kingdom of Bahrain is located in the tropical region with dry climates and very hot summers, with mild winters and rainfall of only 80 mm per year. Therefore, most of the Kingdom's rocky land is covered by dunes of dry and salty sand that do not help the growth of natural forests, but some wild plants that tolerate arid climatic conditions except for the northern and northwestern coast of Bahrain Island, which is characterized by its fertile land and agricultural nature. The freshwater springs within the sea, which Bahrain has given its name and sanctity throughout the ages, were the land of Delmon, Oul and Thailand.

About 80% of the population is concentrated on the main island of Bahrain, specifically in the northern half where government facilities and business incubators are concentrated. In some parts of Bahrain, the population density is more than 1800 inhabitants / km2. The total population of the Kingdom reached 1.5 million in 2017 , 45% of whom are citizens, of whom 64% are of working age (between 15 and 64 years). While the proportion of youth (15-24) about 12% of the population. The proportion of the population of dependents (under the age of 15 and the elderly over the age of 64) reached about 31% (25% children and 6% old), and those under 30 years of age (46%), 58% Non-Bahrainis). The average age of the Bahraini population was 76.7 years, which means that Bahrain can benefit - in principle - from the benefits of this demographic dividend.

For some key economic indicators, Bahrain's GDP is about $ 35 billion at constant prices in 2017. The average per capita GDP is $ 22,000 for 2017, making Bahrain among the high-growth countries. 47 out of 188 globally according to the Human Development Index (2016). Economic growth has seen some volatility in the last decade, as the global economic and social crisis of 2008 slowed growth, especially in construction. The effects of regional instability in the Arab region and the Gulf starting in 2011, and the instability of oil prices have a negative impact on the Kingdom's economic growth. The GDP is about BD 12,245 million (USD 325 billion) in 2017, the oil and gas share is 18.61% Exports to imports 65%.

3. The current situation in relation to the goals and objectives of sustainable development

The level of advanced development in Bahrain requires the highest degree of national adaptation to the goals of sustainable development 2030, and commensurate with the characteristics of development and general conditions in the country. The Millennium Development Goals (2000-2015) were already in place. Some of the Millennium Goals were originally achieved at the date of their adoption, prompting Bahrain to adopt a more ambitious approach (MDG Plus) and to attach great importance to the development of national development plans commensurate with the And the aspirations of the people and government in Bahrain.

The plan is intended to be inclusive of all countries (as opposed to the Millennium Development Goals), so that each country finds what fits within the expanded list of goals and objectives, while adhering to guidelines and general principles, such as No one is excluded, sustainability, integrated nature of the plan, partnership ... etc. In this context, the first thing that Bahrain has done is to evaluate the overall list of goals and objectives in order to determine the following:

- What are the objectives and purposes that do not apply to Bahrain;

- discrimination within the same objective between the purposes applicable or those that do not apply;

- Identification of targets that have been achieved or are close to verification (as measured by their specific indicators), objectives for which further work is required, and the appropriate time frame.



Based on this assessment, the objectives and targets were identified, the priorities and policies required to achieve them were identified to maintain achievements to date, and new policies and programs were proposed to fill gaps and achieve the remaining high priority development goals within national plans. Based on the above, four categories of objectives can be distinguished in terms of appropriateness and level of achievement:

1. The first category includes purposes that apply nationally and are wholly or partly achieved. This includes the total of traditional development objectives measured through quantitative indicators, the most important of which is the eradication of extreme poverty (Goal 1), the provision of public services for all from water extensions, etc., (6) education and health. And ambition is to maintain the level of achievement achieved and completion where necessary,

The second category includes goals or targets that are nationally applicable and are being pursued, such as the share of renewable energy in total energy (goal 7), the promotion of scientific research and the improvement of technological capabilities (objective 9)

3. The third category includes targets or targets that Bahrain still faces difficulties in achieving, such as the goals related to climate change, 13 waste management and recycling,

4. The fourth category includes objectives or objectives that do not apply to Bahrain, such as those relating to forests, mountains and rivers.

The national planning that is commensurate with the needs, capacities and challenges faced by Bahrain is the only way to deal with the achievements and challenges according to the objectives, the goals and the time period to achieve national ownership and the nationalization of the sustainable development plan. Accordingly, Bahrain can incorporate into its national action plans some of the objectives (eg, goals 1 and 10 as it relates to living standards and inequality rather than poverty in its modern sense); the fourteenth and fifteenth (marine and terrestrial environment) Bahrain, by its island nature; as well as goals 8 and 9 (economic growth and infrastructure); and the second objective on food security with the goal of healthy nutrition to health and the market stability target could be incorporated into target 17 on partnership. The government's program of work separates the sovereign axis that deals with security and peace, and between the axis of government performance, that is, it distinguishes between two dimensions within the sixteenth goal. This reinforces the principle of flexibility, and considers the 2030 Agenda as an enabling framework for national planning, not as a rigid template.

Based on this flexibility, planning and action at the national level can adopt an approach that stems from identifying the most complex and important issues as an input to planning and work, and linking them to a set of goals and objectives in an innovative and responsive manner to national realities and national planning traditions.



Chapter Four: Issues central to a national perspective

1.4 Preface

Bahrain has adapted the objectives of sustainable development 2030 to issues of national importance and priority. Six key issues of sustainable development that are of importance in the case of Bahrain have been identified as follows:

- National policies for cities, housing and urban development

- Environmental challenges by nature of the Kingdom as a small island state in a dry desert environment.

- Population and social issues, the growth in the number of expatriates and the pressures on health and social services.

- Issues of education, scientific research, values \0x200B\0x200Bof productive work and citizenship.

- Requirements for growth, economic diversification, sustainability and institutional development.

- Problems of peace and security, including partnership and regional integration.

These issues are the main focus of national policies within each dimension of development, which has already been presented according to various sources. These include social, environmental, economic, political, cultural and partnership dimensions. They are the subject of attention and the enumeration of these issues under separate headings that do not negate the interdependence between them. And require joint solutions, the results of which combined to achieve the objectives of each axis, and contribute to the achievement of the overall development goals.

4. 2. Cities

Urban development is a permanent issue in national plans and strategies. Urban development reduces all aspects of the Kingdom's economic, environmental, social, cultural and urban governance, and is the most visible representation of the interdependence and integration of different dimensions of development. Sustainable development on the ground.

The formulation of goal 11 of the goals of sustainable development covered this integration by providing for "making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable", reflecting both social and environmental dimensions and governance. The "New Urban Plan" adopted at the Habitat Conference 3 in Quito, Ecuador, in October 2016, and adopted by the UN General Assembly in December of the same year, can serve as a detailed plan of action to implement this commitment. This plan will play an important role in supporting and guiding national policies for urban development in Bahrain, particularly with a long history of cooperation between the Kingdom and Habitat. The status of cities (objective 11) will be reviewed in detail in the next section of the thematic discussion report, since goal 11 is one of the objectives selected for the detailed review of the 2018 High-level Political Forum.

The housing portfolio is of great importance to the government. The Ministry of Housing has committed to building 25,000 housing units in the Government's 2015-2015 work program, in accordance with the Royal High Directive to build 40,000 housing units.

The Ministry of Housing is also implementing several housing projects in various governorates that serve all citizens of the Kingdom without exception, including the establishment of new cities with the best environmental, service and engineering specifications, to form new urban communities in line with the 11th objective of sustainable development.

4. 3. Environmental challenge

Sustainability (in its comprehensive sense) is of great importance to the Kingdom of Bahrain, and is at the core of environmental sustainability due to the serious environmental challenges facing the Kingdom for many reasons, particularly the geographical and natural reality of Bahrain. Bahrain consists of a small desert island group, Climate change threatens them with great risks. As well as the human pressures on the natural environment resulting from the large urban expansion and population growth, lifestyles and the nature of consumption. In this sense, the environmental challenge is a challenge to sustainability and has a holistic nature from a strategic perspective and can not be viewed in a fragmented or sectoral manner. The environment, sustainable resource management, urban development, water and energy issues, transport, urban growth, waste management, marine conservation and biodiversity are present and permanent issues. Bahrain Economic Vision 2030 Sustainability is one of three vision-oriented principles, as well as in government programs (environment and urban development), as well as in a number of specialized policies and strategies (energy, agriculture, water, etc.).



In this report, the environmental dimension was addressed through the environment and urban development axis (in the current government work program), and the strategic objective of this theme was defined as "sustainable resource management and sustainable urban development". This axis can be linked to goals 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of sustainable development objectives. Methodologically, these objectives can be grouped into three categories:

- The first category is concerned with the provision of services related to natural resources, namely water and sanitation, and energy, ie, objectives 6 and 7. The policy issue here is twofold: it is required to provide these services with good quality for all without exception (and this is true) and to ensure the sustainable management of these resources and their non-depletion or pollution. This requires appropriate policies, including appropriate pricing policy for services and expansion of renewable energies. These objectives can be added to multiple dimensions in goal 11 on cities.

The second category concerns the natural environment itself, the wild (15) and the marine (14). The key issue is sustainable management, pollution reduction, biodiversity conservation, habitat and species protection, and appropriate use of resources. Which requires immediate, immediate and medium- and long-term policies.

- The third category deals with issues of a structural nature that are at the heart of the concept of sustainability in its holistic sense, which require concerted international, regional and national efforts. It also requires difficult decisions to be taken on the entire range of development, growth options and lifestyles. The objectives 12 (sustainable production and consumption patterns) and 13 (climate change) are within this category, which goes beyond the environmental issue in the narrow sense, for the choices of cultural development itself through the environmental approach.

Addressing the environmental challenge in the strategic term means dealing with these three categories of issues. The following section of this thematic thematic report will include a detailed review of some of these objectives.

4.4. Population and social issues

This section addresses some of the selected issues that fall within the area of \0x200B\0x200B"people" in Agenda 2030, and within the social section of the "Human Development and Social Services" axis of the Government's work program. The strategic objective of this program has been formulated as follows: "Empowering Bahrainis to increase their contribution to the development process". The focus is on empowerment, as the mechanism and means to increase the contribution to development in all its dimensions and as a means to achieve the objectives. This has been translated into a package of policies and procedures that ensure access to services for all and higher levels of economic and social empowerment of different population groups.

The following paragraphs deal in turn with the issues of poverty and living standards (Goal 1), the issue of population characteristics and population growth (distributed over several objectives), the health issue (Goal 3) and the issue of gender equality and the empowerment of women (Goal 5)



4. 4. 1. Population challenges and their impact on development

Rapid population growth is a major concern for small countries, especially if the country is a small island with limited natural resources, as in Bahrain, where population pressures become more influential on all aspects of life. Bahrain has witnessed rapid population growth over the past few years. The total number of residents has increased from 1,039,297 in 2007 to 1,501,116 in 2017, an annual rate of 4.4% during the period. The growth rate was mainly due to an increase in the number of expatriates. The rate of growth of citizens reached 2.8% (from 527,433 in 2007 to 677,506 in 2017), while the growth rate of expatriates reached 6.1% during the same period, representing 55% of the total population and 80% of the total population. Total employees. Although the interaction and interaction between different nationalities in the Kingdom is a positive element of wealth must be maintained that the rapid increase in numbers of expatriates may affect the system of social and cultural relations, which requires study is sufficient to study its effects on the characteristics of future population growth.

In the environmental dimension, pressure on water resources and sanitation is one of the first results of population growth due to the commitment of the state to provide drinking water for all. This means an increase in the pumping of funds for the establishment of new desalination plants, which is the main source of drinking water in Bahrain. For water is 113 cubic meters per year in 2016 compared to 118 in 2007.

The same applies to sewage networks, where the coverage of these networks has declined from 87% in 2006 to 77% in 2009 due to the rapid population growth and urban developments. While the rest of the population is served by the analysis tanks associated with each housing unit. The government has taken the necessary measures to remedy this. The proportion of people connected to the sewerage system in 1992 increased to 92%, an increase of 26%. Only 8% of the population is connected to the analysis tanks.

To address the growing demand for land, it was necessary to bury shallow areas of the sea to accommodate population growth, new housing projects and industrial and tourism projects. The land area increased from about 712 square kilometers in 2000 to 778 square kilometers in 2017. Urban growth has caused shrinking agricultural areas from 6,400 hectares in 2004 to 3,750 hectares in 2014. Demand for housing and land remains obsessed with any small country. In the vertical construction and reorganization of new cities to maintain the remaining agricultural areas and coastal habitats, especially the Crimean areas, grasses, marine algae and coral reefs need to maintain the stocks of blue carbon sites, not to mention the numerous environmental services of these important environments.

On the other hand, the demand for social services, especially health and education services, is increasing due to population growth. The government has committed to providing these services free of charge to citizens, or at a small fee. This puts additional burdens on the public budget for health care, education and housing, And municipal services to meet these growing needs and their environmental, economic and social costs.



4. 4. 2. Well-being and standard of living

To eradicate poverty in all its forms everywhere

The World Poverty Rating (living below $ 1.9 per day) does not apply to the Kingdom of Bahrain because of the adoption of a package of policies aimed at raising the level of per capita income, in addition to the provision of public utilities and basic social services by 100% Dimensions do not apply either.

On the other hand, the government sponsors the most social groups in need of security, solidarity and the provision of social security through a series of social protection systems and measures, housing programs, free education, health and basic services (objectives 1.2, 3 and 4), which aim to reduce the proportion of low-income men and women And children by at least half by 2030 (destination 1.2). Disability benefits, unemployment benefits, compensation for increased meat subsidies, reduced electricity and water charges, and more. As well as the economic empowerment of families through the training courses, workshops and production units of the program (step) for home projects of the Ministry of Labor and Social Development in cooperation with civil society organizations. These services are provided in accordance with an advanced system of social security that takes into consideration the different needs of all categories and segments of citizens, and ensures access to the target groups through the collection of data related to the social situation and registration electronically and periodically updated easily. The social security system includes financial support that extends to special needs groups of children, the elderly and the young, in a manner that does not prejudice the timing of payment of entitlements or sudden suspension of service from the citizen. Some of those aspects of support have already been articulated in the previous paragraph, entitled "Development without exception". The most appropriate strategy to achieve the first objective is to move steadily from the social assistance approach to the empowerment approach as outlined in the government's program of action.

These efforts have resulted in a 47% increase in the Bahraini household's average income over the last 10 years. Despite these achievements, the challenge remains to sustain economic growth (Goal 1), to continue to improve the quality of education (Goal 4), health (Goal 3), job creation (Goal 8) To meet the growing demand for housing (target 11).

4. 4. 3. Healthy lifestyles

Ensuring that everyone enjoys healthy lifestyles in all ages

The third objective of sustainable development aims to "ensure that all people enjoy healthy and well-being for all ages", thereby shifting the focus of attention from disease to health in its universal sense as a key component of human well-being throughout the life cycle. This does not mean that the disease, prevention and treatment aspect is neglected. Health policy focuses on non-communicable diseases and mental health (Goal 4 of Goal 3), health nutrition and obesity issues (Targets I and II of Goal 2). Child and maternal mortality, non-communicable diseases (which are highly correlated with healthy lifestyles), reproductive health, access to medicines, treatment and universal health coverage are a priority for Bahrain. Access to quality health services will remain at the heart of the Government's work program and the work of the Ministry of Health in particular.

The Government of Bahrain has adopted the policy of "providing comprehensive health care to all citizens and residents" through its preventive and curative programs and through the network of health services at all levels, including primary health care, secondary health care and clinical care. The government has assumed responsibility for implementing this policy in all technical and material fields in cooperation with the private sector, which has led to a significant improvement in many of the health indicators of the Kingdom. For example, the maternal mortality rate of 14 deaths per 100,000 live births (indicator 3.1.1) The low rates surpassed the target of 2030 deaths per 100,000 live births in the world in 2030. 99.8% of births are supervised by health professionals (Indicator 3.1.2), leading to a decline in maternal mortality rates, During pregnancy, during and after childbirth and neonatal care and Tu (Indicator 3.8.1), and family planning services (Indicator 3.7.1) The Kingdom of Bahrain seeks to put an end to both infant and under-five mortality by 2030, which is 6.4 deaths per 1,000 live births (Indicator 3.2.2) ) In 2014. The launch of the National Strategy for Children (2013-2017) has contributed to a reduction in under-five mortality to 12 deaths per 1,000 live births (indicator 3.2.3), which is 50% less than the target values \0x200B\0x200Bof this indicator Globally in 2030 of 24 deaths per 1,000 live births.

The incidence of HIV and tuberculosis is generally low in Bahrain, with a new infection rate of 0.04 AIDS per 1,000 non-infected people (indicator 3.3.1) and 0.17 TB per 1,000 population (Indicator 3.3.2). This is due to increased community awareness of prevention, early detection of cases, especially among those coming to work through the introduction of a pre-employment medical check-up system, as well as access to treatment for patients with reduced risk of transmission. For malaria and other vector-borne diseases such as Hepatitis B (Indicator 3.3.4), the incidence rate decreased from 4.9 per 100,000 in 2004 to 0.6 per 100,000 in 2014.

Cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases are the leading cause of death in the Kingdom of Bahrain, which poses a major challenge to the health system. The national plan to address noncommunicable diseases recommended by the World Health Organization was adopted. It is hoped that this will lead to a reduction in the rate of premature deaths resulting from these diseases from 65% in 2010 to 48.8% by 2025. Emergency and ambulatory services (indicator 3.d.1) have also improved. This indicator of health emergency preparedness and basic capacity Of the health regulations in the Kingdom 100% by 2015, reflecting a great national capacity to address any risk or event affecting public health.

Mental health services have been introduced, mental health has been introduced into school health programs, and the National Commission against Narcotics and Addiction has been established, resulting in suicide deaths falling from 11 to 0.7 per 100,000 population for 2005-2014. In this regard, the Ministry of Youth and Sports launched in 2017 the Takatof program for preventive awareness of the drug scourge in line with the fifth objective (5-3), with the aim of creating a conscious generation aware of the dangers of this devastating scourge of youth, dealing with the problems of drug abuse and addiction and activating the strategy of peer education In society to counter that scourge.

Despite the many successes in the health sector, there is a challenge of increasing population and rising cost of medical services, which account for about 8% of total state expenditure (Indicator 3.8.2). Indicator 3.b.1) for all citizens and residents of the Kingdom or at affordable prices. In this regard, the unified procurement program of the Executive Office of the GCC Council of Ministers of Health plays a positive role in providing the Gulf countries with medical needs such as medicines, hospital supplies, vaccines, laboratory supplies and others. The Supreme Health Council is currently developing the National Health Strategy with a view to implementing a comprehensive system of health insurance and developing quality standards for health services.

There is no doubt that there is a link between public health and lifestyles, especially the correlation between the prevalence of non-communicable diseases related to healthy nutrition, healthy lifestyles (exercise) and others. Adult obesity in Bahrain is 40%. This pathological phenomenon affects children and young people aged 6-24 years, reaching 24%. The age of diabetes, for example, is on the decline, with diabetes among the adult population reaching 14.7%. In addition to the diseases of the blood vessels and heart, which are also linked to lifestyle patterns of nutrition, lack of movement, smoking and other harmful habits, to address these diseases, demonstrations and behaviors, it requires work to change behaviors and ways of life and raise awareness of the seriousness of the community through the curricula of education and media and social communication .

In order to identify the health situation of the Bahraini society, in January 2018, in collaboration with the Information and E-Government Authority, the National Health Survey project was launched. The project included a sample of 4,000 Bahraini and non-Bahraini families and collective families in all governorates of the Kingdom. For approximately 5 months. The objective of the survey is to study the health status of the Bahraini society and its characteristics, as well as to provide an integrated database on the health of the population by measuring a range of medical tests and health indicators that are not usually available in the administrative records, including the health status of the population, risk factors, . The survey consists of two surveys: the first is for the family and the second is for the individual participating in the family. Detailed health survey to identify the risk factors and chronic diseases in addition to maternal and child health. The implementation of this project is part of the Government's program of work as a contribution to the health priorities of the Kingdom, future strategies for health expenditure, health insurance, human resources for the health sector, program management, monitoring and evaluation, and other factors that help decision makers develop sound health policies and programs that benefit the citizen. The National Health Survey is a WHO-approved survey that has been implemented in more than 70 countries so far.

4. 4. 4. Gender equality and the empowerment of women

Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Bahraini women have become a major partner in development in all its dimensions and have increased their dependence on leadership positions and decision-making positions and their participation in economic, social, cultural and all spheres of life. The proportion of women in the Shura Council (appointed) 23% compared with 8% in the House of Representatives (elected). Women held 20% of the posts in municipal councils and the capital's secretariat. The percentage of Bahraini women's participation in the public sector in 2016 was 53% of Bahrainis in this sector. The percentage of women in the position of undersecretary of the Ministry of the total ministries' agents was 18%. In the executive position, 42% , And 54% of the women were the head of the department of the total heads of departments in the government sector, and the proportion of supervisors 55%. By 2017, the number of female ministers and those in power rose to four.

In the private sector, according to 2016 data, Bahraini women accounted for 33% of Bahrainis working in the private sector, and the proportion of women on boards of private companies was 14%. On the other hand, 43% of the total active trade records are owned by Bahraini women, while the proportion of permanent records for more than five years is 51%. By 2017, the percentage of active commercial records of Bahraini-owned clinics and clinics was 41%. The proportion of Bahraini women working in the private sector by economic activity (financial intermediation) was 36%, and the percentage of Bahraini women working in the private sector in administrative and supervisory occupations was 33%.

In terms of specialized jobs, Bahraini female doctors accounted for 64% of all Bahraini physicians. In 2016 Bahraini women accounted for 73% of all Bahrainis in educational jobs in the public sector, and 62.2% of all academic jobs, while women held 25% of the total number of diplomatic posts. The percentage of graduates of higher education institutions was 64%. In academic year 2016/2017, women accounted for 42% of the total faculty members in higher education. The percentage of female students in higher education institutions reached 59%. According to the statistics of 2018, the proportion of female lawyers was 57% of the total lawyers.



Undoubtedly, the measures taken by the Kingdom of Bahrain in the area of \0x200B\0x200Bwomen's empowerment have resulted in the Kingdom's progress in terms of gender equality, which was mentioned in the Global Report of the Gender Divide (Davos) in 2017. The Kingdom was ranked first in the world in indicators Enrollment in primary, secondary and tertiary education, and regionally in the Economic Participation and Opportunity Index. The Kingdom of Bahrain was ranked first in the Gulf in the equalization of earned income between the sexes, and in the proportion of women's participation in legislative and higher administrative posts. Bahrain ranked ninth in the world in the index of equal pay for similar businesses from 144 countries around the world, which positively affected the ranking of the Kingdom of Bahrain in the report to reach the second position in the Gulf and the third Arab.



Women have been given considerable attention by the honorable government in all areas in general and housing in particular, where women have been granted the right to apply for housing service as a housewife, and over the last five years, about 1,500 housing services have been allocated to women, including all housing services , Financing of all kinds and temporary housing, and the program of financing social housing "Mazaya", in addition to women's access to housing services in partnership with men (husband and wife). Housing services also include divorced and abandoned women, widows, widows and orphans. Bahraini women benefit from the housing allowance immediately upon applying for housing services, while five years from the date of applying for this benefit must go to the regular cases of male heads of household. In addition, the housing system exempts the widow and her minor children from paying the rest of the remaining monthly installments from the value of the housing unit or housing finance in the event of the death of the head of the household (the breadwinner). Which is very important and honorable image of the images of solidarity and cooperation with women and the family in general is not found in many countries of the world.



New issues in Goal 5

Bahrain has taken practical steps to develop a plan of action to highlight issues of violence and discrimination against women, issues of economic empowerment, and legislative and institutional development. The legislative efforts of the Kingdom of Bahrain to eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres are reflected in the promulgation of a number of laws, including Family Law No. 19 of 2017, which codified family provisions for all families without any distinction between them. 23) for the year 2015, which allowed the Court of Cassation to challenge Shari'a provisions to ensure access to justice at the highest level on family rights. Law No. (17) for the year 2015 on the protection against domestic violence, which issued a number of executive decisions necessary to achieve the effectiveness of the implementation of the law of protection against domestic violence, including the decision of the Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs and Endowments No. 7 of 2017 on the authorization of some employees of the Ministry of Labor and Development Social status of judicial control officers in implementation of the provisions of Article (6) of Law No. (17) for the year 2015 on protection from domestic violence. In addition to the decision of the Minister of Labor and Social Development No. (26) of 2017 on the conditions and procedures for licensing family counseling centers. In 2018, family courts were opened to resolve family disputes.

In the area of \0x200B\0x200Beliminating all forms of discrimination, it requires cultural and social transformation, as well as legislative and legal intervention. In this regard, the Constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain states in article 5 (b) that "equality between men and women is guaranteed and the State guarantees the reconciliation of women's duties to the family and their work in society and their equality with men in the political, social, cultural and economic spheres without prejudice to the provisions of Islamic law." In 2002, the Kingdom of Bahrain acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and committed itself to implement its provisions in awareness programs and to prepare periodic reports on the follow-up to the implementation of its articles. Bahrain is currently preparing its report in 2018. The Supreme Council for Women, the Bahraini government in 2014 lifted its reservation to Article 15 paragraph 4, Article 9 paragraph 2 (after the amendment of the National Nationality Law), while the reservation to Article 29, the first paragraph of the emphasis on the Bahraini legislative sovereignty (reservation to international arbitration

The Supreme Council for Women has launched the National Plan for the Advancement of Bahraini Women (2013-2022) and includes five areas that seek to ensure family stability for women in the context of family cohesion and to protect women from all forms of violence. In November 2015, the Council launched the National Strategy for the Protection of Women against Domestic Violence. In addition, mandatory training has been provided to members of the judiciary, executive bodies and civil society concerned on violence against women and the treatment of women victims of violence. On the other hand, family protection offices have been established in the police directorates of all governorates, in addition to the establishment of a specialized family and child prosecution under the decision of the Public Prosecutor No. (1) of 2016 - headed by a woman with the rank of judge of the Supreme Court of Appeal - To intervene swiftly to stop such violence and to provide psychological, social and legal support to the victim and to take the necessary measures to punish the perpetrator while providing a safe environment for her and her children at times.



In addition, the Family Code No. 19 of 2017, which codified family provisions without any discrimination. The age of marriage in article 20 stipulates that "a girl under 16 years of age shall not marry unless authorized by the Shari'a Court after verification Of the adequacy of marriage ", and the marriage of a girl under the age of 16 years shall not be without the consent of the competent Shari'a court and in the interest of the investigator. Statistics indicate that the percentage of marriage of girls under the age of 15 (indicator 1.3.5) did not exceed 0.3% of the total marriage contracts concluded in 2015, and the proportion of those married at the age of 18 in 2015 about 3.4%, which is a positive indicator.



Conditions of employment and economic activity

Women in the Kingdom of Bahrain have the right to conclude all contracts related to credit, real estate and other property and to conduct business on their own behalf without the need for prior permission. They also have the right to manage their own money without any intervention by the man or need for his consent. Among the most important legislation enacted by the Kingdom of Bahrain in this respect is a circular issued by the Central Bank of Bahrain in November 2015 on the obligation of all financial institutions licensed by the Bank to provide the same functional benefits (such as health insurance) to women working in the sector as men, No. 909 of 2015 on the housing system, which allows groups of women to benefit independently from housing services. In this regard, the Council of Ministers issued a decree in 2015 to separate the husband's salary from the wife when calculating the income of the head of the household when applying for housing service.

As for women entrepreneurs, although the ILO report states that the share of female employers among employers is still small in most parts of the region, it is 28% in Bahrain. Women's active participation in private economic activity increased from 24.3% in 2001 to 43% in 2016 with an increase of 18.7%. Three women won the elections of the Board of Directors of the Bahrain Chamber of Commerce and Industry In 2018 and by 16.7%.

International cooperation and initiator

In January 2017, the Kingdom of Bahrain launched the King Hamad Award to empower young people to achieve sustainable development goals in the belief that young people can lead their countries and the world towards a better future for all people on a healthy, renewed and prosperous planet, as envisioned by the Sustainable Development Plan 2030. To empower young people and enhance their role as effective and productive citizens, thereby contributing to the well-being of their communities and their environment. He also urged institutions working to improve the enabling environment and youth infrastructure to make an impact on all Member States of the United Nations and to achieve a world of justice, tolerance and peace. The Kingdom of Bahrain, represented by the Ministry of Youth and Sports, has chosen the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the United Nations Economic and Social Council (UNSC) to support and manage the award. The program employs 166 offices worldwide.

Bahrain has also opened its representative office at the United Nations House in Bahrain to provide an international platform to facilitate the exchange of experiences with the world through the United Nations. In March 2017, the Princess Sabika International Women's Empowerment Award was launched from the United Nations Headquarters in New York. In the belief of the importance of the role of women in development, in achieving comprehensive social stability, and in encouraging Member States of the United Nations to empower women and to play their role as an equal partner in promoting sustainable and comprehensive development.



Challenges

Remains a key point that needs further attention. It is located in the intersection of economy, society and culture. It is particularly expressed in the fourth objective of the fifth objective, which recognizes "the recognition and appreciation of care and unpaid domestic work through the provision of public services and infrastructure and the development of social protection policies And promoting shared responsibility within the household and family, as appropriate at the national level. " The indicator chosen to measure this destination is "the proportion of time spent on unpaid domestic work and care, by sex, age and place". In this regard, we note the measures taken by the Kingdom to provide public services and some flexibility for mothers on leave and work. However, these measures are still limited and limited to the service side within the logic of reconciling women's domestic duties with work requirements. There are also cultural and social aspects of the distribution of roles and responsibilities within the family between husband and wife. The second aspect relates to the development of the same economic theory, the methods of calculating the productive contributions and the calculation of the GDP, noting the unpaid work and the total care economy, and that the role of women in the family is greater From the role of man.

This goal of Goal 5, and the overall objective of the fifth goal (and sustainable development plan) encourages us to seek new ideas in this field as well as other areas, and to give due importance to the cultural, behavioral and social dimensions of the development process. And protection.



4.5.  Education, innovation and culture

Ensure equitable and inclusive education for all and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all

There are goals and objectives with a direct knowledge and cultural dimension that are distributed throughout the goals and objectives of sustainable development. In the Government's Program of Action (2018-2015), the theme of human development and social services included cognitive and cultural dimensions with a focus on education (the axis of human development), as well as health issues, services and social welfare (the center of social services).

Education: The current situation

The Kingdom of Bahrain has been and continues to be a country that cares for education in terms of providing it for all, and to ensure its quality and commitment in its basic stages and free until the end of secondary school, as stipulated by the Kingdom's Constitution. By 2019, the Kingdom will celebrate the 100th anniversary of its formal education in 1919, achieving a total enrollment rate of 100% for the academic year 2016/2017 and almost illiteracy. It has many public and private universities that are accepted by all without distinction . All women and men have equal access to quality and affordable vocational education and higher education, including university education (4.4.4.3), which has helped to eliminate gender disparity in education and to ensure equal access to all levels of education and vocational training, With a principle of development that does not exclude anyone. Despite the financial difficulties Bahrain has faced since the middle of 2014 due to the collapse of oil prices, the Kingdom has increased its education budget to 339 million dinars in 2016. The allocation of 3% of the university budget for scientific research is a good step to bridge the digital knowledge gap based on data Statistical and scientific research and possession of advanced technologies that it is important to employ these budgets in universities to serve sustainable development and activate the partnership between the public and private sectors and civil society and the exchange of experiences and practical experiences. There are opportunities for studies related to the sustainable development agenda 2030 and ways to match them at the postgraduate level nationally and regionally at both the University of Bahrain and Gulf Arab University. However, it is necessary at this stage to harmonize the goals and objectives of sustainable development 2030 within the various stages of education in the Kingdom in the future.



In the field of education, persons with disabilities (Goal 4-5) and students with special needs were not overlooked. In 1986, special classes were opened for students with slow learning, and annual local and external missions were allocated to them. The ministry also ensured that all schools that receive this class are equipped with infrastructure and materials, as well as providing their own buses and providing the human cadres concerned with their education. The Ministry also applies the policy of integrating students with special needs in the regular classes with their peers from ordinary students with the aim of integrating them into their surroundings and their primary community.



The Ministry of Education in the Kingdom of Bahrain adopts the Lifelong Learning Strategy to enable the learner to achieve himself and enrich his life in accordance with the philosophy of continuing education aimed at developing, modernizing and developing the abilities and skills of the Bahraini professional and functional society and others. Global arena and career development, to drive development. This is done by providing a variety of programs to the public in all its categories and levels, taking into consideration the needs of the labor market and individuals. Continuing education programs have ensured that those whose conditions did not enable them to continue the educational process have increased, with the number of enrolled students increasing from 4653 citizens in 2013/2014 to 5476 citizens in 2016/2016. The number of schools applied for technical and vocational education reached ten schools in 2016 and 2016, six of which applied to the commercial track, and four of them applied the industrial track. The number of students enrolled in schools increased from 6204 students in 2011/2012 to 6364 students in 2015/2016. The Kingdom did not overlook the importance of partnership with the private sector. The number of private educational institutions increased from 175 in 1999/2000 to 248 in 2015/2016, which absorbs 36% of all primary and 29% preparatory students and 25% Secondary education.



The Kingdom has focused on the quality of education, which was the concern of the citizens confirmed in all surveys / questionnaires on the priorities of sustainable development was the project "improve the performance of schools" in 2008, which contributed to improving the quality of educational services provided to students. And the National Quality Education and Training Project, which set quality standards for all levels and institutions of education. The Supreme Council for Higher Education and the National Commission for Qualifications and Quality Assurance of Education and Training were established in 2008 to implement the National Qualifications Framework to classify qualifications according to a set of high standards by learning outcomes .

UNESCO's King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa Award for the Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Education

In 2005, the King Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa Award for the Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Education was initiated and funded by the Kingdom of Bahrain. The Award targets individuals, institutions and non-governmental organizations that carry out projects and activities based on best practices and innovative uses of information and communication technology to enhance educational performance in general and recognize the importance of ICT-supported innovations or innovations. Sustainable and peaceful.



In the educational sector, His Majesty's King Hamad School of the Future project in 2004 and His Majesty's initiative to launch the Digital Empowerment Program in 2014, which is an extension of His Majesty King Hamad's project for future schools, should be commended for improving the process of learning and digitizing the student. The aim of these initiatives is to develop the educational system in terms of the use of information and communication technology in the processes of learning and education to e-learning e-learning. These initiatives aim at transforming the information society and the knowledge-based economy to meet the needs of the development and labor market in dealing with modern information and communication technologies. The Digital Education Empowerment Program includes projects and areas such as: the Safe Use of Technology Project, the Technical Guidance Project, the Education Portal Project, the Digital Education Content, the Specialist Training Field, the Infrastructure and the Evaluation. All these projects and fields are applied in all schools in Bahrain. It is hoped that the Digital Education Empowerment Program will contribute to the enrichment of digital knowledge and the knowledge-based economy, and to complement the digital culture-related projects such as the King Hamad-UNESCO Prize for the Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Education and the Regional Center for Information and Communication Technology (RCICT).

Regional Center for Information and Communication Technology (RCICT)

The Regional Information and Communication Technology Center (RCICT) operates as a second-class accredited center under the auspices of UNESCO. Through its various programs, initiatives and activities, contribute to the advancement of human development indicators by harnessing information and communication technologies in the process of capacity-building, exchange of knowledge, experience and good practices. The Regional Center is a partner of education with UNESCO in providing support and dissemination of culture to those implementing and achieving sustainable development goals in partnership with local, regional and international governmental and private agencies.



Education on citizenship, development and innovation

The Kingdom of Bahrain has sought to promote the spirit of citizenship and human rights of students, to spread a culture of peace, moderation, tolerance and coexistence, and to reject hatred, extremism and violence in the school space. Through the introduction of curricula for citizenship education for all levels of study, and intensification of student activities in this area, in cooperation with UNESCO. The project started with four preparatory schools as a first pilot phase in the academic year 2015/2016 and then expanded to 14 schools in 2016/2017 and to all schools in 2017/2018. These schools focus on class and non-descriptive student activities and initiatives that promote the values \0x200B\0x200Bof tolerance, moderation, respect for opinion and other opinions, rejection of fanaticism and extremism, preservation of national unity and encouragement of collective and voluntary action and pride in national customs and traditions, including the "Ambassadors of Tolerance and Coexistence" "Instilling love" and others.



The Kingdom of Bahrain also has clear efforts in supporting Goal VII (7.4) to ensure that all learners have the knowledge and skills to support sustainable development through, inter alia, education for sustainable development and sustainable livelihoods, human rights, gender equality, The promotion of a culture of peace, non-violence and global citizenship, the appreciation of cultural diversity and the appreciation of the contribution of culture to sustainable development by 2030, in partnership and cooperation with the Ministry of Youth and Sports, where many conferences and programs have been organized to promote these goals and objectives. Innovation is one of the most important drivers of economic growth (Goal 9). A key determinant of the economy's ability to innovate is the educational level of the population and the production of research and development by universities and the private sector (Goal 9). It is one of the main challenges faced by Bahrain, especially with its small population (1.5 million) and the limited resources that hinder Bahrain's competition with innovators working in larger economies. However, Bahrain has responded positively to this challenge by launching a national strategy for scientific research in 2014 Strengthening research capabilities and integration between academic institutions, the private sector and international scientific research institutions, and spreading the culture of scientific research.



On the other hand, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), in cooperation with the Government of Bahrain, is making efforts to promote the idea of \0x200B\0x200Bentrepreneurship in the minds of young people in schools and universities to contribute to the elimination of unemployment, improving the productivity base and providing more jobs for qualified young local workers. All these efforts are aimed at strengthening partnerships (Goal 17) between the private, public and academic sectors as a means of promoting innovation, promoting education, research and development and economic growth. This partnership led to the establishment of the Arab International Center for Entrepreneurship and Investment, which is internationally known as the Bahrain Entrepreneurship Model and is currently being implemented in 52 countries around the world. It has provided support and support to 8,500 Bahraini entrepreneurs, creating 2,000 new enterprises with investments of US $ 2 billion and the development of around 15,000 jobs.



International initiatives and contributions

Bahrain's achievements in the field of education have been highly appreciated by the UNESCO Education for All (EFA) report in the list of high-performing countries in education. A 2015-2016 report on the World Economic Forum (Davos) Globally in the Education Quality Index, ranked 34th globally in the Internet use index in schools, and ranked 42th globally in the Mathematics and Science Teaching Index. Bahrain has also endeavored to achieve goal 4-7 of education for sustainable development, sustainable livelihoods, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace, non-violence and global citizenship, appreciation of cultural diversity and contribution to sustainable development. In this context, the King Hamad Center for Interreligious Dialogue and Peaceful Coexistence is an example of respect for cultural diversity and tolerance among religions and rejection of extremism, hatred or discrimination based on doctrinal or religious grounds, away from religious tyranny or intolerance. The Kingdom believes that peace can only be achieved through understanding and dialogue. It is important to create an environment conducive to peace, interfaith dialogue and understanding and combating the discourse of hatred and intolerance. Bahrain has been and continues to be a leader in the peaceful coexistence of all religions and nationalities throughout the ages.

The King Hamad Center for Interreligious Dialogue and Peaceful Coexistence also contributes to the high-level international debate on promoting dialogue and tolerance between religions and its initiative in the Declaration of the Kingdom of Bahrain, a global document committed to promoting religious freedom for all. The center also includes a museum to display the historical heritage of the Kingdom of Bahrain. The Center is an extension of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa's chair at the University of La Spenza Rome to teach dialogue, peace and interfaith understanding 2016.

the culture

Bahrain is blessed with its ancient monuments, ancient heritage and its attractions. The BCHR therefore sought to use these historical, cultural and natural elements to stimulate tourism because of its impact on the national economy and job creation. Which supports the social aspects while preserving the natural environment and employ it to activate this sector, and thus achieve the principles of sustainability in the preservation of the environment and promote the economic and social aspects, was the "Spring of Culture" and "Pearl Road" and the initiative "Our heritage is our representative" allowed to cross cultural tourism in Bahrain Which aims to encourage the local public and tourists to visit the cultural and archaeological sites of Bahrain and to promote mutual cultural understanding and raising awareness of the need to preserve and preserve cultural and natural heritage.



Challenges

Improving the quality of education remains a constant goal of national policies. The same applies to culture, behavior and the value system, especially that societies have engendered wars and conflicts that spread fanaticism and extremism and return to sub-affiliations of non-nationalities and ideological references that transcend the state, the country and the law. These effects do not recognize the boundaries between States. The media, social networks and transnational institutions disseminate such systems, which have the most serious effects on national belonging and the idea of \0x200B\0x200Bthe State, as well as their deconstructive impact on social relations and the traditional family and religious system. This means that active interaction with these influences to prevent them and to absorb their negative effects is one of the priorities of educational, media and cultural work.

Although the quality of education remains a constant objective of national policies, it is not limited to formal education, but rather action plans that accommodate the contributions and functions of the various institutions that deal with thought, values \0x200B\0x200Band behaviors, with an emphasis on the value and social aspects of educational curricula and the adoption of modern teaching methods Which increases the immunity of students to negative ideas, and the development of their competencies and their ability to think logical and innovation and scientific and technological innovation, technical and literary, which requires cooperation and integration between the organs of the state concerned to achieve the desired goals on the path of

4. 6. Economic development from the perspective of sustainability and prosperity

 Promote sustained and inclusive economic growth for all, sustainable and full employment and decent work for all.

 Building sustainable infrastructure, inculcating sustainable industrialization, and promoting innovation.

 Enhancing means of implementation and revitalizing the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development.

The Sustainable Development Plan 2030 has transformed the concept of traditional economic growth into the concept of prosperity that makes human well-being and protecting the planet an economic activity, emphasizing that economic growth is a means not a stand-alone goal, and that we must pay more attention to the nature of growth and its content and consequences than our size And its quantitative quantitative indicators.

Bahrain has been able to face various changes and challenges through policies aimed at diversifying the economy and sources of income by enhancing the role of the private sector as a partner in the development process and a key driver of growth according to the opportunities outlined in Bahrain Economic Vision 2030. The Kingdom is working hard to implement major development projects covering all Vital sectors, and contribute to the consolidation of the economic position of the Kingdom and competitiveness, and attract investment.

Based on this understanding, which incorporates economics and economic growth in the wider development context, these paragraphs address the component of prosperity in Agenda 2030, including the economic and financial hub and the infrastructure pillar of the Government's 2015-2018 Program of Action: Towards the Community of Justice, Security and Welfare. These paragraphs focus on the Eighth and Ninth Objectives (Economic Growth, Employment and Infrastructure), taking into account Goal 12 (Transition to Sustainable Production and Consumption Patterns) and Goal 17 on Global Partnership, in which we focus on the regional dimension of Bahrain's economy and aspects of Bahrain's contribution Economically at the global level.

Identifying economic, structural and situational challenges is a necessary input to shape Bahrain's macroeconomic profile.

Achieving real and sustainable economic growth rates

Bahrain's economy depends mainly on oil. Although the contribution of oil to real GDP is almost 20%, this figure obscures the multiple linkages between the oil sector and other sectors. Specifically, government expenditure on projects and salaries of public sector employees is the main driver of the different sectors of the economy. The percentage of employees working in the public sector is 85%, which is high according to international standards. Bahrainis account for 24% of total employees. Oil revenues account for 80% of total public revenues.

The economy grew at an accelerated pace during the period 2000-2014, characterized by a stable rise in oil prices, which slowed temporarily in 2008-2009 due to the global financial crisis. In the period 2000-2012, GDP growth rate was 5.1% per annum. However, the significant decline in oil prices after 2014 reflected the growth of the real economy, which in turn declined to 3.2% in 2015, to 2.2% in 2016, and 2.0% in 2017. Growth rates would have declined further if not The government raised its borrowing, where the budget deficit reached 15.1% as a proportion of GDP. In 2014, Bahraini public debt reached 44% of GDP, and is expected to exceed 90% of GDP in 2017.

The government has made some reforms aimed at reducing the deficit by cutting government spending and channeling support and others, but the price of oil is still not required to balance the budget (more than 90 US dollars a barrel), while oil experts expect oil to remain below this level for years (Especially since the price of a barrel of oil has not yet exceeded the threshold of 80 US dollars).

In this regard, the Gulf countries resorted to two main measures, the first of which was the restructuring of subsidizing the prices of certain goods and services (including energy, water and others); secondly, the introduction of taxes on goods including value added tax and others, Their differences. Proactive measures have been taken to mitigate the negative social effects on the purchasing power of citizens in conjunction with the awareness campaign and the activation of safety nets and protection measures for some categories of citizens.

B. The challenge of promoting Gulf economic integration

The economy of Bahrain is closely linked to that of the GCC countries, which requires taking this into consideration when building a sustainable national economy. The GCC countries have agreed on steps for economic integration since the establishment of the Council in 1981, including the establishment of a free trade area, a customs union, a common market and a realistic plan for monetary union. Countries achieved tangible returns according to traditional integration criteria, mainly Gulf trade, which rose from $ 6 billion in 1984 to $ 101 billion in 2015. Despite these tangible achievements, Gulf integration did not advance as quickly as expected.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has also committed itself to the directives of the Gulf Cooperation Council to facilitate the movement of individuals, goods and capital, and to facilitate working conditions, and considers itself to benefit from the integration that is positively reflected on it and on other countries. However, the success of integration and the achievement of the full positive effects does not depend on a single country, but requires the collective commitment of all members and provide the regional environment to help.

At the same time, the promotion of Gulf economic integration carries many gains for Bahraini and Gulf citizens and for the regional and global economies (Goal 17), as it will give them an opportunity to interact with a larger market. Addressing political and logistical obstacles to Gulf economic integration is a central challenge for the Kingdom of Bahrain.

(C) structural challenges associated with the pattern of growth

There are a number of structural challenges stemming from the nature of economic growth in Bahrain, characterized by their interaction with the characteristics of the natural and human environment. This pattern is based on large investments, including foreign investment, especially in construction, infrastructure and real estate, and industrial areas related to the oil sector or energy production and heavy industries. This calls for labor savings and local labor can not be covered by expatriate workers. With the growth of economic activity, the number of workers increased to more than the number of citizens in many countries, including the GCC countries. The influx of expatriates is causing rapid population growth, which in turn creates great pressure on the natural environment and its resources. And an open economy of globalization which makes it more vulnerable to imported global crises (such as the 2008 crisis); and to global market volatility, it has managed to withstand and maintain acceptable levels of growth, labor protection and economic diversification, despite the contraction of financial reserves caused primarily by the drop in oil prices, which led to some fiscal imbalances in the budget, and growth in public debt.

In terms of foreign investment, Bahrain has maintained its ability to attract significant capital over the past ten years, amounting to approximately $ 10 billion, of which 70 per cent is for Gulf States, and the overall focus of the financial sector is 95 per cent, To a financial center. The total number of banking and financial institutions and insurance companies licensed by the Central Bank of Bahrain was 393 in 2017, including 78 traditional banks, 23 Islamic banks and 156 insurance companies. The consolidated balance sheet of conventional and Islamic retail banks amounted to 31389 million dinars.



Work and Play

In view of the well-known characteristics of the labor market and the balance between national employment and expatriate labor, the Kingdom of Bahrain has adopted an active policy in the labor market which seeks to achieve, inter alia, the development of skills and the needs of the labor market, The required extent of the rights of workers regardless of their nationality through the regulation of the labor market.

The Ministry of Labor and Social Development is in accordance with a well-thought-out methodology based on scientific foundations to find employment opportunities and develop the vocational training system through the National Labor Market Observatory in accordance with a strategy aimed at reforming the labor market and making national cadres the best option through education and training and activating Law No. 17 of 2007 (Law No. 25) for the year 1998 concerning private educational and training institutions, and finally a draft law on private training institutions, which was referred by the Council of Ministers to the Supreme Council To develop education and training.

Tamkeen was established in 2006 to provide support to both individuals and institutions who wish to develop and strengthen their individual initiatives, establish their own businesses, increase and improve their productivity and raise their living standards, and thus achieve one of the Kingdom's most important objectives in its vision for the future of private sector development Making it one of the major growth engines. The Fund is engaged in its various training and financing programs for various segments of society. It also provides consultancy services for feasibility studies and marketing for individual and group institutions, increasing efficiency, engaging in international markets and participating in specialized exhibitions. Tamkeen has managed to train and train 13,000 Bahrainis in various disciplines over the past years. The number of start-up projects that have supported them has reached 60% and 5,000 Bahrainis have been employed through the Business Development Program. The fund also contributed to the support of nearly 130,000 citizens within the Professional Certification and Training Program, as well as the support of some 45,000 companies and institutions, and the injection of more than $ 2 billion into the national economy. The Fund also paid special attention to Bahraini women. More than 131 entrepreneurs were supported by JD 2.7 million (about US $ 7.2 million). The support provided to women in the business sector was 40% of the total support provided to women since the Fund was established. .

Given the changes in the labor market in recent years, as the challenges posed by low oil prices and the need for a trained and efficient workforce commensurate with the requirements of the labor market, Tamkeen has embarked on the implementation of a modern strategy "2018-2020" An annual budget of 60 million dinars (about $ 160 million) is expected to increase the future funding of its annual programs and projects. The most prominent of these projects support 3600 citizens and provide them with the necessary practical skills and in accordance with the need of the labor market in some disciplines such as technology, health, hotels, business management, aviation and aviation engineering as a priority in employment. In addition, some 1,500 entrepreneurs have supported the creation of projects, job creation and production, as well as the assistance of some 4,000 institutions, which are more able to absorb and deal with new developments in the labor market with openness and greater vision. The fund focused on small and medium-sized entrepreneurs, representing about 99% of Bahraini companies and 70% of Bahrain's workforce, maintaining Bahrain's high ranking on the Business Development and Development Institute Index of the World Institute for Entrepreneurship and Development, Bahrain ranks 29th in the world and 3 in 2016.

On the other hand, in order to achieve the second objective (2-8) to achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, upgrading of technology and innovation, the Ministry of Youth and Sports launched FAB LAB, an extension of the lab lab labs as the first laboratory of its kind in Kingdom of Bahrain to help inventors, entrepreneurs and students to turn their ideas into reality and discuss and solve manufacturing problems. The third objective of the eighth objective (3-8), in collaboration with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), launched the "Best Home Product" initiative from the productive families belonging to the youth centers to sell it in the local market and export it as possible. In 2010, the Ministry of Youth has implemented the "Youth City 2030" project with the support of Tamkeen with the aim of upgrading, rehabilitating and training Bahraini youth through a range of programs designed to build and develop capacities and capacities that will enable them to enter the labor market. , Benefiting about 4875 young men and women.



Expatriate labor: Towards liberation from the sponsorship system

The Kingdom of Bahrain attracts workers from all over the world thanks to its attractive business environment, with expatriates representing 55% of Bahrain's population and 76% of the total workforce. Bahrain, although small, provides more than 600,000 permanent jobs for expatriates. Despite the limited resources of Bahrain, it has sought to meet the basic needs of them and their families of fully or partially subsidized services as well as free education and semi-free treatment. The total remittances are BD 927 million (equivalent to US $ 2.5 billion) in 2017, contributing as a difficult task to help develop national output in their countries. What is worth mentioning is that foreign workers in Bahrain fall into three categories: highly qualified and qualified, those from different countries including the United States and European countries, working in the private and public sectors with high salaries; those with intermediate qualifications who also serve as middle-level cadres In various fields; and those with low qualifications who are the most numerous and working in the construction and services sectors. Their work in Bahrain contributes to enriching their families and getting them out of poverty through the remittances they send them.

Sponsorship system for expatriates

The commitment of Bahrain to the overall goal of the Sustainable Development Plan to achieve "no one behind" has led to the start of work on freedom from the kafala system, and in 2017 the flexible work permit system was launched, which exempts the worker from the exclusive association with only one sponsor. The labor market reform project, the first of its kind in the Middle East region, has received a regional and international welcome as it is in line with all international labor agreements and agreements. It takes into account all legal, humanitarian and social considerations, and is in line with labor standards. To ensure the rights of workers in accordance with national laws and legislation, and improve the working environment.



The United Nations supports flexible work permits as one of the best international practices

The flexible work permit provides an innovative solution in the way of reforming the labor market by improving the environment of dealing with expatriate workers, thus guaranteeing their rights along with the rights of the rest of the parties. It also provides a qualitative economic addition to the national economy by providing the market needs of temporary employment without prejudice to competitive nature, As well as correcting employment contrary to their status in accordance with the law. Under that permit, workers are granted the right to work in various non-professional positions, both full-time and part-time, and with one or more employers. A flexible worker can also benefit from health care in government centers and is allowed to leave the Kingdom and return on a regular basis during the period of validity of the work visa.



Regional and international partnership

The partnership is a two-way relationship between the state concerned and the others, in which the parties share roles and benefits in an integrated manner. As has been pointed out repeatedly in this report, regional integration and openness to the world play a crucial role in Bahrain's sustainable development path, with obligations and benefits for the Kingdom.

Bahrain is neither a donor nor a recipient country in the traditional sense. It is part of the GCC system. This affiliation is an advanced form of institutionalized partnership that results in other forms of exchange of expertise and development support through regional development projects, trade exchange, Operating among the member countries, whose development impact exceeds the system of aid and traditional lending.

On the other hand, Bahrain through the Royal Charity Foundation and the Bahraini Red Crescent and civil society organizations have provided many financial and in-kind contributions to support refugees in various parts of the world such as Palestine, Syria, Pakistan, Somalia, Turkey, Nepal, Philippines, Egypt and Yemen. In addition to building hospitals, schools and other infrastructure in partnership with the sisterly GCC countries and the friendly world countries. The kingdom's potential does not allow it to expand its role, nor does it consider itself a donor. Rather, it is committed to moral and humanitarian commitment and solidarity with people who need assistance in difficult circumstances.

Challenges and look to the future

The emphasis on achievements is to draw attention to the existence of a margin of capacity to advance and to build upon the accumulated experience and experience accumulated in previous years. However, this does not mean not seeing problems, difficulties and challenges on their diversity, and trying to overcome them with the will and the right planning. The eighth goal calls for achieving stable economic growth for a period of time. In this regard, the average annual economic growth in the past decade was 37%, which is a good growth despite Bahrain's difficulties due to the global economic crisis and the fluctuation of its oil economy.

The choice of economic diversification that the Kingdom has been going through for years, the option of effective integration into the regional economy, scientific and technological innovation, the path of increasing energy efficiency and alternative energy, and the consistent and strategic option of sustainability is the safest option for economic growth conducive to prosperity and planet protection.

4.7. Security, Governance and Institutional Development

Encourage the establishment of peaceful, non-marginalized societies for sustainable development, universal access to justice and the building of effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.

The government work program allocated two axes out of six axes to cover the area of \0x200B\0x200Bpeace, justice and good governance, which are related to the goal of sustainable development. The first focuses on "strengthening security, stability, democratic order and external relations," while the latter focuses on procedural aspects and provision of services to citizens. Its strategic priority is to "enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of government performance".

Security and stability in Bahrain (as in any other country) is as national as it is regional. National measures may succeed in providing security and political and institutional stability in the country, but this does not create the desired developmental impact and preserve and protect it unless it is reinforced by a regional and international environment supportive of peace and stability.

In the last decade, the pace of external interference in the affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain has increased, according to irrefutable evidence and documents, which is a clear violation of the principles of respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and good-neighborliness, as affirmed by the Charter of the United Nations and international law, In the Kingdom's quest for comprehensive sustainability and national capacity-building in various areas of development. In this regard, the Kingdom of Bahrain offers a distinctive development model according to international indicators, but it faces a security challenge from state sponsored terrorism, which aims at stability and development plans. Security and development are fundamental requirements that are inseparably linked, one can not be achieved without the other and can only be achieved through a secure and good governance State. The provision of sustainable growth remains contingent on ensuring the effectiveness of security, stability, human development and the preservation of human values. Bahrain has maintained a balanced balance between security and development in a stable environment. It has faced terrorist acts within the framework of law and human rights values. At the same time, it has consistently pursued development and directed efforts and resources to serve the welfare of citizens and residents.

The current review in more than one place pointed to the impact of regional tension on Bahrain and Bahrain's commitment to a joint confrontation with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to prevent further crises and encircle their impact on the national interior. As for internal stability, His Majesty the King, the government and all the institutions of the State are striving to establish a culture of dialogue and the rule of law and the continuation of the institutions of constitutional rule (Shura and Parliament) through periodic elections (there are parliamentary elections in 2018). As well as the fight against corruption and the maintenance of public money through the Office of Financial and Administrative Control, which was established by Decree Law No. (49) for the year 2010 to undertake the task of oversight of public funds and verify the integrity and legitimacy of its use and good management without excessive or waste in support of the State and society and benefit them, In addition to assisting the audited entities to manage their affairs in an institutional manner based on the laws and procedures governing their work, with a view to improving the performance of those entities and filling the gaps that are exploited in the commission of irregularities and manipulation of public funds as well as disclosure of financial and administrative irregularities. Adjust the violators. The Financial and Administrative Control Bureau also reviews the financial and administrative regulations and procedures and procedures of the operations to ensure the efficiency and adequacy of these laws and regulations and identify shortcomings and shortcomings in the protection of penetration, and propose appropriate means to develop and reform. Under Article 116 of the Constitution and Article 1 of Law 49, the Court is financially and administratively independent of the legislative and executive branches to enable it to perform its functions impartially, transparently and independently. The SAI issues an annual report that includes the results of the control of the final account of the state and the results of performance control and administrative control. The presence of the SAI has been effective in protecting public funds, improving the performance of the audited entities, ensuring accountability, enhancing transparency and improving the performance of those entities. With public funds.

As for criminal security, it should be noted that the availability of modern urban infrastructure, lighting, road networks covering all neighborhoods, availability of police stations and service centers, effective communication system and emergency services all contribute to a safe environment for all to work, study, move and live in Bahrain day and night.

The Kingdom seeks to promote and protect human rights through legislative measures and policies, including the independence of the Bahraini judiciary, which follows a series of legal procedures to ensure a fair trial including the right to defense and judicial assistance. The Kingdom guarantees respect for rights and freedoms, The Office for the Rights of Prisoners and Detainees, the Special Investigation Unit, the National Human Rights Foundation and the National Complaints and Suggestions System. The Kingdom also offers democratic practices through the legislative authority, freedom of opinion and expression, and many tools, including allowing the activities of non-governmental organizations, the freedom of the various media and respect for civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights in accordance with the Constitution, national legislation and international conventions in the field of human rights, . Its reports are submitted periodically in accordance with established international mechanisms.



It is worth mentioning that the Kingdom of Bahrain submitted the Universal Periodic Review report at the third session of the UN Human Rights Council in May 2017, received 175 recommendations from different countries of the world, and approved 139 recommendations, representing nearly 80% of the recommendations. 88 recommendations (50.3% of the total) are linked to specific sustainable development objectives. The following table summarizes the approved recommendations disaggregated by sustainable development objectives.



Recommendations approved by the Kingdom of Bahrain

Related to the goals of sustainable development

Goal 3

  (one recommendation) Develop health programs in health centers and rehabilitation centers to accommodate all age groups and persons with special needs.

Goal 4

  (6 recommendations) relating to human rights education and training in general, and to include it in the curricula, and through the various media and communication.

  (one recommendation) Intensify efforts to provide public education and training on human trafficking law.

  (one recommendation) Raise awareness in the community among groups of all ages to enable them to understand the importance of civil society organizations and their role in the dynamics of Bahraini society.

Goal 5

  (5) on legislation, policies and measures to eliminate and protect all forms of discrimination against women.

  (one recommendation) to continue the important process of improving the reconciliation of women's rights and obligations under the provisions of the Shariah.

  (one recommendation) Take steps to ensure the successful implementation of the National Plan for the Advancement of Bahraini Women 2013-2022.

  (one recommendation) Increase the number of women in political and public life at all levels and in all spheres and strengthen the role of women in leadership positions and ensure access to them in the higher education system.

Goal 8

 P (4) relating to the continuation of efforts and measures to prevent and eliminate trafficking in persons and to strengthen the protection and assistance of victims.

 (3) on the adoption and implementation of a national strategy to combat trafficking in persons, especially women and girls.

 (one recommendation) take further steps to ensure equality in all aspects of work and professions.

 (4) on the continuation of efforts to ensure the safety, security and dignity of migrant workers and to protect them against discrimination, including domestic workers, by taking the necessary institutional and legislative measures.

Goal 10

 P (two recommendations) on the further promotion of sound, pro-population social policies, with special emphasis on the rights of vulnerable groups.

 P (one recommendation) adopt effective measures in laws and practices to eliminate all forms of discrimination, especially on the basis of religion or belief.

 P (one recommendation) take additional measures to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to and use of violence against persons because of their religion or belief.

 P (3) on the further implementation of the National Strategic Action Plan for Persons with Disabilities and effective measures to realize the rights enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to continue to support the integration of persons with disabilities into society by promoting educational support and job training.

 P (one recommendation) to further improve the social security system and take further steps to ensure the rights of persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups.

 P (one recommendation) to continue to strengthen the capacity of the National Committee for Childhood to fully implement the National Strategic Plan of Action for Children.

Goal 16

 (8 recommendations) related to strengthening the independence and effectiveness of national remedies in accordance with international principles and standards, such as the National Human Rights Institution, the General Secretariat of Complaints and the Special Investigation Unit of the Attorney-General.

 (5 recommendations) on capacity-building and training of judges and law enforcement personnel in accordance with international human rights standards and international conventions, and the dissemination of a code of conduct for law enforcement personnel among themselves and in society at large.

 P (6 Recommendations) on investigations into all allegations of torture, ill-treatment and enforced disappearances in accordance with the norms of the rule of law and the perpetrators of such crimes, and to ensure that there is no impunity.

 P (one recommendation) to continue the counter-terrorism strategy in order to protect human rights.

 P (16) on the removal of obstacles to freedom of opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and association, promotion and facilitation of NGO activities, and that the new press law conform to international standards.

 P (3) on measures and legislation to protect civil society and journalists from acts of aggression, intimidation and reprisals.

 P (3) on the release of prisoners for exercising their right to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly.

 P (two recommendations) regarding respect for and protection of the right of all groups and individuals to legitimate political and public participation.

 P (one recommendation) Remove restrictions on the establishment or membership of political parties.

 P (one recommendation) focus on strengthening the legal framework, institutions and the judiciary to ensure the independence of the judicial system and the right to a fair trial guaranteed by articles 9 and 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

 P (one recommendation) Prohibit the practice of corporal punishment against children in all contexts and contexts under the law, including the home, and repeal all exceptions relating to its use.

 P (Single Recommendation) The age of criminalization in the legislation of the Kingdom to take into account the best interest in treating the child in a manner commensurate with his age and protect his dignity and facilitate his rehabilitation and integration into society.

 P (one recommendation) to continue steps to promote human rights by taking effective measures to implement the rights enshrined in the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

Goal 17

 P (one recommendation) to continue efforts for international cooperation in the field of human rights and to benefit from relevant international experiences.

 P (single recommendation) Action to raise awareness of the right to a safe environment through participation and cooperation among all partners.



The Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain has agreed to these recommendations and accordingly will take the necessary measures to implement them and even implement some of them even before submitting its report to the United Nations. The other part will be included in the next government work program, The next periodicity in 2021, which also coincides with the timeframe for the next government's work program 2019-2022.

It is worth mentioning that the fundamentals of the political system in the Kingdom of Bahrain and its developments illustrate the keenness to benefit from the outcome of Bahrain's political, economic and social experience and to take into consideration the challenges required by the continuous development while at the same time benefiting from the relevant experiences in order to build a modern state in terms of frameworks And taking into account local, regional and international developments.

The process of developing the political system has been characterized by transparency and openness between the leadership and the people through the proper frameworks of democratic practices that emphasize respect for the rule of law, the guarantee of rights and freedoms, and the emphasis on the importance of popular participation and national unity.

Linking the goals of sustainable development with the periodic review report will contribute to improving the mechanisms for pursuing sustainable development goals on the one hand and promoting the linking of human rights with the concept of sustainable development on the other.

The electronic government

In the light of the information and communication revolution, Bahrain has succeeded in employing electronic technologies to improve the efficiency of government services by adopting the e-government initiative, which is ranked among the most advanced countries in the world in this field. It is a classification obtained by countries that achieve more than 75% (Which exceeds 400 standards), thus enhancing its efforts towards electronic transformation by providing many services to citizens and residents electronically, using the best international methods and practices in this field. This facilitated the electronic readiness, the efficiency of the IT infrastructure, the intelligent communication equipment and the reliability of the Internet, enabling it to deal with the huge amount of data. They can be used to develop information that helps in decision-making.



Develop government leadership to support public sector initiatives with sustainable development objectives

The Institute of Public Administration (BIPA) works to support government work leaders with programs to train and develop leaders in the areas of policies, strategies, resource management, skills, behavior, knowledge, and problem solving through scientific research. The Institute works with international partners such as IIAS to develop a unified international agenda for the future of public administration, as well as to prepare an international leadership project for international leaders and to design academic and training programs that contribute to the improvement of government performance.

In collaboration with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) in Bahrain, the Institute has also begun to coordinate the objectives of sustainable development with the National Program for the Development of Government Leaders in several stages, beginning with understanding the objectives of sustainable development and ending with monitoring performance indicators at the leadership level that achieve the goals of sustainable development in the institution.



In 2008, the Bahrain Center for Excellence was established to realize the vision of wise leadership in developing the administrative performance of all ministries and government agencies through the adoption of solid scientific and scientific programs that proved successful in the public and private sectors in order to reach innovative and sustainable solutions through the methodologies of excellence Institutions in the world These efforts are aimed at simplifying and speeding up the procedures of government services provided to the public while ensuring accuracy and speed at the same time. Based on several criteria, the most important of which are:

\0xF0FC The ability of the institution to support the national economy,

\0xF0FC Industry change through excellence applications,

\0xF0FC Development of leaders, leadership teams and human assets,

\0xF0FC Preserving the implicit and acquired knowledge assets,

\0xF0FC Communication with the community and the ability of the institution to develop the spirit of social responsibility.



Chapter 5: Thematic Debate: Transforming into sustainable and resilient societies



5. 1. Boot

In its previous paragraphs, the present report addressed the conceptual framework for development, the 2030 Sustainable Development Plan, and the commitment to the principle of interdependence and complementarity of national goals, objectives and policies. In the next section, we have special space to review the five objectives 6, 7, 11, 12 and 15, as well as target 17, which is included permanently in each session. We have added target 13 on climate change, which will be reviewed at the 2019 Forum for its organic association with goals 6, 7 and 12; and we added target 14 for the seas and oceans, reviewed in 2017, because the marine environment and the land environment of the country can not be separated Such as Bahrain.



5. 2. Cities and urban development in Bahrain



Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable



The National Strategic Plan of the Kingdom of Bahrain 2030 identifies the urban development objectives and the sustainable urban and urban development features of the Kingdom since 2008 by providing modern housing, safe infrastructure services and sophisticated public facilities to meet the needs of the inhabitants for decent living and in accordance with best global practices in terms of water availability For different uses, wastewater treatment, energy efficiency and use, the introduction of renewable energies, the quest to turn cities into smart complexes that attract technology, low-carbon performance (destination 11.3) and others. The road network, and the modernization of mass transit (destination 11.2), as well as the provision of public facilities from schools, educational, social and health centers have also been developed. The development of parks and public parks also includes the popular and central markets and city and village development projects, which will positively affect the living, health and social levels of the population in the different regions of the country and enhance the Kingdom's efforts to achieve healthy environment and cities that are smart, healthy and sustainable.

Modern housing services

In the area of \0x200B\0x200Bproviding adequate and affordable basic housing and basic services to citizens and improving the quality of old housing, target 11.1 has been achieved. Legal protection is provided to ensure equal access to land, including the right to inherit and own all citizens. The Constitution stipulates in Article 9 paragraph (f) that "the State shall provide housing for low-income citizens", which established the methodology of the Ministry of Housing to provide housing services in full fairness to those entitled according to the classification of monthly income levels and all categories of society, People with special needs in modern housing communities.

Within the framework of cooperation with the United Nations Development Office (UNDP), a project was agreed upon to develop housing policies and services and ensure that the new sustainable housing development goals are included in the long-term sustainability of the housing portfolio in a number of ways. More efficient construction using environmentally friendly building materials and the use of thermal insulation Energy consumption, with the introduction of solar system installation steps in a number of new housing units, as a first step towards generalization of the experiment.

The Ministry of Housing has taken three main steps towards activating partnership with the private sector in the provision of housing services, as one of the main solutions to ensure the sustainability of the housing file in the Kingdom. The first is to conclude a contract with a real estate developer to implement housing projects on government land. The first experience in the city of Salman, the implementation of 1618 housing units and the implementation of 832 housing units in the area of \0x200B\0x200BAl-Luzi, has been so far the experience of success in the completion of completion rates, and the ministry actually distributed units to citizens listed on the waiting lists.

The second track, which has witnessed great success and popularity in the Bahraini street, is the Mazaya program, which achieved positive results in a record period. It was authorized for adoption as a basic housing service by a decision of the Council of Ministers. Rehabilitation, while 2,800 citizens completed procedures to receive their units already in a very short period of time. Mazaya has contributed to encouraging real estate developers to implement more projects at affordable prices after qualifying them and providing them with approved technical specifications. The Housing Bank, the strategic partner of the ministry, has also attracted more banks to grant easy and long-term financing to beneficiaries with direct financial support from the Ministry in the payment of monthly installments.

It can be said that the Mazaya program has achieved the principle of facilitating the access of citizens to housing finance included in the government's program of work through the funds granted by banks participating in the benefits of citizens, as well as the Ministry of Housing to develop new frameworks and policies related to the allocation of direct housing finance to citizens for the purpose of purchase or Construction or renovation, to ensure that the allocation requests are not accumulated without benefit, and to provide financial financing to citizens most in need and readiness, and thus obtain funding and purchase, construction or repair of the unit in a record time.

On the third track, the Ministry has launched an initiative to purchase more than 3,000 residential units from one of the largest real estate developers in the Kingdom of Bahrain, which will benefit registered citizens on their waiting lists, a new form of cooperation with the private sector.



The two main challenges in this area are to provide sustainable financing for the housing sector by increasing the role of the private sector, and secondly by the need to reduce the waiting period for housing. The disparity between increasing demand and waiting time increases the likelihood of building codes being violated and many changes to households occupied housing to respond to the needs of extended family growth, which are faster than the ability to respond to nuclear families.

On the other hand, the government has developed a number of old residential neighborhoods in order to preserve the social fabric and the historical character of these areas, such as the development of the Boher Maher case. The Farajan initiative was recently launched to develop a number of neighborhoods in Muharraq Governorate, the capital of ancient Bahrain, with its historical heritage and heritage, and the development of high quality buildings, roads and corridors that mimic the history of these areas.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has received international recognition on several occasions for its efforts in the field of human settlements, notably the awarding of the Honorary Award for Excellence in Urban Development and Housing by His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa in 2006 by the United Nations Human Settlements Program in Geneva Amidst a distinguished international ceremony. Muharraq was chosen as the capital of Islamic culture for the year 2018, due to the history of its history and human heritage and embodied by the elements of civilization distinct.

The environment and the impact of urban growth on them

As urban growth is accompanied by impacts on air quality and increased waste. Decision No. (10) of 1999 on environmental standards (destination 11.6) was issued to establish a national standard that is appropriate to the nature of the Kingdom and its environment, to reduce emissions of gases and liquids in many sectors and to measure the quality of ambient air. On November 27, 2016, the Council of Ministers approved Resolution 10 - 237 on the mandate of the Supreme Council for the Environment to develop a national strategy for air quality in the Kingdom of Bahrain in coordination with the relevant authorities and in cooperation with a specialized house of expertise to improve air quality and provide a healthy environment in the Kingdom of Bahrain.

Technical reports of air quality indicate that the micro particles smaller than 10 and 2.5 microns (10 PM and 2.5 PM) have been replicated to national standards in all governorates of the Kingdom, although these standards are higher than WHO standards (11.6.2). This is a cross-border problem and a result of drought due to low precipitation in the region The relationship between the number of days of dust and total annual precipitation is inverse as dust days increase in years when precipitation decreases As in 2008. The dry Which has been exposed to the Badia Al-Sham and Iraq recently, not to mention the instability that has been affected by the years ago spent on the vegetation and decomposition of soil and make them vulnerable to wind increased dust storms and sand creeps, which requires protection of vegetation through the expansion of the establishment of transboundary natural reserves in parts North of the West Asia region as protected areas are a synergy between the multilateral environmental conventions of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change







In addition, the increase in the development activities of construction and construction projects and the increase in the number of vehicles and industrial development increased the concentration of these particles in the surrounding air and to reduce the phenomenon of dust and air pollution in urban areas has been expanded in the establishment of parks, parks, coasts, And beautification of the streets in different regions of the Kingdom and was cultivated with local plants and taking into account the requirements of all groups of children, women and people with special needs and others (destination 11.7). In addition, Bahrain's old springs were rehabilitated and turned into parks such as Ain Adhari, Ain Shams, and others, which enabled Bahrain to preserve its heritage and also contributed to the preservation of the environment and human well-being.



Waste is a big problem

Waste is one of the problems of urban areas and is exacerbated in small island countries, especially with rapid population growth and increasing per capita daily production of waste, which in Bahrain amounts to about 1.5 kg / person / day, which is high when compared to the global average of 1.2 kg. Solid urban waste accounts for 94% of the total waste generated, while the percentage collected and transported from urban areas to their disposal sites is 100% (Indicator 11.6.1). The total of these wastes has been disposed of since 1986 in Mardam or Askar landfill, a quarry for rocks in southeastern Bahrain, where landfills are dumped without any trace of sorting, processing or recycling. They are then bonded with heavy machinery and covered with a layer of sand And so on successively. The Askar landfill received about 2 million tons of waste in 2016. The preliminary results of the national integrated waste management strategy currently being prepared indicate the urgent need to adopt an integrated waste management approach and the need to improve its governance from reducing individual productivity, Resources and recovery of energy and an end to the increase of the default age of the landfill, especially with limited land in the Kingdom.

Hazardous waste is disposed of in a waste dump for this type of waste. It is worth mentioning that the Kingdom of Bahrain has ratified the Basel Convention on the Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and the Supreme Council for the Environment has issued a number of resolutions regulating the issues of its circulation. As well as the establishment of a statistical system to manage them, including the daily registration of the amount of industrial waste, type, source, place of disposal or export and information of the carrier, and prepare an annual report to the Secretariat of the Basel Convention, which honored Bahrain for its efforts in this area.



As part of the Kingdom's plan to make cities safe and sustainable (disaster 11.5 destination), a national emergency plan has been prepared to combat oil spills, and the industrial waste and hazardous waste management plan is under preparation. On the environment.

Confronting disasters

In the field of maintaining public safety, the Ministry of the Interior has formed the Civil Defense Council and the National Disaster Response Committee (NDC) to take measures and measures related to the handling of emergencies. And to strengthen cooperation with fraternal and friendly countries in taking measures to alleviate human suffering by preventing natural and human accidents and taking measures to mitigate their effects if they occur. The Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (Indicator 11b.2) in Bahrain is in line with the 2010-2015 World Endowment for Disaster Reduction. Prevention measures, planning and pre-planning, incident handling procedures, removal of impacts, recovery and return to status A seismic monitoring station has been set up to monitor the radiation and nuclear and land-based seismic emissions inside and outside Bahrain.

National Disaster Response Committee

The National Disaster Preparedness Committee of the Ministry of the Interior ensures the readiness of the concerned authorities to deal with any emergency events such as fire and chemical hazards, including industrial accidents, hazardous materials, road accidents, radiation, nuclear pollution, etc., which often have serious consequences for the society. Injuries, and destruction of infrastructure (electricity, water, sanitation, roads, transportation, etc.). And planning in a proactive way to prevent them and raise readiness and readiness to confront them. The National Risk Matrix is \0x200B\0x200Bperiodically updated in accordance with the 2015-2013 Strategy and Framework of the Decade, during workshops involving all partners in government, private sector, civil society and academia. Where the risks that may be exposed to the country, and their effects, and appropriate actions for prevention, and the development of plans to address them, and to ensure the readiness of the institutions concerned to deal with them.

Transport problems

The increase in population and successive housing projects have contributed to the growth and expansion of the road network. However, the steady increase in the number of vehicles is about 26 thousand vehicles per year, and the limited policies of mass transportation cause increased traffic violations and congestion. 11.2.1 Efforts are being made to develop the road network, as well as the Ministry of the Interior to issue a law of "review" traffic and several development projects have been implemented, such as traffic signs, traffic cameras, awareness campaigns, etc. Despite these challenges, Traffic violations by more than 20% since the beginning of the implementation of the Traffic Law "2015 Review" and the approval of the national plan for road safety and improving road safety (destination 11.2) as well as the decrease in the number of deaths resulting from traffic injuries.



However, these regulatory measures are insufficient from a strategic point of view. The transport problem is structural in nature, closely linked to climate, growth patterns, urbanization and consumer lifestyles that encourage the acquisition of private cars. It is therefore necessary to undertake a proactive effort to adopt a package of effective transport policies aimed at reducing the large number of vehicles, improving land use planning, organizing the transport network and re-planning and implementing smart mass transport, thus contributing to the development of the transport. The national strategy for air quality is expected to contribute to this trend.

5. 3.Water quality sanitation services and sustainable management



Ensuring the sustainable availability and management of water and sanitation services for all



Although Bahrain suffers from a scarcity of water resources, like a number of drought-stricken and desert countries in the region, coverage of water and sanitation networks is 100%. The population of Bahrain relies entirely on non-conventional water resources (desalinated water from sea water) and conventional water resources (groundwater or rainfall) to meet their drinking water needs. Sewage treatment is used to meet the requirements of the agricultural, municipal and industrial sectors.

Desalination by nature puts pressure on the environment due to its energy consumption, its contribution to air pollution and its saline solution to the marine environment. On the other hand, the unsustainable use of groundwater leads to a decline in their quality and degradation, resulting in the natural dryness of the springs and the salinization of the agricultural land on which they depend. This is compounded by the effects of climate change and sea level rise, For the aquifer class, the decrease in precipitation and the rise in temperature, and hence the increase in demand for water in all sectors, especially the agriculture sector.

The Kingdom of Bahrain is making great efforts to provide safe drinking water and sanitation services throughout the Kingdom, increasing storage capacity to ensure water security, and increasing the efficiency of its use, especially for the domestic and agricultural sectors. Bahrain is also implementing an integrated approach to water resource management through the Water Resources Board, which was formed in 2009. The percentage of population with access to improved and safe drinking water (destination 6.1) is 100% affordable and quality levels improve over time.

Wastewater management and treatment

The proportion of people connected to safe sewerage networks increased from 73% in 2000 to 92% in 2015. The rest of the population benefits from safe sanitation services connected to treatment plants. Therefore, the target of 6.2 sustainable development goals has been fully achieved for all in a fair and appropriate manner. There has also been a steady increase in the WIS indicator to drinking water, from 47 per cent in the base year to 58 per cent in 2015, close to the recommended international rate of 60 per cent.

Over the years 2000 to 2015, the combined wastewater treatment rate was 100%. The challenge remains to raise the proportion of treated wastewater and the reuse to total treated wastewater (usage share). Which in 2016 accounted for only 39 percent of the total treated wastewater (Indicator 6.3.1) while the rest is discharged into the sea rather than exploited.



Treated and reused wastewater, and those discharged to the sea, 2000-2016 (1)



The agricultural sector accounts for about 33 percent of total water produced for various purposes by 2014, and more than 84 percent of the total groundwater abstracted by 2015, despite the small contribution of this sector to GDP of only 0.21 percent. Programmatic measures have been taken to rationalize water consumption in the agricultural sector by placing meters on all groundwater wells to monitor the clouds and ensure that they do not exceed the safe limit, as well as reconsidering the crop structure, cultivating less water consuming crops and expanding the use of triple treated water Irrigation rather than groundwater, as well as the application of modern methods of agriculture and irrigation, especially the protected landless agriculture, which proved successful in conserving resources and environment, high economic returns and many job opportunities.

Institutional actions and regional cooperation in the field of water

In order to preserve water sustainability, the Water Resources Council shall draw up water policy, take measures to ensure the proper utilization of water for various purposes, regulate the drilling of wells and the use of groundwater, and other administrative and regulatory procedures. The aim of integrated water management is to balance supply and demand, protect it against pollution, preserve the environment and meet the needs of all sectors. This requires management, institutional and governance of traditional and non-traditional water resources, maximizing the utilization of treated wastewater and protecting the environment. The GCC Water Sector Standard Strategy (2035-2015) and its Operational Plan are a guiding guide for the current strategy for water resource management in Bahrain (2018-2035) in collaboration with the Arab Gulf University under the umbrella of the Council with the participation of sectors and segments of society The national strategy is expected to be a qualitative leap in addressing the issues and challenges of water scarcity and sustainable management.

In view of the importance of water data and statistics, the Information and E-Government Authority has made great efforts to establish and develop a comprehensive national water statistics base for the Kingdom of Bahrain that meets the regional and national needs of water data. The base contains about 440 variables or a statistical topic. Including water quality, groundwater levels, water use efficiency and demand management. And related to climate, natural, demographic and economic data and indicators related to water, allowing the production of coherent quantitative indicators and standards on water resources and sustainable development. The National Water Statistics Database (NBS) is viewed as a continuous national project and may be linked to geographic information systems and modeling applications to facilitate data processing and analysis and to prepare and extract technical and statistical reports to support decision-making in water resources planning and management.

Available data on the conditions of shallow aquifers in Bahrain associated with index 6.1.6 and 6.3.3 on ecosystem change and water quality respectively show positive results in groundwater levels and their quality by reducing clouds From the reservoir to the safe deposit limit of 112 million cubic meters per year.

Support and pricing of water services

Price revisions have been made to the tariffs of drinking water and municipal, commercial and industrial uses. The revised tariffs reflect the real cost of water gradually being met under the principle of cost recovery and the creation of economic incentives to rationalize water consumption and raise the efficiency of its use. Drinking water and insurance. An integrated program to detect leaks in the distribution network and limit the amount of non-measured water is being implemented, as well as campaigns and programs dedicated to rationalizing the consumption of drinking water.

Within the framework of the national sanitation strategy, a series of projects are being implemented, most notably the expansion and rehabilitation of the Tubli Central Sewage Treatment Plant and the leakage reduction projects in the sewage collection, transport and distribution networks. And review the central sanitation system currently in place in Bahrain and study the possibility of replacing it with a decentralized system including the establishment of new stations in the areas of Muharraq, the southern city, and the northern city, and the rehabilitation of some treatment plants subsidiary. As well as increasing the potential of triangular treatment and raising the reuse share on the one hand, as well as reducing negative environmental impacts on the coastal environment on the other.

In addition, a fee is being considered to restore the cost of some of the services provided, such as access to sewage networks, treatment and reuse, reducing the financial burden of the sewage sector on the public budget and improving the level of services provided by this sector. The recharging / recharge of aquifers is being studied with surplus tri-treated wastewater to increase the groundwater reserves.



5. 4. Modern, reliable, sustainable and affordable energy services for all



Ensuring affordable access for all to modern, reliable and sustainable energy services.



Energy plays a crucial role in achieving all sustainable development goals, from its role in poverty eradication to progress in the areas of health, education, water supply, industrialization, etc., to addressing climate change. The Kingdom of Bahrain has adopted a strategy based on the provision of electricity services with the highest degree of reliability and quality from gas turbine and steam turbine stations. The electricity produced through major transport stations is transferred to all the governorates of the Kingdom and distributed through the network to all subscribers.

The steady increase in the Kingdom of Bahrain, which accompanied the economic development especially the industrial ones due to the oil boom since the seventies of the last century, led to an increase in the annual consumption of electricity and increased the production capacity from 1447 MW in 1999 to 3934 MW in 2016. The number of power transmission stations From 68 stations in 1999 to 179 stations in 2016, while the number of substations reached 7888 stations in 2016 to ensure coverage of all regions.

The percentage of the population who benefit from electricity services, which are managed safely, relying on natural gas and clean technology is 100% (indicator 7.1.2), with high efficiency and with minimum interruptions even during peak time and during the summer period when demand for electricity reaches its peak.

The severity of the weather is one of the factors affecting the increase in the demand for electricity and therefore the increase in per capita consumption. Temperature and humidity rise during most months of the year and peak in the summer, increasing the individual's energy and water consumption. The per capita annual consumption of electricity has increased from 11,348 kWh in 2014 to 12,719 kWh in 2015.

The Kingdom is working hard to meet the increasing demand for electricity by building new production plants. In 2012, the first phase of the Al-Dor production plant was launched to produce electricity with a capacity of 1,234 MW. It operates in a complex cycle mode to obtain reliability and high efficiency in order to ration fuel and reduce emissions. The Kingdom is also working to improve the management of electricity demand through awareness campaigns to rationalize consumption as well as by reducing the importation and circulation of low-efficiency electrical appliances and gradually revise the tariff for subscribers. It restructured support and set a new tariff structure for various sectors and segments, Note that the rate of support up to 40% of the cost of electricity according to certain systems.

Alternative sources

In order to sustain energy, the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain, through the Sustainable Energy Unit project, a joint venture between the Government of Bahrain and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), has made concrete efforts to diversify the energy mix (destination 7.2) and utilize renewable energy sources to meet the growing demand for energy and to keep pace with sustained economic growth. The kingdom.

In December 2016, the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain adopted the National Energy Efficiency Plan (NEEAP), the National Renewable Energy Plan (NREAP) and the proposed initiatives. In January 2017, the proposed national ratios were adopted to increase the share of renewable energy in the national mix by 5% by 2025 10% by 2035 and 6% more energy efficiency by 2025.

The net measurement policy, which represents a shift in the production of energy in the Kingdom, changed the traditional roles of the producer and the consumer. Energy production is no longer restricted to the government, and every user can be produced immediately after installing solar panels and connecting it to the renewable energy system at home.

It also approved the construction of a solar power plant with a capacity of 100 megawatts, which is expected to be operational by the end of 2019. As well as the completion of the construction phase of the Dor power plant using solar and wind power with a total capacity of 5 megawatts, and work is under way to complete the remaining work in support of the actual operation of the station and its connection to the network by the end of this year.

In the context of the achievements of the efforts to encourage investment in the field of renewable energy and its uses, in January 2017 the first solar panel production plant was opened in the Kingdom.

5. 5. Bahrain: Sea of \0x200B\0x200Bthe Wild



 Conservation and sustainable use of oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development

 Protection and restoration of terrestrial ecosystems and their sustainable use, sustainable management of forests, combating desertification, halting and reversing land degradation and halting the loss of biodiversity.

The marine and coastal environment (target 14) of the Kingdom of Bahrain is characterized by a rich biodiversity that includes at least 1455 species belonging to the different taxonomic groups and important habitats that are gaining environmental, economic, social, cultural and national importance at the national, regional and international levels. The most important of which are the so-called blue carbon environments (coral reef environment, marine weed, mud surfaces and the Crimean environment), pearl oysters, sandy and sandy beaches and salt marshes.

Due to the limited land area in Bahrain, population and development activities are concentrated on the coastline, Land Base Activities are putting pressure on coastal ecosystem services and affecting the sustainability of fish stocks, food security and its economic and social impacts. The most important of these pressures are the operations of burial and landfill, drainage and sewage treatment, as well as the disposal of desalination plants and some other factories and others, not to mention the pressures of the marine source from the fleet of vessels that roam the Gulf waters and the water balance and plastic and other. In 1996, the Kingdom declared Resolution 16 of 1996 as the Hawar islands and the surrounding territorial sea, a protected area where the world's largest colony of Phalacrocorax Nigrogularis is located. Its territorial waters are part of the world's second largest herd of Dugong cattle. After the declaration of the Hiraat Nghwa Boulthamah, Hir Boulthamah, Hier Shtayeh and Heer Buamama areas, marine protected areas increased to 1,603 km 2 in 2017, more than 21 per cent of the total area of \0x200B\0x200Bthe territorial waters of the Kingdom of Bahrain, Aichi Biodiversity Targets "aimed at conserving (at least 10%) of coastal and marine areas by 2020.

Bahrain is the first country in the Gulf region to adopt the management of some of its coastal areas according to the ecosystem approach to promote the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in a fair manner, represented in the Herat reserve (Har Bulthama, Hirat Shitia, Har Bouamama and Nghwa Boulthamah) With the aim of preserving coral reefs and pearl oyster deposits, and preserving the cultural heritage of pearl industry and trade by promoting ecotourism and creating new jobs. Rehabilitation of degraded habitats such as weed and coral reefs has been rehabilitated by live coral culture, artificial reefs and mangrove culture to increase fish stocks and ensure the livelihoods of the local fishers. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has also regulated the fishing, exploitation and protection of wealth, the latest of which is Decree No. 27 of 2017 prohibiting the fishing of shrimp in the territorial waters of the Kingdom, trading or selling it for six months instead of four months in order to preserve the stock.

The Biodiversity Strategy and the National Plan of Action of the Kingdom of Bahrain (2016-2021), which foresees administrative, legislative and regulatory measures to address the threats to biodiversity in the environment in general and marine in particular, have been updated, notably the shelf and landfill operations, the emergence of invasive alien species and the regulation of fishing Sea. The identification of areas of future urban growth is critical to sustainable development in the islands of Bahrain and the preservation of natural resources.

Small islands and important habitats

Although the limited land resources of Bahrain and its desert nature, it contains many important ecosystems such as natural springs, palm groves, reeds and deserts. In view of the growing demand for land resources, these habitats are being degraded by human pressures. The deterioration of groundwater has led to the transformation of some agricultural land into residential areas. Urban growth towards the coasts has also become a threat to shallow and important wetlands such as the Crimea, mud flats, marine weed and pearl oyster fringes. Although the Kingdom's land is free of forests (indicator 1.1.15), which is generally recognized by the FAO as the black mangroves of Avicennia marina grow heavily in a specific area in Tubli Bay, Ras Sanad, Some international organizations such as the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and the International Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) have been included as forests. The area of \0x200B\0x200Bthe Crimea is about 437 hectares, an area below the international standards set by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which requires at least 1,000 hectares of forest classification. However, the Kingdom of Bahrain has protected it and declared it a wetland of international importance Site No. 921) and issued Law No. 53 of 2006, which states that Tubli Bay is a protected area. Since 2013, a program for the cultivation of Crimea has been initiated in cooperation with Bahrain Petroleum Company (Bapco). The adoption of ecosystem approaches to the management of coastal ecosystems is a means of sustaining the sustainability of these systems and services, maximizing economic and social return and promoting human well-being. Not only is the environmental impact assessment of individual projects but of the SEA a necessity to identify, avoid or avoid the cumulative effects of development projects.

For the protection of endangered species and their habitats (Indicator 15.5.1) Red List Indicator The status of selected 23 species of endangered species in the Kingdom of Bahrain has been assessed based on the IUCN Red List categories and criteria to determine their status and degree of threat of extinction that you are facing. The result of the assessment at the regional level was the existence of six species in Bahrain "endangered by the first order", five "endangered", five "endangered", four "under threat", one "less threatening", three " , And "non-resident." These categories reflected the stressful situation surrounding these species of invasive alien species, overfishing, urbanization, depletion of groundwater, pollution, dredging and landfill activities, and climate change that led to the degradation and vulnerability of their habitats Particularly on populated islands, the most important of which is "

Recently, the National Strategy and Action Plan for the Kingdom of Bahrain (2021-2016) related to biodiversity has been finalized and is being adopted by the Government. The strategy has been aimed at administrative, legislative and regulatory measures that are expected to contribute to mobilizing efforts to protect the Kingdom's biodiversity and to address the threats Especially in the marine environment. In 2011, Bahrain passed Law No. 2, which provided for the accession to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Nagoya Protocol for Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of Their Use. Bahrain contains 81 medicinal plants Accessible and commercially profitable, folk medicine and folk medicine continue to flourish, accompanied by a unique cultural heritage that requires protection and protection. Currently, the Protocol is on the agenda of the Government's program of work for ratification. The Kingdom also works in the same context with the rest of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries to build capacity for access to genetic material and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising therefrom, and impose requirements on the import of genetic resources to ensure the rights of exporting countries and provide other States access to genetic resources including products Agricultural and marine fishery resources under prior controls. The Kingdom is also monitoring the trade of endangered animals in accordance with the CITES agreement, which was ratified by the Kingdom in 2012.

As for the agricultural sector, despite the fact that the Kingdom of Bahrain is located in the belt of the dry areas, it has historically been known as the island of the million palm trees thanks to the abundance of fresh groundwater that flowed through the ages through natural eyes by land and sea. However, since the end of the last century, due to the increase in population, economic development and increased demand for water, groundwater has deteriorated in quantity and quantity, affecting the agricultural sector in the Kingdom, which in turn faces many challenges, including dry climate, small agricultural land area and decline due to urban growth, Bahrainis to the total population as a result of their polarization by other sectors, which led to the decline of national agricultural labor and the shrinking of productive agricultural land. However, the Constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain stressed in Article 9 (g) the maximization of the State to exploit arable land fruitfully and to support the small farmers (Goal 2). Article 11 affirmed that "all natural resources and their resources are the property of the State, Conservation and good investment. Although Bahraini farmers make up only a very small percentage of Bahrain's labor force, the National Agricultural Sector Development Initiative (NEDI) has attached great importance to the agricultural sector, with a view to increasing agricultural productivity and thus the income of small farmers, especially women. One of the public parks in Bahrain was dedicated to displaying farmers 'products in the market called "Farmers Market", which has developed into a permanent market in the High Hawrah area. It also facilitated farmers' access to the markets and their access to marketing opportunities (Target 2.3 and 2.4). Most forms of agricultural export subsidies (destination B2) have also been reduced or eliminated, and access to information on markets and food reserves has been reduced to help reduce their price volatility (destination C2). Tamkeen supports production inputs and expansion of crops (Target 2), focusing on innovation, increasing agricultural productivity and food security (Goal 2), enhancing capacity to adapt to climate change (target 14) and weather conditions Extreme droughts, floods and others

5. 6. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns



 Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.

 Take urgent action to address climate change and its impacts.



A review of the energy, water and other support policies, and their reorientation and orientation to the most vulnerable groups, is an important step in achieving sustainable consumption patterns, improving the efficiency of resource use, and maintaining health and the environment. The success and expansion of this strategy requires a public awareness strategy and educational programs that promote rational use of natural resources and policies that focus on sustainable production and consumption patterns.

The Supreme Council for the Environment, through its programs and activities to preserve the environment and preserve its natural resources, seeks to raise the level of environmental awareness and the dissemination of environmental culture among all segments of society, aware of the importance of community partnership and its effective role in achieving equitable sustainable development and changing negative behaviors and habits in dealing with the environment.

In small island developing States, waste is a major challenge for municipal administrations for sound and sustainable management, especially with landfill continuity. The integrated waste management system is a way to meet the objectives of sustainable development. However, it requires raising awareness of issues of rationalization, sorting and recycling, as well as providing a favorable environment for legislation and institutionalization. The resource and energy efficiency program is being implemented in government buildings. While conditioning the central markets in reducing the damage of food and thus reduce the waste of food.

The above measures include the dimension related to the pattern of sustainable consumption, which the Kingdom of Bahrain is working to adopt within its national programs. The Supreme Council for the Environment has developed a practical road map showing how to implement the ten-year framework programs for sustainable production and consumption and taking advantage of the opportunities available therein. To launch the first project of the framework. (Target 12).

The Kingdom has also adopted the concept of sustainable building and construction. The Green Building Assessment Guide, which includes guiding standards for designers, owners and advisory offices on the application of green building systems, has been launched to promote awareness of sustainable building techniques and ensure a better environmental and health life for future generations based on principles Sustainability, rationalization and environmental improvement. The Sustainable Green Buildings Initiative has been implemented as a business strategy since 2010 in new buildings for various ministries and government institutions that are designed, supervised or maintained by the Ministry of Works. According to the approved statistics, the green buildings achieved many positive results in the reduction of at least 30% in electricity and water consumption, 15% in operation and maintenance costs, 35% reduction in carbon emissions and 50% to 75% reduction in construction waste .

Climate Impact on Bahrain

According to Bahrain's Second National Communication Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, climate change threatens Bahrain with about 11% of its landfall due to sea level rise (National Communication II, 2012) with the potential loss of its coastal and lowland lands, Coastal areas and their already vital aquifers along coastal coastal areas. Rising sea level will also cause additional pressure on groundwater resources due to the invasion of groundwater by underground water reservoirs. Climate change is also a potential public health threat due to the frequency and intensity of dust waves associated with droughts due to decreased precipitation, increased exposure to extreme temperatures, the possibility of changing vector dynamics, and increased incidence of food and water-related diseases that are likely to affect populations, , Patients and children. In addition, climate change may lead to a deterioration in water and food security, with its expected impacts on biodiversity, fish stocks, date plantations and others, as well as its impacts on coral reefs, mangroves and migratory birds. Sixteen marine habitats, six of which are priority systems for any subsequent adaptation action, are algae, coral reefs, shellfish, seagrass, marshland, mud areas, salt swamps and coastal dunes.



Providing funding for the climate change response program is critical to addressing the negative impact of this phenomenon on Bahrain to enable it to reduce emissions in the more greenhouse-gas-emitting sectors in accordance with the principle of shared but differentiated responsibilities according to each country's capacities set out in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . Where developed countries should provide financial resources to assist developing countries (including Bahrain) by decision GC.161 on the establishment of the Climate Fund (GCF) and Article 11 on support for projects, programs, policies and other activities in developing countries that are members of the Convention.

Although Bahrain's greenhouse gas or greenhouse gas emissions, which amounted to 22,374 Gg of carbon dioxide equivalent in 2000 and accounted for less than 0.1% of total global greenhouse gas emissions, were among the first countries to have signed the Paris Agreement on And presented its national commitments to the National Adaptation and Mitigation Assessment Report; and is preparing its third national communication. The issue of climate change has been introduced into the national policies of all sectors, enabling them to raise their capacities to cope with climate change, adaptation and mitigation. This includes taking into account that the coasts and their development facilities and sectors are more secure and resilient to the threat of sea level rise, as well as to raise energy efficiency and increase the proportion of renewable energy in the energy balance and others.



6. Conclusion

The first national voluntary report of the Kingdom of Bahrain reviewed the progress made in the implementation of the goals of sustainable development 2030 and highlighted the achievements and challenges in the area of \0x200B\0x200Bsustainable development in their economic, social and environmental dimensions in each of the areas covered to draw lessons and highlight success stories for replication or expansion. Nationally, regionally and globally. Bahrain began decades of development efforts that enabled it to harvest its fruits and put the Kingdom on the right track by benefiting from the role of the organs and sound institutional arrangements to achieve the goals of sustainable development.

The preparation of the national report has helped to strengthen partnerships between the various public and private sectors, civil society organizations and academia; and to define the goals and objectives of sustainable development 2030. The institutional organization has facilitated the National Information Commission's nationalization of objectives in all sectors and began to compile and tabulate its indicators in preparation for the launch of the web portal of sustainable development goal indicators as a follow-up, planning and reporting tool with sustainability reports that establish a monitoring and reporting system and exchange information on development Among all partners.

The process of preparing this review shows that raising awareness of the objectives of sustainable development is necessary and important and requires success by working on several axes, the most important of which is the education sector through its inclusion in the curricula of the stages and levels. And the other through the media channels and in cooperation with the National Call Center, which was assigned the task of spreading awareness of the goals of sustainable development 2030, in cooperation with United Nations organizations and programs operating in Bahrain and abroad. The other important focus includes stakeholders from civil society organizations, parliamentarians, local councils, women and youth to raise awareness of the goals of sustainable development and the creation of ownership in all sectors of society without exception to ensure that no one lag behind development.

The report stresses that climate change is a major challenge facing the Kingdom of Bahrain and threatens several sectors in it. Its water and agricultural resources and biodiversity, and its coastal facilities, where 98% of Bahrain's population is concentrated and its already costly infrastructure will be negatively affected by climate change, Food and poses a threat to the Kingdom's health and pursuit of sustainable development. The Kingdom is committed to the Paris Agreement of 2015 and emphasizes the outcomes of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development 2016 on "enabling small island developing States to reap the fruits of the 2030 Plan, mobilizing resources from all sources for the effective implementation of Samoa's path and addressing their weaknesses, To promote such cooperation and the Addis Ababa Agenda aimed at securing funding sources for the implementation of the 2030 Sustainable Development Plan.

On the other hand, population growth is a challenge and an opportunity for Bahrain. The pressures it creates on resources, the environment and society are matched by opportunities to boost the labor market with national competencies and maintain and improve a high standard of living. Stability, peace and acceptance of societal disparities are of great importance in enhancing the course of democratic action, attracting foreign investments, developing new economic engines, providing rewarding employment opportunities for citizens, addressing the effects of the global and regional economic recession and low oil prices on the economy and society.

Nevertheless, the government has continued its interest in implementing strategic strategic projects in a number of sectors, including oil and gas. During the previous period, the expansion of Bapco's refinery and the Bahrain Natural Gas and Liquefied Natural Gas (BNG) project began. The government will continue its efforts to implement the royal decree by providing 40,000 housing units through the implementation of a number of housing projects and services, redrawing the role of the Ministry of Health from the provider to the health services provider, adopting the health insurance program and establishing a number of hospitals and public health centers, Sheikh Mohammed Bin Khalifa Cardiology Center, and the Specialized Center for Whole Wash. As well as improving the quality of leadership and educational cadres in educational institutions and the development of national curricula, and the establishment of a number of new schools. As well as providing support to the most needy groups of society. The expansion of the Kingdom's international airport and its capacity, the implementation of a number of strategic road projects, the development of the electricity transmission and sewerage network and the completion of the integrated water management strategy, which takes into account the interlinkages between water security, energy security and food security, will continue.

The development process is organized and ongoing in Bahrain, based on what has already been learned from the experiences of others. The Government takes a proactive and precautionary approach to planning its programs. Preparations for the next government's work program (2019-2022) began in late 2017 with a series of workshops to develop mechanisms and set priorities according to Bahrain Economic Vision 2030 as pillars of development, emphasizing the importance of increasing economic growth, developing legislation to sustain development, , And raising the efficiency and effectiveness of the government sector, and services, especially in the areas of education, health, housing and environmental protection. The workshops dealt with five axes: economic and financial, infrastructure, legislative, government, environmental and services. The workshops led to the formulation of 29 policies and 106 initiatives.

The Government's future program of work aims at shaping the role of the public sector in the future, from the main driver of the economy to the entrepreneur and partner of the private sector in the implementation of projects, continuing to support innovation and excellence, and investing in citizens to improve their standard of living. Program 2019-2021 builds on the achievements of the current Government's work program, which has reached 83% completion rate, and will complete the Government's efforts to achieve the goals of sustainable development 2030.

The new oil discoveries in 2018 represented the Gulf of Bahrain field, which promises Bahrain another development boom that will realize Bahrain's vision of doubling the per capita income in the future, covering the Kingdom's current debt, continuing to implement the initiatives of the government's work program for the next four years and beyond. Agenda of 2030. However, the volatility of oil prices since 2014 indicates the need for Bahrain to continue its precautionary approach in terms of diversification of its economy and the continuation of economic reform programs to achieve growth and development in a sustainable manner.

Bahrain stresses that the sustainability of its development and the well-being of its citizens and residents on its soil requires the provision of support and the expansion of global partnerships in the field of finance for cost development, fueled by a desire for sustainability that is a challenge to countries with limited natural resources. The financing and capacity-building, and the localization and provision of modern technology, is a hope for Bahrain to achieve sustainability, especially in priority issues at the national level, the most important of which are green technologies such as renewable energy technologies, solar desalination technologies, waste recycling and sustainable transport. The sustainability of development calls for the establishment of security first, which the government has always sought to ensure that Bahrain remains a safe haven for peaceful coexistence and dialogue between different races, cultures and religions throughout the ages.

