Summary 
 
A New Transformation Path 
Bangladesh, as part of her commitment to implement the SDGs, decided to take part in the Voluntary National Review at the UN High Level Political Forum. We have an inspiring story to tell. We have earned many international accolades for our achievements in MDGs. While embarking on the journey to implement the SDGs, we draw inspiration from the ideals of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. He envisaged a prosperous Bangladesh with equal opportunities for all. Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina envisions transforming Bangladesh into a middle-income country by 2021 and a developed country by 2041. We have translated this vision into an actionable agenda by formulating Perspective Plan (2010-2021) and two Five Year Plans (FYPs) associated with this. In our journey towards achieving this vision, we have already become a lower middle-income country. As part of our strategy, we integrated the 2030 Agenda in our 7th FYP (2016-2020). This offered us a tremendous opportunity to implement the 2030 Agenda by reflecting the priorities of the SDGs in the national plan. We have adopted \0xECWhole of Society approach to ensure wider participation of NGOs, development partners, private sector, media and CSOs in the process of formulation of the Action Plan and implementation of the SDGs. To spearhead the process, SDGs Implementation and Monitoring Committee has been formed at the Prime Ministeris Office to facilitate the implementation of SDGs Action Plan.  
Means of Implementation 
> Mapping of Ministries: 
   Bangladesh has clearly identified the responsibilities of the ministries and agencies to achieve the SDGs. In the process, we have mapped out lead, co-lead and associate ministries against each target of the SDGs. This mapping exercise is expected to reduce duplication of efforts, enhance synergy and help implementing action plans.   > Data gap analysis: 
Bangladesh Planning Commission conducted a review of various means of data generation in the country. It reveals that Bangladesh has data for 70 indicators and partially available data for 108 indicators. We need to devise new mechanism for data mining for the remaining 63 indicators.   
> National Monitoring & Evaluation Framework:  
   We are in the process of finalizing a Monitoring & Evaluation Framework for SDGs implementation. This framework will have a web based data repository system to facilitate data collection, analysis, progress tracking and reporting. > Action Plan to achieve SDGs: 
The Government is preparing an action plan for implementation of the SDGs in alignment with the 7th FYP. Respective ministries are working towards translating the particular targets into actionable projects/programmes/activities in this regard. The Action Plan for SDGs will be finalized soon.     > Needs Assessment and Financing Strategy:  
We have done an estimate to determine the financing needs for SDGs implementation with a view to mobilizing internal and external resources. The preliminary assessment reveals that we may require around US$ 1.5 trillion worth of additional resources for full implementation of SDGs. 
> Assimilation of SDGs targets in Performance Agreement: 
Bangladesh has introduced Annual Performance Agreement (APA), a results-based performance management system across the whole spectrum of public sector. The APA is expected to play an instrumental role in assessing performance of individuals and ministries/agencies involved in SDGs implementation.  
Challenges Ahead 
* Resource Mobilization: 
   SDGs are all encompassing requiring huge resources for implementation. Traditional sources of funding are insufficient to implement the SDGs. We need to find innovative ways of financing from both the public and the private sectors, development partners and ensure effective and efficient ways for utilization.  ? Stakeholdersi Engagement: 
SDGs implementation requires a multi-stakeholder approach involving private sector, NGOs, CSOs, Media and Major Group of Other Stakeholders. Bangladesh has been working towards enhancing participation of all the stakeholders in its efforts to implement the SDGs.   
* Data Availability and Management: 
   There are enormous challenges in collection, analysis, disaggregation, and dissemination of data. We need to build collaboration at bilateral, regional and global levels for capacity building and sharing of best practices.  ? Localization of SDGs: 
Localization of SDGs in line with domestic development plans and strategies has come up as a big challenge. We are encouraging inclusive and enhanced stakeholdersi participation for local level ownership of the SDGs.   
Conclusion 
SDGs demand concerted efforts with strong political commitment. The 2030 Agenda comes at a time when Bangladesh has already kicked off its journey towards a developed country by 2041. Bangladesh has incorporated priorities of SDGs in all her development policies. The Government has adopted an inclusive approach to development so that the poorest and the most vulnerable section of the country can be integrated into its national development efforts. Bangladesh is confident to set an example as a leading SDGs achiever.

     Chapter 1 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Bangladeshis Preparedness for SDGs Journey                                         
Bangladesh is regarded globally as a remarkable achiever in the field of socio-economic development. We are one of the very few countries in the world consistently maintaining an average steady growth rate of 6.5% during the last eight years. With an all-time high national growth of 7.24% in FY 2017, the per capita income jumped to US$ 1602. The Government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina is pledge bound to gradually increase budgetary allocation in social sectors. In 2015, per capita income of the country crossed the Lower Middle Income threshold.  
Bangladesh today is the 44th largest economy in the world in terms of GDP and 32nd in terms of purchasing power parity. According to PricewaterhouseCoopers (2017), Bangladesh would emerge as the 28th economy of the world by 2030 and 23rd economy by 2050. We have embedded two core concepts namely Digital Bangladesh and Regional Connectivity in all our development activities. Geographical location, burgeoning middle class and existence of an industrious work force have made the country a natural hub for business, investment and networking in the region and beyond. We have been working hard with our global partners to create a congenial atmosphere to encourage new investors in the country. We have streamlined laws, rules and regulations, investment procedures, and customer services to take full advantage of our socio-economic progress and natural endowments. We have plans to establish 100 Economic Zones all over the country with special incentives for investors, which ushered in a new era of economic opportunities for all. 
Thus, Bangladesh stands on a solid foundation to take up the challenges of SDGs implementation. The overall macro-economic environment, Governmentis growing ability for increased public spending, peopleis awareness and participation in Governmentis development strides, and above all strong political commitment make Bangladesh a deserving candidate for becoming a success story in SDGs implementation. 
However, we are mindful of the fact that our success in realizing SDGs goals and targets would largely depend on our ability to overcome sector-specific challenges, performance of our public and private sectors and above all regional and international cooperation.  
1.2. From MDGs to SDGs- Bangladesh perspective 
We view SDGs implementation as a continuation of our MDGs efforts. Yet, we are aware of moving out of MDGs trap in our development strides and entering into SDGs paradigm by doing necessary adjustments. Indeed, our achievements in MDGs have laid down a strong footing for us to take up the SDGs challenges. We have commitment at the highest level of the government. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has formed an inter-ministerial SDGs Implementation and Monitoring committee. 
Bangladesh recognizes that the first and foremost step towards localizing SDGs is about ensuring proper alignment of national development plan with 2030 Agenda. Keeping this in mind, we have taken initiatives to integrate SDGs properly with the national development plan [Seventh Five Year Plan (2016-2020) (7th FYP)].  As the goals of the SDGs had been appropriately reflected in the 7th FYP, we could become an \0xEBearly starteri in implementing the 2030 Agenda. 
Bangladesh has done an exercise of mapping of key lead/co-lead and associate ministries/ divisions with specific responsibilities for implementation of 169 targets of SDGs. The mapping handbook has figured out that 40 ministries/divisions, including Prime Ministeris Office and Cabinet Division would come up to lead implementation of the targets of SDGs in Bangladesh. 
A data gap analysis for monitoring SDGs has also been conducted. The analysis found that data for only 70 indicators is available (out of 232) in existing data generating system of Bangladesh. And further 108 can be generated by modifying existing census (from aggregation to disaggregation), survey, MIS etc. On the basis of the above findings of SDG data gap analysis, monitoring and evaluation framework of the SDGs is in the process of development through a series of consultations with all government and non-government stakeholders. To facilitate the results based monitoring system within government, a macrolevel data repository system (SDGs Tracker) is being prepared.  
Bangladesh has already drafted a study on SDGs Needs Assessment and Financing Strategy for the country to estimate the resources needed for achieving SDGs by 2030. It reveals that Bangladesh would require around US$ 1.5 trillion worth of additional resources for full implementation of SDGs from FY 2017 to FY 2030.     
In addition, the government has also adopted a \0xECwhole of society approach for implementation and attainment of the SDGs.  
1.3. Challenges Ahead 
We have identified the following challenges as critical with regard to the SDGs implementation:  
\0xEF Generating adequate financial and nonfinancial resources from domestic and international sources will be crucial.  
\0xEF Developing a holistic, coherent and coordinated rather than sector oriented implementation strategy would be critically important. This would be essential for maintaining the development momentum that the country achieved in MDGs era and picking up the required acceleration for SDGs implementation. 
\0xEF Technology appears to be another key constraint, especially in terms of transforming towards the low carbon and low natural resource intensive pathways towards development. We need international cooperation for developing our capacity in harnessing benefits from modern environmentally sensitive technologies and products.  
\0xEF Additional technical and capacity development support would be required for data generation and analysis at both institutional and individual level in order to store, manage and monitor vast data required for the SDGs. 
\0xEF For monitoring of the SDGs, data must be provided from almost all ministries/agencies of the government because of inter-connected nature of SDGs. Hence, the capacity of Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, the NSO of Bangladesh, will need to be enhanced.  
\0xEF Involving other stakeholders meaningfully in the implementation process of SDGs and ensuring proper coordination among them seem to be a major challenge. 
1.4. Objectives of the Report 
The report aims at informing the High Level Political Forum (HLPF) of the United Nations about the initiatives taken and progress achieved by Bangladesh in implementing SDGs during the last two years. The specific objectives are: 
a) Sharing experiences on adoption and integration of sustainable development goals in national planning, 
b) Illustrating the initiatives taken in implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of SDGs; 
c) Highlighting opportunities as well as challenges that could impede implementation of the SDGs; and  
d) Sharing policy strategies and mechanisms to support implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
 
1.5. Methodology and process for preparation of the review 
This Report has been prepared following guidelines provided by the HLPF of the UN for preparation of country-specific Voluntary National Review. In preparing the report, we have taken the latest available data into consideration. Two guiding documents namely Mapping of Ministries by targets in the Implementation of SDGs aligning with the 7th FYP and Data Gap Analysis for SDGs have been immensely helpful in preparing the report. These two documents were earlier prepared with a view to navigate through the difficult pathways for transformation at the initial phase of SDGs implementation. 
We have undertaken a number of exercises in framing and drafting this report. We engaged all the stakeholders in a robust consultative process. We shared the draft report with all relevant ministries/agencies and national statistical organization and received their inputs. We ensured incorporation of views and comments of all relevant ministries through interministerial consultations.  
We also shared the report with the civil society organizations (CSOs), non-government organizations (NGOs), private sector, development partners, academia, and media to make sure that the review contains diverse opinions and evolve as an inclusive national document. In the process, we also have consulted with students, youth organizations, members of the marginalized segments of the society, and Major Group of Other Stakeholders.  
 	 

Chapter 2 
 2. Policy and enabling environment: Creating ownership of the SDGs 
2.1. Political Commitment 
The Government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina envisions transforming Bangladesh into a middle-income country by 2021 and a developed country by 2041. We have already translated this vision into an actionable agenda by formulating Perspective Plan (2010-2021) and two five-year plans (6th and 7thFYPs). While we had been working with the 7th Five-year plan at the domestic level, the 2030 Agenda was in the process of being adopted at the UN. This offered us a tremendous opportunity to integrate the priorities of 2030 Agenda in the 7th Five-year plan (2016-2020). At the structural level, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina formed an inter-ministerial SDG monitoring and implementation committee comprised of Secretaries from 21 Ministries. A high level position, Principal Coordinator (SDG Affairs) had been created at the Prime Ministeris Office to head the committee. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission serves as secretariat. 
2.2. Whole of Society Approach in engaging all Stakeholders 
The government has adopted a \0xECwhole of society approach for implementation and attainment of the SDGs. As part of this, we held several consultations on stakeholdersi engagement on the SDGs implementation involving representatives from the NGOs, CSOs, Businesses, Development Partners, ethnic minorities, professional groups, labour associations, women network and media. 
We are holding regular dialogues with private sector and the development partners including UN agencies on the role of the private sector in facilitating the SDGs. In the process, Bangladesh International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI), Dhaka Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DCCI) organized seminars, workshops and symposia in collaboration with government and expressed deep commitment to remain engaged in SDGs implementation.    
The Government has also been in constant dialogues with media through seminars and workshops to share ideas regarding potential role of media in SDGs implementation in Bangladesh. The media professionals have shown keen interests in contributing to SDGs awareness creation and branding through regular campaigns in electronic and print media. 
In Bangladesh context, the Members of Parliament (MPs) can play an instrumental role in transmitting the core messages of SDGs to local level and integrate those in local development initiatives. Keeping this in mind, the government held several consultations with MPs to seek their guidance in localizing the SDGs goals and targets. The Honourable Speaker of the Parliament has proposed to form several committees comprising of MPs to work on specific goals and targets and provide regular suggestions and guidance to the government. 
In Bangladeshis development journey and socio-economic transformation over the past few decades, women played a pivotal role. In particular, women empowerment has been a key driving force in elevating Bangladeshis rural economy and society. Financial inclusion of women, particularly promoting women entrepreneurship worked as a catalyst in Bangladeshis achieving success in MDGs.  Against this backdrop, the government considered it most important to bring the women to the forefront of the decision-making process. Keeping this in view, the Government has engaged different women groups, including Bangladesh civil service women network, to create adequate opportunities for them to contribute to the SDGs implementation. 
SDGs are inherently futuristic in nature and as such it is important to engage the young leaders in the process. In our initiatives to bring them on board, we have started systematic consultation with high school and university students. We are keen to reflect their ideas in SDGsi policies, plans and implementation.  
Ethnic minorities and tribal communities constitute an important part of our society and culture. We already have policies in place to integrate them with mainstream society, which goes very well with the 2030 pledge:  leave no one behind. As such we felt it important to have a wide consultation with Ethnic Minorities and other marginalized groups to bring their ideas and needs to the forefront of SDGs implementation. 
Alongside, the Government has already engaged with professionals of diverse background including law enforcement agencies, local level public officials, health professionals, engineers, planners, school teachers, legal practitioners, peasants, RMG workers and members of different labour groups. 
2.3. Translation of SDGs goals and targets in Bangla 
We feel that language barrier may stand in the way of popularizing SDGs concepts and ideas among the people in general. Unless we are able to disseminate the philosophies of SDGs to the wider mass in their own language, SDGs implementation will remain a far-fetched dream. Hence, we have already translated all the SDGs goals, targets and indicators in Bangla and made them widely available in the public offices all over the country. 
 
2.4. Incorporation of SDGS in National Framework 
2.4.1. SDGs reflections in Five Year Plans (FYPs) 
In Bangladesh, the key national framework for development is structured around Five Year Plans (FYPs) which lay the guidelines for development projects and strategies for a time frame of five years. We plan to implement SDGs through 3 Five Year plans\0xF3 7th, 8th, 9th. Fortunately for Bangladesh, when the 2030 Agenda was in the making at the UN, we had been simultaneously working on the 7th FYP. This offered us a wonderful opportunity to contribute to the global development agenda while reflecting its key philosophies in our national plan. In fact, the 2030 Agenda worked as a key guiding document in selection of development priorities in our national context. Bangladesh, therefore, could start the SDGs implementation very early. Indeed, the 7th FYP captures the essence of the global agenda very well. It highly emphasizes on building just and equitable society with inclusive growth. It also puts adequate importance on the protection of environment. As we implement the 7th FYP, we would certainly come across many challenges and discover gaps vis-\0x2021-vis the 2030 Agenda. Learning from the experiences we would make attempts to fill out such gaps while formulating the following FYPs. 
2.4.2. Action Plan of 7th Five Year Plan to achieve SDGs 
The Government has already mapped out responsibilities for Ministries and agencies against each goal and target of the 2030 Agenda. In order for carrying out their responsibilities, the Ministries are now in the process of preparing their own action plan which would have specific actions/ activities and interventions to achieve their respective goals/ targets. The Ministries are consulting both the 2030 Agenda and 7th FYP so that they can appropriately formulate short, medium and long-term development plans. The outcome of this consultation would be reflected in \0xECAction Plan of 7th FYP to Implement SDGs, a forwardlooking document which is expected to blend priorities of 2030 Agenda and our national plan. It would outline action plans in a Ministry specific manner, thus would serve as an important tool for performance evaluation of the Ministries. The government is aware of the need for capacity building of the ministries to undertake this exercise. We have already taken initiatives to train relevant officials accordingly.    
2.4.3. Assimilation of SDGs target in Annual Performance Agreement (APA) 
Bangladesh has introduced Annual Performance Agreement (APA), a result-based performance management system across the whole spectrum of public sector with a view to improving efficiency as well as ensuring transparency and accountability. Under the APA system, each ministry enters into a memorandum of understanding with the Cabinet Division at the beginning of each financial year. The APA outlines the goals and targets of each ministry with corresponding performance indicators.  The government is in the process of integrating the SDG targets into APA system so that the long-term objectives can be translated into annual work plan of the ministries. 
2.5. Integration of the three dimensions 
We understand the importance of incorporating the three dimensions of sustainable development i.e. economic, social and environmental in our development pursuit. Like many other countries, the economic dimension of development of Bangladesh has traditionally been the most discussed topic in relevant discourses. This is because of the fact that Bangladesh, with its consistent GDP growth rate of around 6.5% for quite some time, has indeed amazed the development experts around the world. Therefore, it is not surprising that Bangladesh aims at achieving a growth rate of 8% by 2020 indicating that economic aspects are well taken care of in our development aspirations.  
Our success in achieving the MDGs reveals that Bangladesh did very good in addressing the social aspects of development as well. Our performance in health, education and social safety net programs gives us hope that we will continue with even more success in ensuring societal development during the post 2015 period. \0xEBInclusivenessi, as well as the policy of \0xEBleaving no one behindi has also been at the core of our future development plans and strategies.     
As we embark on the SDGs journey, we are prepared to build on our MDGs experiences.  We learned during MDGs implementation that environmental aspect had been an important missing link in our past development efforts globally. We are happy that environmental dimension has gained due importance in 2030 Agenda. Indeed, this is very significant for us as Bangladesh remains one of the most vulnerable countries in the world in the face of adverse impacts of climate change. We are, therefore, very keen to incorporate the environmental dimension in all our development policies. The Government has approved National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS: 2010-2021) with a view to ensure the balance among economic, social and environmental aspects of development. The \0xEBDelta Plan 2100i of Bangladesh is yet another testimony of our sincere effort to focus on the three dimensions of development in a balanced and coherent manner.    
 
Chapter 3 
3. Thematic Areas 
 
3.1. SDG # 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
3.1.1. Introduction 
Since Independence, Bangladesh achieved great success in reduction of poverty measured by both upper and lower poverty lines. We have implemented 6 Five Year Plans (FYPs) from 1973 until 2015 where the main focus had always been on poverty alleviation. Currently, the 7th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) is being implemented with a target to bring down the upper poverty rate to 18.6% and lower poverty rate to 8.9%. 
Bangladesh has been successful in achieving significant poverty reduction since 1990. The poverty rate was 56.7% in 1991, which came down to 24.3% in 2016.  And the extreme poverty rate was 41.1% in 1991, which declined to 12.9% in 2016. The poverty reduction measures taken by the Government has helped Bangladesh to achieve the corresponding MDG target couple of years earlier than the deadline. 
Table 3.1: Long term Poverty Reduction in Bangladesh 
Head Count Poverty 
Cost of Basic Needs (CBN) Method 

1991 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 
2016 
National (Upper Poverty Line) 
56.7 
51 
48.9 
40 
31.5 
24.3 
National (Lower Poverty Line) 
41.1 
34.4 
34.3 
25.1 
17.6 
12.9 
 Source: Various rounds of HIES, BBS 
 
Government of Bangladesh recognizes the multi-dimensional nature of poverty and the need to address the problem by adopting appropriate policies and strategies. Development policies and strategies mainly centre on the overarching goal of achieving pro-poor growth. The economy enjoyed annual growth rate persistently around 6.5% during the past eight years. Sustained growth over the last one decade has been instrumental in reducing poverty.  
\0xEF 
Half of the total budget expenditure has been interlinked to poverty reduction for the last eight years. 
\0xEF 
Anti-poverty strategy of the government through the expanded Social Safety Net Programmes (SSNP) to address risk and vulnerability helped reduce poverty and inequality. 
Building disaster resilience is critical for eradicating extreme poverty. With a view to achieving this goal, Sendai Framework proposes for the promotion and development of social safety nets linked with livelihood enhancement programmes in order to ensure resilience of household and communities to disasters. The government of Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina, for the first time, has formulated a comprehensive National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) to consolidate all safety net programmes to support its citizens who need it most. Distressed people particularly women, children, aged and disabled persons have been given due priority under NSSS. The coverage of social safety net recipients is 27.80 percent (HIES, 2016). The allocation has been increased from 1.9% of GDP in FY09 to 2.1% in FY17. The allocation for Annual Development Programme (ADP), which is the main public investment window to reduce poverty, was 2.8% of GDP in FY09 and has increased to 5.7% of GDP in FY17. Moreover, half of the total budget expenditure has been related to poverty reduction for the last eight financial years. 
Figure 3.1: Social Protection Spending (crore TK), % of GDP  

Source: Budget document, Finance Division, Ministry of Finance (Note: FY 08 to FY 16 are spending, other two are allocations)   
 
3.1.2. Strategy for Eradicating Poverty to achieve Sustainable Development for all 
\0xEF We recognize that faster growth is a necessary pre-condition for alleviating poverty. The 7th FYP seeks to raise the GDP growth rate progressively from 7.1% in FY16 to 8% by FY 20, averaging yearly growth rate of 7.4% for the Plan period. Along with strategies for rapid economic growth, the 7th FYP will ensure that complementary strategies and policies are in place to make the growth path inclusive, responsive and adaptable to the ongoing transformations. We are also ensuring that the growth is sustainable and resilient to climate change. 
\0xEF We are attaching additional focus on eradicating extreme poverty (defined as people living below the lower poverty line) by taking special measures for the most vulnerable population.   
\0xEF We are taking necessary measures to bring all the poor under coverage of social protection system by 2020. Anti-poverty strategy of the government through the expanded Social Safety Net Programmes (SSNP) to address risk and vulnerability helped reduce poverty and inequality. We are also developing the National Household Database (NHD) under Social Safety Net Systems (SSNS). This will facilitate better targeting of the poor households for safety net service delivery and also improve coordination among various ministries/agencies. 
\0xEF According to our estimate, about 12.9 million additional jobs will be created by 2020. This includes around 2 million jobs abroad for migrant workers. This is going to significantly improve the situation of unemployment in the country. 
\0xEF To ensure safe, orderly and regular migration for all workers including women, the Government has taken adequate measures for legislative and regulatory reforms. Notable among these are the enactment of the Overseas Employment and Migrants Act 2013, and Overseas Employment Policy 2016.  
\0xEF We are encouraging women to get into wage employment in the rural economy in larger proportion. Due to our consistent efforts, the relative male-female wage ratio has increased from 73% in FY2010 to 78% in FY2014.  Since agriculture is the predominant sector in our rural economy, we have sorted out specific strategies to narrow down the gender wage gap in this particular sector.  
\0xEF Bangladesh maintains a stable macroeconomic environment underpinned by strong balance of payment. We consistently had external current account surplus since 2010. This has been reflected in increasing trend of our foreign exchange reserve. The key factors behind such a steady performance in balance of payment are buoyant exports and remittance receipts. 
\0xEF Building on our past success, we have fixed an export target of US$ 54.1 billion with average growth of about 12% per annum during the 7th FYP period (2016-2020). Notably, RMG constitutes almost 80% of our exports. This sector employs 4.5 million workers of which 85% are women. This has significantly contributed to our efforts in poverty reduction and women empowerment. 
\0xEF In the 7th FYP, we have recognized migration as an integral component of development. Remittance has been playing an important role in reducing poverty through increased consumption, financing of a range of services, and encouraging entrepreneurship in rural areas. As such, we have taken various measures to increase remittance inflow substantively during this period. Notably, the remittances had been a mere average of $3.5 billion in 2000s, which reached $14.93 billion in FY 2016. We are keen to maintain this momentum in coming years.  
\0xEF Given the importance of transport sector in improving competitiveness and growth, the Government has been allocating significant resources to this sector in the Annual Development Programme (ADP). The 7th FYP placed considerable emphasis on the development of the rural roads network. This will play a major role in poverty reduction through accelerated economic activities in rural Bangladesh.  
\0xEF We have achieved considerable progress in electricity generation, transmission and distribution. The access to electricity increased to 80% in FY 16 from 48% in FY10. We aim at achieving electricity coverage of 100% by FY 21.  We have launched a highly successful Solar Home System (SHS) program which has already reached a capacity of 150 MW. All these initiatives helped rural small/medium industries to grow and create jobs, thus contributing to our efforts for poverty reduction.  
\0xEF Bangladesh has a rich experience in administering microcredit programmes. The Government has been supporting these programmes through enabling regulations and financial assistance.  The 7th FYP puts due emphasis on microfinance.   
\0xEF We have given ICT sector immense priority in the 7th FYP in line with governmentis Digital Bangladesh Vision to help transform the rural economy. This will significantly reduce the transaction costs of trading with the urban economy, bring farms closer to growth centres, and financial services to the doorsteps of rural population.  
\0xEF One House One Farm: A signature poverty alleviation initiative launched by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has been successful in lifting millions out of poverty in rural Bangladesh. The core ideas about this initiative is summarized below:  
 
 	One House One Farm: A signature poverty alleviation initiative 
 The Government has taken up a project called 'Ekti Bari Ekti Khamari (One house one farm) with a view to improving living conditions of the rural poor by 
 
encouraging income generating activities. This is a community-based model for 
 	micro-savings initiated by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.  
 The idea is about turning the tide from existing micro-credit approach to poverty alleviation to a more innovative micro-savings paradigm. Under this project, self-
 governed village development organizations (VDOs) are being formed in rural  areas where members create their own funds by contributing small amounts. 
       Government then supplements such funds by contributing equal amounts of  grants. In addition, Government also provides an annual revolving fund to the VDOs. Members can borrow from that accumulated fund to run their own 
 
       businesses. The service charge for borrowers is only 8% that is significantly lower  than the interest rate of existing microfinance schemes. Currently, there are 
40,527 village development organizations with more than 10 million beneficiaries. 
 
       We plan to establish 60,515 more village development societies targeting 3.6  million poor families within next 4 years.  
 
Institutions Directly Contributing to Poverty Alleviation 
 
1. Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) 
2. Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (BARD) 
3. Rural Development Academy (RDA), Bogra 
4. Bangabandhu Academy for Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development (BAPARD) 
5. Palli Daridro Bimochon Foundation (PDBF) 
6. Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) 
7. Small Farmers Development Foundation (SFDF) 
3.1.3. Financial Inclusion to poverty reduction 
We recognize access to finance as one of the most important factors for boosting economic activity, generating employment, facilitating trade and fostering growth. Providing easy access to financial service to the women and people in the rural areas can significantly contribute to improvement of livelihood and reduction in inequality. The central bank of Bangladesh had been playing a pivotal role in offering banking facilities to millions who did not have access to any formal financial services. Such initiatives include introducing mobile financial services, requiring banks to open 50% of their branches in rural areas, and starting agent banking. Farmers now can open bank account with only Ten Taka deposit that has allowed them access to different financial benefits offered by the government. Women entrepreneurs can now borrow loans with single digit interest rate. Microfinance institutions also have substantial impact on the financial inclusion, as more than 90% of their clients are female.  
Bangladesh won the Global Money Week Award at the Global Inclusion Awards 2017. This comes as a recognition of Bangladesh Bank's successful initiatives regarding sustainable and innovative financial inclusion and financial education.  
3.1.4. Adoption of Multidimensional Poverty Index  
The Government of Bangladesh is aware of multidimensional nature of poverty and plans to invest on capacity building for introducing Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) measurement in future. 
3.1.5. Challenges for SDG 1 implementation 
\0xEF Poverty reduction is a comprehensive issue and thereby requires a whole-ofgovernment approach to address it. According to the mapping of Ministries for various SDG targets, 44 Ministries/Divisions are involved in addressing this goal. Therefore, effective coordination is the sine qua non for success.  
\0xEF Resource mobilization particularly from external sources remains a big challenge.  
\0xEF The National Social Security Strategy aims at ensuring adequate resources for providing decent living of vulnerable and marginalized segment of the society. The strategy is inherently inclusive and requires consolidated and streamlined efforts for implementation.  
\0xEF Bangladesh needs capacity building of its national statistical organization for tracking the progress of the SDG 1.  
\0xEF Bangladesh is one of most vulnerable countries in the world in the face of adverse impacts of climate change. We are facing frequent floods, droughts, cyclones and other natural disasters that make implementation of SDG 1 greatly challenging particularly in the coastal areas. 
 
3.1.6. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-1 
There are 7 targets including 2 Means of Implementation under this goal with 14 indicators to monitor the progress. However, metadata related to 6 indicators are yet to be finalized by the UNSC (1.4.1, 1.4.2, 1.5.4, 1.a.1, 1.a.3, 1.b.1). According to the \0xEBData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals: Bangladesh Perspectivei Report (2017), data related to 5 indicators are readily available in Bangladesh. Once the metadata is finalized, the NSO will take appropriate steps to generate data in consultation with relevant stakeholders. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-1. 
3.2. SDG # 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
3.2.1. Introduction 
One of the biggest success of the Bangladesh agriculture sector has been achieving food security for 160 million people in the country. The significant progress in the food security front primarily comes through efficient food delivery mechanism, improved rural infrastructure, liberalized agricultural inputs, and integration of product markets. All these factors have contributed positively towards increasing production of major crops, mainly cereal and vegetable crops. However, the country needs to tackle a host of challenges in future if it is to ensure food security for its growing population, to meet their nutritional requirement, and to ensure a balanced diet for its population. The high impact of disaster and climate risk on agriculture requires mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation strategies within the agriculture sector. 
3.2.2. 7th Plan Policies and Strategies for Food Security  
The widely accepted World Food Summit definition reinforces the multidimensional nature of food security as including food accessibility, availability, utilization, and stability. Acknowledging the complexities of the concept, Bangladesh placed the focus mainly on food availability and utilization measures of food security. Food security strategy under the 7th Five Year Plan has been in line with the following objectives of the National Agriculture Policy-2013, National Food Policy (NFP-2006) and the National Food Policy Plan of Action (2008-2015): 
\0xEF Ensuring sustainable and profitable agricultural production system 
\0xEF Ensuring adequate and stable supply of safe and nutritious food 
\0xEF Enhancing purchasing power of people for increased food accessibility  
\0xEF Ensuring adequate nutrition for all 
Considering the holistic dimension of food security issue, the following strategies will have to be implemented during the 7th FYP (2016-2020): 
\0xEF Nutrition oriented food-based safety net channels of Public Food Distribution System (PFDS) to be promoted;  
\0xEF Direct interventions on food-based nutrition in identified communities/ vulnerable areas of the country, where the prevalence of underweight and stunting is higher than average, to be encouraged; 
\0xEF The annual monitoring of National Food Policy Plan of Action (NFP-POA) and Country Investment Plan (CIP) to be continued up to preparation & finalization of new National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (NFNSP); 
\0xEF Private sector participation to manage and operate modern food storage facilities to be explored for food stock management to help smoothing extreme seasonal price variation;  
\0xEF Food grain fortification initiatives to be strengthened and the preparation of Road Map for fortified food grains to be explored; and  
\0xEF The present public procurement system to be made effective through applied research and utilizing price signals in the markets;  
3.2.3. Sustainable Agriculture 
Improvement of agriculture sector and acceleration of its growth is a national priority for ensuring food security and reducing rural poverty. Steady growth in agriculture along with a strong emphasis on rice production has enabled Bangladesh to achieve near self-sufficiency in cereal production. The sector is getting more diversified and passing through a transition from subsistence farming towards commercial orientation.  
Agricultural practices need to be modified in order to adapt to the projected changes in climate conditions as well as the increasing disaster risk. In order for preventing, mitigating and reducing disaster and climate risks, we are focusing on the following: 
\0xEF Sustainable and productive agriculture systems, including farm technologies and crop diversification to adjust to new temperature and precipitation patterns;  
\0xEF Changing livestock breeding practices, and shifting grazing patterns; 
\0xEF Developing and managing climate resilient food production systems; and 
\0xEF Developing and using drought, saline, flood tolerant crop varieties; 
3.2.4. Performance of Crop Sector 
Since independence, rice production has more than tripled from 11 million tonnes (milled rice) in 1972 to about 34.9 million tonnes in FY15. Since late 1990s, most of this growth has occurred due to development and adoption of improved rice varieties through R&D. Use of good quality seed, stress-tolerant crop varieties (salt, heat, water logging/submergence), and hybrid rice has increased production manifold. This was hugely supported by irrigation in the dry season. The production of other cereal crops like wheat, maze, have also grown phenomenally.  
3.2.5. Key Strategies/Priorities of Crop and Livestock sub-sectors 
Policies and Strategies under 7th FYP for the Crop Sub-sector are as follows: 
\0xEF Creating Opportunities for Sustainable Agriculture and Green Growth 
\0xEF Application of Science and Technology for higher levels of Food Production 
\0xEF Crop Zoning and Land Use Planning 
\0xEF Agricultural Inputs- Seeds and Fertilizers 
\0xEF Promoting agricultural diversification and expansion of Horticultural Crops 
\0xEF Introduction and Popularization of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) 
\0xEF Increased Farm Mechanization 
\0xEF Boosting Agro-Processing Industries 
\0xEF Value Chain Development 
\0xEF Intensified Agricultural Credit 
\0xEF Mainstreaming Women in Agriculture  
\0xEF Agriculture in the newly Accreted Coastal Land and Marine Islands  
 
The goals and objectives for the livestock sub sector are to promote: 
 
* Sustainable improvements in animal productivity of milk, meat and egg including products processing and value addition; 
* Sustained improvements in income generation, nutrition and employment opportunities for the landless, small and marginal farmers, and women in livestock rearing;   
* Increased private sector participation and investments in livestock production, livestock services, market development and export of livestock products and byproducts. 
 
3.2.6. Fisheries Sub-Sector 
The vision 2021 of the government targets surplus production of fish and shrimp for export. We want to achieve this target with concomitant improvement in safety standard of fish production. Alongside, the 7th FYP promotes increased participation of women in fish cultivation. The idea is not only about enhancing productivity, but also ensuring livelihood security and equitable distribution of benefits. We are also equally mindful about the conservation of potential fisheries resources and aquatic biodiversity of water bodies. 
 
3.2.7. Strategies and Policies of the Forest Sub-Sector 
Peopleis participation will be continued in afforestation programme in all marginal lands and buffer zone of forests. Integration of tree plantation and crop cultivation will be practiced. To prevent the extent of damage by cyclones and tidal surges, creation of 500 meter wide permanent Coastal Green Belt along the coast will be continued.  
3.2.8. State of Nutrition in Bangladesh 
The Perspective Plan of Bangladesh (2010-2021) envisions a minimum intake of 2,122 k.cal/person/day of food for all. We also envisage ensuring standard nutritional food for at least 85% of the population. The 7th FYP targets interdependent but coordinated interventions across diverse sectors such as agriculture, health, water and sanitation, education, food and disaster management. The National Food Policy-NFP (2006) and the National Food Policy Plan of Action comprehensively address food security and nutritional issues. 
 Bangladesh has made commendable progress in eradicating hunger in the last two decades. The underweight children under-five years of age have come down to 32.6% in 2014 (female: 33.1%, male: 32.2%) from 66% in 1990. The level of stunting has declined consistently from 50.6% in 2004 to 36.1% in 2014. Increased food production and crop diversification, increased availability of livestock and poultry products, increased literacy of women aged 15-24, reduction of fertility rate, enhanced measles vaccination coverage, increased safety-net coverage, smaller family size, and spread of vitamin A supplementation coverage have been the factors contributing to the success. 
The \0xEBState of Food Insecurity (SOFI) 2015i Report jointly prepared by FAO, IFAD and WFP indicates that the proportion of hungry people in total population of Bangladesh has reduced from 32.8% in 1990 to 16.4% in 2014. However, as for micronutrient deficiencies, a third of pre-school children and half of pregnant women are anaemic. Vitamin A deficiency affects one child in five, and vitamin B12 deficiency one child in three. Early marriage and related teenage pregnancies leading to a high prevalence of low birth weight (22%) are among the key determinants of malnutrition. Similarly, only half of the children are exclusively breastfed and complementary feeding practices are inadequate to meet the nutritional requirements of infants and young children. 
3.2.9. Addressing Nutrition Issues 
The Institute of Public Health & Nutrition (IPHN) has been assigned as the institutional home for nutrition studies and awareness building. Nutrition Programme of the Government has been mainstreamed through an operational plan titled National Nutrition Services (NNS) to provide regular nutritional services. Ministry of Agriculture provides extension services for different crops fortified with nutrition elements, newly developed by research institutes of Bangladesh. A new variety of rice namely, \0xEBGolden Ricei, fortified with beta carotene as Vitamin A supplement is a major achievement, which are being extended in suitable areas.  
The multidimensional approach to address the intergenerational health impact include awareness on child/women nutrition, food value and food diversity. Iron-folic acid supplementation among pregnant, lactating women and adolescent girls to cover irondeficiency anaemia are being distributed through health and family planning facilities. Vitamin A capsules distribution for children is continuing. Post-partum Vitamin-A distribution to improve vitamin A status of neonates through breast milk is being scaled up. Monitoring of salt iodization has been strengthened. Zinc for treatment of diarrhoea has been adequately promoted. Expansion of intestinal parasite treatment, including the distribution of albendazole tablets, along with a separate deworming programme is being considered. With the coverage of IMCI, zinc tablets are expected to be freely provided to children with diarrhoea.  
To help assist exclusive breast-feeding of new born babies up to six months, maternity leave for the working mothers has been increased to six months by the government, which augmented the nutritional status of the new-born babies. The National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) acknowledges the importance of nutrition for vulnerable people. The strategy advocates a consolidated income transfer under a reformed Vulnerable Womenis Benefit (VWB) programme. The Government has already started introducing fortified rice distribution, a cash grant for vulnerable women and nutrition BCC in its VGD programme.  
3.2.10. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-2  
 There are 8 targets including 3 Means of Implementation under this goal with 13 indicators to monitor the progress. However, metadata related to 5 indicators are yet to be finalized by the UNSC (2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.5.1, 2.c.1). According to the \0xEBData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals: Bangladesh Perspectivei Report (2017), data related to 5 indicators are readily available in Bangladesh. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-2. 
 
3.3. SDG # 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
3.3.1. Introduction 
Bangladesh has remarkable achievements in health related MDGs. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina received the UN MDG Award in 2010 for governmentis success in reduction of under-five mortality. In 2011, Bangladesh received 'Digital Health for Digital Developmenti, a South-South Award for successful attainment of MDG- 4 & MDG-5.  
The Government of Bangladesh recognizes health as an integral part of development. Improvements in health would translate into higher incomes, higher economic growth, and accelerated poverty reduction. Bangladesh has achieved remarkable progress in improving the life expectancy at birth (72 years). The status of mean years of schooling and expected years of schooling has also improved significantly (Fig 3.2; Source: Calculated from micro data of Sample Vital Registration System, BBS 2016). The gross national income (per capita 3,341 PPP$) has also increased elevating the country in the group of medium-ranking Human Development Index (HDI) countries. 
Four of the seven targets of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction are directly linked to health. These focus on reducing mortality and injuries, improving peopleis wellbeing and promoting the safety of health facilities and hospitals. Accordingly, the government has prioritized design, construction and retrofit hospitals, storage for emergency medicine, preservation of doctor and nursesi database to ensure healthy lives and wellbeing of its citizens. 
3.3.2. Status of Health and Population 
Health Status: Since independence, Bangladesh has made significant progress in health outcomes. Infant and child mortality rates, under-five mortality rate and maternal mortality rate have reduced significantly in 2015 (Fig 3.3). The neonatal mortality rate (NMR) also reduced from 81/1,000 (1981) to 20 (2015). Expanded programme on immunization (EPI) coverage evaluation survey 2015 reveals that 82.5% children were fully vaccinated. Deliveries attended by skilled health personnel (SHPs) increased from 5% (1991) to 42% (2014). Proportion of birth in health facilities by wealth quintile from 4.4:43.4 in 2007 to 15.0:69.5 in 2014 (BDHS) indicates a sharp reduction in inequity in Bangladesh. 
The prevalence of malaria dropped from 456 (2005) to 300 (2015) per 100,000 persons; the death rate has also reduced to 0.07 per 100,000 populations in 2015. According to the National Tuberculosis (TB) Prevalence Survey (2007-2009) Report of Bangladesh, the overall prevalence of new smear positive cases among adults aged 15 and older was estimated at 79.4 people over a population of 100,000. The overall case notification rate was 119 per 100,000 populations which have come down to 
	53 	(2014). 	Polio 	and 	leprosy 	are 	virtually 
eliminated. HIV prevalence is still very low, but there is a high risk of infection. Regarding tobacco control, legislation was first enacted in Bangladesh in 2005 and was strengthened in 2013 to increase compliance with the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). Most significant recent achievements include: (a) Introduction of pictorial health warnings covering 50% of tobacco packaging since March 2016; (b) Implementation of a strong taxation policy by raising tobacco taxes to 79% of the retail price of the most popular brand of cigarettes.  
Development of a countrywide network of healthcare infrastructure in the public sector is remarkable. Community based primary health care service through community clinics (CCs) is a flagship initiative of the government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. This initiative has been highly appreciated by the international community as a means to bring the services closer to the people. CC is the lowest tier health facility in the rural areas all over Bangladesh including the remote and very hard-to-reach areas. Each CC has a defined catchment area with 7,000-10,000 population. CC promotes health and provides preventive and basic curative care. Currently, 13,136 CCs are functioning with adequate health workers and medicines. Among these 1,008 CCs are providing delivery facilities. On an average 40 patients/day attend each CC, 95% of whom are women and children.  
Population Status: Bangladesh is now Asiais fifth and worldis eighth populous country with an estimated population of about 160 million. Strong policy interventions led to continuous reduction in the annual growth rate of population from the level of 2.52% (1974) to 1.37 (2011). The total fertility rate (TFR) also went down from 6.3 (1975) to 2.1 (2015). The contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) increased from 7.7% (1975) to 62.1% (2015). 
Cross-Cutting Issues: World Health Organization (WHO) has recently drawn attention of the world community to the inevitable effect of climate change on the basic requirements for maintaining health: clean air and fresh water, sufficient food and adequate shelter. Bangladesh has demonstrated remarkable achievements in natural disaster/ emergency response through better preparedness and proper management. Health risks from natural disasters are minimized through the supply of emergency drugs and laboratory reagents in patient management. 
Bangladesh also considers the healthcare waste management a critical issue in the context 
of environment pollution. To effectively address Fig 3.3: Under five and infant mortality rate this issue, the Government developed a Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP). The countryis commitment to and support for womenis development programmes over the past two decades have resulted in positive gains in female life expectancy, MMR, IMR and child mortality rates, and empowerment.  
3.3.3. Strategies for ensuring healthy lives and promote well-being for all 
The Government of Bangladesh recently (March 21, 
2017) approved a mega programme for the HNP sector development. The US $ 14.71 billion mega programme called 4th Health, Population and Nutrition Sector Program (4th HPNSP) 2017/2022, is guided by Bangladeshis Vision 2021, and is in line with the SDGs. The 4th 
Box-3.1 HPNSP Implementation Strategies 
 
\0xEF Building capacities in leadership, management and regulation 
\0xEF Restructuring the MOHFW 
\0xEF Rolling out an upgraded essential services package (ESP) 
\0xEF Developing new approaches and partnerships 
\0xEF Focusing on the improvement of the quality of care 
\0xEF Promoting the importance of public health 
\0xEF Tackling the rising burden of NCDs 
\0xEF Tackling the burden of established and new communicable diseases 
\0xEF Adopting new technologies to strengthen surveillance, data quality and information systems for evidence based decision making \0xEF Increasing investment in health 
HPNSP incorporates appropriate strategies and activities for focused improvements in increasing access to and utilization of health care. It also aims at improving equity along with financial protection in order to meaningfully realize the objectives of universal health coverage (UHC) by 2030. 
 Achieving 	sustainable 	levels 	of financing for the sector will depend on a combination of managing demand for health care. The 4th HPNSP will be translated into actions through implementation of a number of strategies (Box-3.1). 
 
Road Safety 
The Government addresses road safety issues with 3E approaches, i.e. Engineering, Education, and Enforcement. We have taken up various engineering measures to make the roads and highways safe. We have also introduced various enforcement measures i.e. digital motor vehicle management system and put adequate emphasis on enforcing traffic laws. In addition, massive mass awareness campaigns on road safety issues are going on. 
3.3.4. Challenges 
\0xEF Ensuring skilled attendance at birth; 
\0xEF Addressing the communicable and non-communicable diseases;  
\0xEF The prevalence of road accidents, drowning, aging and geriatric diseases; 
\0xEF The spread of infectious diseases such as Hepatitis B and C; 
\0xEF The health effects of geo-climatic disasters and arsenicosis; 
\0xEF Sustainable health financing and promotion of equity in the context of achieving UHC. 
Box-3.2: Key Strategies and Policies 
 
\0xEF 7th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) 
\0xEF National Health Policy-2011 
\0xEF Bangladesh Population Policy 2012 
\0xEF 4th Health, Population and Nutrition Sector Programme (2017-2022) 
There is a high level of commitment from the GOB in bringing health care as close to the communities as possible. National commitment and policy support are reflected in different key strategies and policies (Box-3.2). 
3.3.5. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDGs-3 
There are 13 targets to be implemented under SDGs-3, which will be monitored by 27 indicators. Out of the 27 indicators, 5 indicators (3.5.1, 3.8.1, 3.8.2, 3.b.1, 3.b.3) are still in the Tier III category meaning metadata is yet to be finalized by the UNSC. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-3.   
 
3.4. SDG # 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
3.4.1. Introduction 
Bangladesh has a remarkable success story in the fields of women empowerment. We put non-discrimination issue to the forefront of our national development plan. We have been supporting women empowerment through adoption of policies, legislation, strategies, national action plans and programmes. For example, the women empowerment issue has been given high prominence in the Constitution of Bangladesh, domestication of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction (NSAPR-II) 2009-2011, 6th and 7th Five Year Plan (2011-15 and 2016-20), National Women Development Policy (NWDP)-2011, and Child Marriage Restraint Act 2017.   
3.4.2. Trends and inequality analysis with respect to Gender in Bangladesh 
Education: The primary school enrolment of girls has increased from 5.4 million in 1990 to 9.72 million in 2015. Since 1991, the secondary education enrolment for female students has increased significantly with girlsi enrolment surpassing boysi in 2000 (52% for girls and 48% for boys). The parity still exists. In schools, more than 65% teachers are female.  
Figure 3.4: Gender Parity at Primary Secondary and Tertiary Education (1990 to 2015) 

Source: MDGs: End-period stocktaking and Final Evaluation Report, GED, 2016 
 
The primary and secondary education in the country is free for female. We are distributing textbooks free of cost to all students up to the secondary level. In addition, we are providing stipend and financial support to female students of secondary and higher secondary level. The Government has taken various measures to address the dropout issue. We have already identified the root causes, the prominent among which are poverty, social taboos, child marriage and opportunity cost. We have chalked out specific actions to address these issues. 
Traditionally, gender parity at the tertiary education has been low in the country. In 2010, it was around 0.32 (76% boys vs. 24% girls). However, since 2010, the scenario began to change and during the last two years, it remained at around 0.6. This is indeed an encouraging trend.  
Health: The under-five mortality rate has decreased drastically from 212 (male: 211, female: 214) to 36 (male: 39, female: 34) per 1000 live birth from 1982 to 2015 (SVRS, 2015). With an annual average reduction rate of 2.5% the reduction rate has been highest during 2010 to 2015 (4.7% annually).  Infant mortality rate decreased from 122 (male: 124, female: 120) to 29 (male: 30, female: 28) per 1000 live births from 1982 to 2015 (SVRS, 2015). The annual average reduction rate has been 2.3% where the reduction rate was highest during 2010 to 2015 (3.9% annually). Neonatal mortality rate decreased from 85 (male: 85, female: 86) to 20 (male: 20, female: 20) per 1000 live birth from 1982 to 2015 (SVRS, 2015). The annual average reduction rate has been 2.3% with the highest reduction rate during 2010 to 2015 (4.6% annually). 
Figure 3.5: Trends of U5 mortality rate, IMR and NMR (1982 to 2015) 
250
200
150
100
50
0
U5MR, IMR and NMR (National, Male and Female) 
212 	211 	214 







	122 	124 






120 
	85 	85 	86 



36 


39 


34 

29 

30 

28 































20 



20 


20
National
Male
Female
National	Male	Female
National	Male	Female

U5MR

IMR
NMR
	1982	1985	1990	1995	2000	2005	2010	2015
Source: Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS), BBS 
 
Maternal Mortality Ratio (per 100,000 live births): Maternal mortality ratio reduced 72% during 1986 to 2015 which was 648 (Rural: 669, Urban: 579) to 181 (Rural: 191, Urban: 162) per 100,00 live birth (SVRS, 2015). The annual average reduction rate has been 2.5% with the highest reduction rate during 1990 to 2000 (3.3% annually). The reduction of child marriage during this period has an impact in the reduction of MMR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6: Trend of Maternal Mortality Ratio of Bangladesh    

Source: Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS), BBS 
 
Life expectancy of women as a ratio of life expectancy of men: In Bangladesh, notable progress has also been achieved in health indicators over the last 45 years. Total Fertility Rate reduced from 6.3 to 2.1 children per woman from the mid-1970s to 2015 (SVRS, 2015) while the contraceptive use rate has increased from 7.7% to 62.1% during the same period. Life expectancy has increased from 46.2 to 71.6 years during 1974 to 2016. Bangladesh was among the few countries in the world where female life expectancy was lower than male. Reversing the past trend from 2001, women now live longer than men. Life expectancy of women as a ratio of life expectancy of men is 72.0: 69.4 (SVRS, 2015). 
 
Figure 3.7: Average Life Expectancy at birth in Bangladesh 

Source: Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS), BBS 
 
 
3.4.3. Womenis Economic and Political Empowerment and Participation 
Non-Agricultural Wage Employment: The total labour force participation rate for females is 35.6% where the share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector increased from 19.1% to 24.2% during 1990 to 2015-16 (LFS 2015-16). The participation in mainstream economic activities by gender is shown in Table-3.2. 
 
Table 3.2: Participation in mainstream economic activities 
No 
Indicator 
Gender 
1990 
2005 
2010 
2015-16 
1 
Share of women in wage employment in agricultural sector 
Female  
45.5 
66.54 
40.84 
13.2 
2 
Share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector 
Female  
19.1 
14.6 
19.87 
24.2 
3 
Labour force participation rate   
Female  
23.9 
29.2 
36 
35.6 


Male 
84 
86.8 
82.5 
81.9 
4 
Unemployment rate 
Female  
7.8 
7.04 
5.8 
6.8 


Male 
3.4 
3.35 
4.1 
3.0 
Source: Labour Force Survey (LFS), BBS 
Women in National Parliament: In the last parliamentary election in 2014, women got directly elected in 21 Parliament seats, which is almost double as compared with the earlier election. In the current parliament, the Speaker, the Leader of the House, Leader of the opposition, Deputy Leader of the House are all Women. Bangladesh secured 7th position in the political empowerment score rank of the Global Gender Gap sub-index out of 144 countries. In the overall score, Bangladesh ranked 72 in 2016.  
Figure 3.8: Female MPs in the Parliament in Bangladesh 

Source: Bangladesh Parliament Secretariat 
Women's Rights: The Government adopted the \0xEBNational Women Development Policy (NWDP)i in 2011 that aims at eliminating all forms of discrimination against women and creating favourable environment for them to access to economy, education and health. Moreover, womenis need and concerns have been incorporated in all sectoral plans and policies.  A separate act to prevent violence against women and children is already in place (Nari O Shishu Nirjaton Domon Ain, 2000). Special skill development programmes have been introduced to develop women working force.  
The Government is strongly committed to reducing child marriage in Bangladesh. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina committed at the UK Girlis Summit to end marriage for children under the age of 15 by 2021 and under the age of 18 by 2041. She also pledged to reduce the number of girls getting married between 15 and 18 by at least one-third by 2021. Towards strengthening prevention of child marriages through law enforcement, Bangladesh recently enacted the Child Marriage Restraint Act 2017. The Law has put a lot of emphasis on community responsibility, as well as that of local level public officials to actively prevent child marriages. The Government has prepared an action plan for all the districts of the country to eradicate child marriage. The Government has also drafted National Plan of Action on Ending Child Marriage.  
3.4.4. Challenges 
\0xEF Bringing parity in wage rate for women; 
\0xEF Violence against women; 
\0xEF Preventing child marriage; 
\0xEF Ensuring conducive workplace environment for women; 
3.4.5. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-5 
There are 9 targets including 3 Means of Implementation under this goal with 14 indicators to monitor the progress. However, metadata related to 5 indicators is yet to be finalized by the UNSC (5.1.1, 5.5.1, 5.6.2, 5.a.1, 5.c.1). According to the \0xEBData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals: Bangladesh Perspectivei Report (2017), 1 indicator (5.3.2) is not relevant to Bangladesh and data related to 7 indicators are readily available in Bangladesh. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-4. 
3.5. SDG # 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
 
3.5.1. Introduction 
Bangladesh recognizes the importance of investment in infrastructure particularly in the areas of transport, irrigation, power and energy, industrialization, and ICT in achieving the SDGs. The 7th FYP prioritizes the need for improved power, energy, transport and other infrastructure in its growth strategy. The government believes that economic growth, social development and climate action are heavily dependent on investments in infrastructure, sustainable industrial development and technological progress.  
3.5.2. Sector performance 
Power sector: As a result of strong commitment of the Government, power generation capacity has reached 15,379 MW in FY17. Transmission and distribution networks have also widened significantly. The access to electricity increased to 80% in FY16 from the baseline of 48% in FY10. 
Manufacturing Sector: Rapid expansion of the manufacturing sector is important for the development of Bangladesh. At present, textiles and apparel are the leading manufacturing industry in Bangladesh. The share of manufacturing in GDP has increased from around 14% in 1995-96 to nearly 21% in 2015-16. Due to the labour intensive nature, manufacturing sector constitutes a dominant position in terms of providing employment opportunity in the country. 
In manufacturing, the RMG sector has been traditionally a star performer. The RMG sector now accounts for the bulk of manufacturing employment (60%). However, we are also focusing on improving the performance of small scale manufacturing enterprises. We have done extensive research in this regard and come up with a three step strategy for the SME sector:  
\0xEF Consolidating the naturally developed capabilities;  
\0xEF Reorienting SME sector to help boost the export sector;  
\0xEF Enhancing capacities to sustain the challenges of globalization;  
As a measure to implement this strategy, Bangladesh Bank (BB) has already established a refinancing window of BDT 6000 million, supplemented by $125 million from ADB, and Yen 5000 million from the Government of Japan. So far, a total of 41,951 entrepreneurs (including 9,612 women entrepreneurs) have received funding from this refinancing facility.  
Fast-track Transformational Project: The Government has taken up 13 transformational mega projects to be implemented on priority basis. The mega projects for roads and highways are the Padma Bridge, Metro rail, Padma bridge rail link, and Dohazari-Cox's Bazar-Gundum rail line. In the Utilities and Port sectors, the mega projects are Rooppur nuclear power plant, Rampal power plant, Matarbari power plant, Bhola gas pipeline, LNG terminal, Matarbari coal terminal, Petrochemical industry in coastal area, and Payra sea port.  
Highways and Bridges: In addition to the Padma Bridge, the Government is also giving priority to the construction of a tunnel underneath the Karnaphuli River to lower congestion and improve roads transport movement. As far as the highways are concerned, the topmost priority is to convert important national highways into four lanes. Out of 3812 km National Highways in Bangladesh, 368 km highways have already been expanded to four or more lanes, which include the Dhaka Chittagong Highway. And further 1416 km is expected to be completed by 2020. Upgrading and improvement of Regional Highways and District Highways have also been started. According to Highways Development and Management Survey Report in 2016, 79.61% National Highways, 69.21% Regional Highways and 52.92% District Highways remained in \0xEBGood to Fair Conditioni. The Government plans to raise 85% of all categories of highways to "Good to Fair Condition" by 2020. 
Cross border trade and movement is also important for steady economic growth. Government is committed to upgrade its highway and transport networks to facilitate trades and cross-border movement of vehicles. Bangladesh is currently involved in several regional initiatives such as Asian Highway, SAARC Highway Corridor, SASEC Road Corridor, BCIM-Economic Corridor, BIMSTEC Road Corridor and BBIN Motor Vehicles Agreement.  
Urban Transport: Government has formulated Strategic Transport Plan (STP) in 2005 which was revised in 2016 to be implemented during 2015-2035.There are provisions for 5 MRT (Mass Rapid Transit) Lines and 2 BRT (Bus Rapid Transit) Lines in STP. First 20.10 km long elevated MRT and 20 km long BRT Corridor from Gazipur to Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport is under construction. A contract has been signed to construct 46.73 km long Dhaka elevated express way from Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport to Kutubkhali of DhakaChittagong highway. 
Rural transport: Under the 6th FYP, we have constructed 28,697 km rural roads and 125,856 meter bridges/structures throughout the country. The Government has taken several strategies for comprehensive development of the rural road system which include: 
\0xEF Road Master Plan 
\0xEF Rural Roads & Structures Maintenance Strategy 
\0xEF Enhanced involvement of Local Government Institutions (LGI) and 
\0xEF Ensuring utilization and maintenance of built facilities. 
 
Railway: The government placed special emphasis on railway communication by establishing a separate Ministry in 2011. The construction and reconstruction of 441 km rail line is under way. We are working with our neighbouring countries to expand cross border railway communication with a view to promoting enhanced people to people contacts and tourism. 
Water Transportation: Water transportation in Bangladesh is primarily a private sector led business where Governmentis role has traditionally been in legislative and regulatory sphere as well as ensuring navigability of the river routes. We have formed a River Protection Commission under the River Protection Commission Act, 2013 to prevent illegal encroachment, river pollution, illegal construction and other unlawful activities. 
Port Infrastructure: The Government has decided to invest heavily in current port facilities and infrastructure for expanding trade and investment opportunities in the country. We have enacted Payra Port Authority Act, 2013 to establish a port at Payra in Patuakhali District. The port has already started functioning at a limited level and is expected to begin full-fledged operation by 2023. 
Civil Aviation: We are working towards expansion and up-gradation of airports in the country including Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport. We have decided to upgrade the Coxis Bazar Airport to an international one with a view to promoting tourism. 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) and SEZ: The government has established Public Private Partnership Authority (PPPA) to manage PPP initiatives in Bangladesh. Under the7th FYP, we expect the PPP investment to reach 2% of GDP. The Government of Bangladesh has established Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority (BEZA) which has undertaken an ambitious plan to set up 100 SEZs all over the country to encourage enhanced level of domestic investment and foreign direct investment (FDI).  
The vision of Digital Bangladesh is to ensure that citizens have access to ICTs for accessing information and knowledge required to perform 
Technology: The Digital Bangladesh initiative calls for establishment of tele-centre/community 	e-centres 
with internet facilities all across   rural Bangladesh. We aim at increasing tele-density to 70% by 2015 and 90 percent by 2021. We have been able to digitally connect all Ministries/Divisions, and District offices. The Government has a plan to establish 2600 connections at Union level (lowest tier of local government) by the year 2018. We hope to ensure widespread access to internet at the grass root level by 2020.  
The government continues its efforts to develop software capabilities through establishment of ICT Parks. We are offering public research grants and tax incentives to encourage private investment in software development.  
3.5.3. Major Challenges 
Structural: The proper implementation of the proposed infrastructure strategies will require significant institutional and regulatory reforms. A case in point can be urban transport sector reforms initiatives. In reforming urban transport sector, we need to consider many other factors including synchronization of the initiatives in transport sector with the overall urban management and development strategy.  Obviously, this is a tough task because of cross cutting issues and multi stakeholdersi involvements. In the power sector also, there are multiple challenges in the fronts of power generation capacity, transmission, distribution, and diversification of production particularly moving towards renewable energy sources. Similarly, all other infrastructure investment areas have different level of structural constraints which require to be addressed.  
Implementation of Megaprojects: In terms of implementing mega projects, the challenges primarily come in the form of land availability, relocation, protecting and maintaining environmental standard and ensuring local level participation.  
Financing: To improve the infrastructure situation, Bangladesh requires huge financing from multiple sources. We continue our efforts to further improve the investment climate and adjust policy and regulatory framework to attract more financing in the form of domestic and foreign investments. 
3.5.4. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-9 
There are 8 targets including 3 Means of Implementation (MoI) under this goal with 12 indicators to monitor the progress. Nevertheless, metadata related to 3 indicators are yet to be finalized by the UNSC (9.1.1, 9.3.1, 9.3.2). Majority of the data under this goal will be generated by the National Statistical Office of Bangladesh. However, LGD, MoEF, FD, ERD, PTD will be responsible to produce some indicator related data either though administrative sources or by conducting surveys. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-5. 
 
3.6. SDG # 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 
 
3.6.1. Introduction 
With the peaceful delimitation of maritime boundaries with neighbouring Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina embarked on the journey towards unlocking the potentials from better access to sea and ocean resources. The blue economy is now well-recognized as a new \0xEBdevelopment spacei in Bangladesh. Shipping, sea ports, shipbuilding and recycling, marine fisheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources development and governance have been identified as key priority issues for the development of blue economy. Bangladesh has 118,813 sq. km in the Bay of Bengal which includes both territorial sea and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Total marine waters stand at 121,110 sq. km of which coastal waters and the shallow shelf sea constitute about 20% and 35% respectively. The rest 45% is in deeper waters. Almost all of Bangladesh's marine fishing is carried out in shallow and shelf waters, beyond which no fishing is being currently done due to lack of appropriate vessel, fishing technologies and human capacity. 
3.6.2. Fisheries resources  
The fisheries resources play a significant role in fulfilling the demand of animal protein and socio-economic development of the country. More than sixteen million people of Bangladesh directly or indirectly depend on the fisheries sector. The Bay of Bengal of Bangladesh is blessed with rich coastal and marine ecosystems, hosting a wide range of biodiversity, such as fishes, shrimps, molluscs, crabs, mammals, seaweeds, etc. 
3.6.3. Oil and gas  
World energy consumption has more than doubled over the past four decades, mostly driven by the developing economies. Increased economic activities demand more energy and nearly 62% is currently supplied from oil and gas, with about one third of this is shared by offshore production. Bangladesh is yet to assess the true potential of its offshore oil and gas prospects. While an impressive gas success ratio of 3:1 (3 exploration wells drillings result 1 discovery) was observed in the onshore area, the success ratio in the offshore hovers around a less impressive ratio of 9:1. Notably, Some 26 Tcf (trillion cubic feet) gas reserve has so far been discovered in Bangladesh, of which only about 1 Tcf is located in the offshore areas. 
3.6.4. Integrated Coastal Development and Exploration of Blue Economy in Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 
The engagement of the private sector in the Blue Economy is vital. Necessary capital investments, technology development and deployment and effective operations and management will be required to leverage the future opportunities which can only be met with significant participation from the private sector. Particularly the introduction of modern deep sea fishing vessels fitted with effective communication and signalling arrays coupled with satellite navigation and tracking will be essential in boosting production. Aside from oil and gas prospects in the Bay of Bengal, much work has not been done in investigating the potentials for the hydrogenous minerals in the context of developing a sustainable submarine mining industry. Opportunities exist for the private sector to engage in these surveys and investigations, which will require significant partnerships with international firms as well. 
3.6.5. Actions to achieve the SDG targets within 7th FYP (2016-2020) in oceans, seas and marine resources 
\0xEF Developing Waste Reception Facilities at port(s) and contingency plan to fight against oil spillage  
\0xEF Identifying Marine Ecological Critical Area 
\0xEF Creating Coastal Green Belt  
\0xEF Formulating National Marine Fisheries Policy during the 7th FYP 
\0xEF Developing Inventory of Marine Biological Resources, particularly in recently resolved South-West waters of EEZ (19,467 sq. km) 
\0xEF Promoting technology for production of seed for culturing marine fish and seaweed  
\0xEF Protecting around 5% of coastal and 1.34% of marine areas by 2020  
\0xEF Extending fishing areas using new technologies and methods even beyond EEZ in the international waters 
\0xEF Developing capacity for the relevant agencies, strengthening of monitoring, control and surveillance system in the Bay of Bengal 
 
 
3.6.6. Sustainable fisheries production and management 
\0xEF 
The Bay of Bangle of Bangladesh is blessed with rich coastal and marine ecosystems, hosting a wide range of biodiversity, such as fishes, shrimps, molluscs, crabs, mammals, seaweeds, etc. 
\0xEF 
Given Bangladeshis rapid growth and recent favourable resolutions of long standing maritime boundary disputes, this ocean and water resource centric approach will provide the basis for enormous economic development in the near future 
Stock and maximum sustainable yield/total allowable catch (quota) must be determined thorough assessments on a regular basis. Therefore, capacity development and proper actions in the marine fisheries sector should be brought to immediate focus.  
Conservation of fish biodiversity and healthy stock will remain keys to the success in this sector in the long run. Suitable areas in the EEZ and coastal waters will be declared as Marine Protected Areas 
(MPA) of appropriate kind to 
facilitate conservation and protection of fish breeding, nursing, growth, migration, habitats, etc. 
Land based pollution consisting primarily of solid wastes (e.g. plastics, polythene, and toxic substances) and untreated industrial effluents must be banned from entering into the rivers and sea, and be enforced with rigor and determination, if the habitats and the lives of fishes are to be protected. Shore-based and ship-borne pollution should also receive due importance. 
No industrial practices should be allowed without Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) on the continental shelf and onshore areas which may cause destruction and degradation of fish habitats, mangrove ecosystem and decline of fish stocks. Such activity may also include irresponsible and destructive means of oil and gas explorations/ exploitation. Special attention should be given to the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) of the Natural World Heritage Site of the Sundarbans and should avoid disturbance to this ecosystem.  
3.6.7. Maintaining existing and creating new maritime industrial fronts 
Shipbuilding has already been proven as a highly effective industry for the economy of Bangladesh. It should be promoted and nurtured in all possible ways, including its horizontally and vertically linked businesses, and given opportunities and incentives for growth and expansion. Likewise, marine biotechnology and industries based on biotechnology research are now overdue. Universities and research institutions will be encouraged and given funding & logistics for opening this promising discipline for future industrial growth. 
3.6.8. Extending marine fishing horizon 
Bangladesh's marine fishing is effectively limited to the continental shelf only. This limitation in fishing area is primarily due to smaller tonnage of the vessels, and also due to fishing gear preference of the operators. The implications of this limited fishing zone are threefold, firstly, fishing effort is intense on a smaller space and volume of water putting excess pressure on the stock therein; secondly, some open ocean high value fishes only rarely appear in Bangladeshi fish catch despite their availability in deeper areas; and finally, the large area within the EEZ and beyond has tremendous untapped potential. It is, therefore, imperative for Bangladesh to create the necessary environment to encourage fishing operators to venture into deeper and open ocean areas with high-tonnage vessels, using alternate gear, such as tuna long-lines and hooks, and expanding the fishing horizon not only on the geographic front, but also on economic and nutritional fronts.  
3.6.9. Development of maritime human resource 
Bangladesh is in a suitable position to produce skilled human resources in almost any sector imaginable. A thrust in blue economic growth may come from a large army of skilled coastal and offshore engineers, navigators, foresters, mangrove ecologists, merchant mariners, fisheries technologists, biotechnologists, etc. and in a variety of other related professions. Targets to produce skilled human resource hiring international experts to train skill providers in potential new trades for domestic and international job markets, and its export will be given special attention in strategic planning. 
3.6.10. Redesigning tourism industry 
The tourism industry, despite its huge potential and recent developments, still remains locked in a 'go-see-dine-sleep' model of the past years. In spite of growing appetites, 'action tourism' (e.g. tracking, climbing, surfing, diving, boating, sport fishing, etc.) is virtually nonexistent. Coastal and marine tourism has great potentials for expansion not only in terms of activities, but also of destinations, modes of travel and accommodations, amenities, target demographics, and overall philosophy. This sector should undergo an overhaul - in planning and operation, to include, for example, luxury marine cruises to distant destinations. Ecotourism may be promoted in the area. The tourism sector also should be a major face in the development of marine policy, laws and regulation. 
3.6.11. Expanding shipping and commerce 
The shipping industry in general and the ports in particular, are already contributing a large proportion to the country's economy and growth. However, the true potential is far from being tapped yet. Bangladeshi cargo fleet carries only a small portion of import and export commodities. Expansion of the fleet in terms of its size and capacity, and of destinations will substantially lift the economic face of the country in a short time. Due attention will be given to the protection and conservation of the World Heritage Site while expanding shipping and commerce in the area. 
 
3.6.12. Consideration of Climate Change issues in conservation, management and sustainable use of ocean and seas resources 
Human induced Climate Change and associated phenomena including ocean acidification, ocean warming, sea-level rise, weather and climate shift, changing rainfall patterns, intensification of tropical cyclones, etc. have put a tremendous pressure on marine life, ecosystem, coastal, biodiversity, marine resources etc. Further increase in GHG gases like carbon dioxides in the atmosphere will add salt to already-caused problem in the ocean and seas. In response to the global call to address the issue, Bangladesh has already submitted Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to UNFCCC with a view to cut GHG emission at 5% unilaterally and up to 15% with necessary support by 2030. A roadmap to implement NDC is under preparation. The implementation of the activities of NDC should be supported by the relevant global community early. 
The existing Green Belt initiatives of the Government should be strengthened further. Protection of coastal zones and islands by mangrove afforestation should continue. Policies, Strategies and action plans including new and existing, should update/ include climate change dimensions and mainstreamed with the national planning process. Existing adaption and mitigation actions taken by Bangladesh should be backed by enhanced actions with full support from relevant country parties and other sources.   
3.6.13. Maintaining river system and ecosystem health 
River systems and inland water resources should be maintained and managed in a way to support fish populations, navigability and sediment transport to the coastal areas. Blocking of stream flow of any kind should not dominate the irrigation agenda. Ecosystem management should be a goal of both integrated water resources management and marine and coastal zone management. Ecological monitoring may be carried out on regular basis to monitor river ecosystem health. 
3.6.14. Science and research 
Study of the science of the oceans and the coastal zone and associated research should be given high priority. Universities involved in the study of marine sciences, marine fisheries, coastal zone management, oceanography, mangrove ecosystem etc. should be given research funding and facilities; science based knowledge acquired at these institutions should be incorporated in policy and planning processes. The activities of the National Oceanographic Research Institute (NORI) will be enhanced and joint research projects with universities/industries should be launched based on tapping of national marine resources priorities. A national marine science data infrastructure should be developed. 
 
 
3.6.15. Integrated policy and strategy, interagency coordination and marine spatial planning 
An integrated coastal and ocean management policy and framework will be developed and run by a special task force at the highest level of the government to ensure proper coordination and integration among different ministries and line agencies. Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is required for addressing specific ocean management challenges and advancing the goals of economic development and conservation. 
3.6.16. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-14 
According to the \0xEBData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals: Bangladesh Perspectivei Report (2017), 60% data related to this goal is not available in the existing data generation system of Bangladesh. There are 10 targets including 3 Means of Implementation under this goal with 10 indicators to monitor the progress. However, metadata related to 8 indicators are yet to be finalized by the UNSC (14.1.1, 14.2.1, 14.3.1, 14.6.1, 14.7.1, 14.a.1, 14.b.1, 14.c.1). To overcome the challenges of data availability of SDG 14, the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), the National Statistical Office (NSO), has taken steps to generate appropriate data in consultation with relevant Ministries/Divisions. The baseline figures and their milestones targets for 2030 of the indicators whose data is available are given in Annex-6. 
3.6.17. Voluntary commitment  
Bangladesh promises the following as voluntary commitments during the Ocean Conference (5-9 June 2017) in New York:  
\0xEF By 2025, weill prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, particularly from land-based pollution (Target 14.1) 
\0xEF Weill declare 5% of marine areas (7500 square km) as marine protected area by 2020 (Target 14.2)  
\0xEF By 2020 weill effectively regulate over-fishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices in marine areas (Target 14.4) 
3.7. A snapshot of Thematic Analysis  
The report focus on seven thematic areas namely poverty, hunger, health, gender, infrastructure, life under water, and means of implementation. In terms of the analytical framework of the report, it primarily highlights on the lessons learnt about how investments in these areas could yield best possible results and effectively contribute towards overall socio economic development of the country in line with 2030 Agenda. 
Poverty undermines basic human dignity and value system. Keeping this in mind, the reduction of the poverty had been at the heart of all our national plans, policies and strategies. We have achieved impressive progress through numerous demand and supply side interventions in poverty alleviations since independence. Yet, a large number of population remains below poverty line. Again, a significant proportion of population live on the borderline of poverty and bears the risks of falling into poverty trap if they are faced with any sudden shocks. The current demand side instrument of the country for tackling the poverty is the National Social Security Strategy which is built on life cycle approach. Our future success in poverty front will largely depend on the successful implementation of this strategy. 
In order for achieving SDG targets regarding food security and hunger, Bangladesh based its strategies primarily on the development of agricultural sector. We have introduced many fiscal incentives and heavily invested in research to make sure the agricultural sector grows in a sustainable manner to fulfil the demands of our growing population. We have already achieved near self-sufficiency in cereal production. Unfortunately, however, 26 million people still suffer from hunger. We have challenges in the areas of the prevalence of undernourishment, stunting, wasting, underweight and overweight in children under five years of age. The 7th FYP has outlined strategies to overcome these challenges. 
Bangladesh has significant achievements in health sector. We have performed better on many indicators in this sector with relatively lower investment than many of our neighbours. Although we are one of the most densely populated countries in the world, we have been successful to include ourselves in the medium human development category with life expectancy of 72 years. We are, however, facing significant challenges in the fronts of ensuring quality health care services in rural areas, rise of non-communicable disease, awareness about unhealthy lifestyle and practices etc.  
The rise of women leadership and achievements in women empowerment have been phenomenal in Bangladesh. The driving forces for this success are governmentis assistance in girlis education, supportive policy, easy access to microfinance and the growth of Ready Made Garmentis industry. Yet, we have challenges in the areas of workplace discrimination, domestic violence, child marriage, gender parity in tertiary education, and participation in labour force. 
Infrastructure is a key driving force for sustained economic growth. The Government has mobilized huge resources to invest heavily in basic infrastructure including roads, highways and bridges, power and energy, seaports and airports, and economic zones. The idea is about creating congenial environment for enhanced domestic and international investments, creating jobs, and spurring innovation. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has taken personal initiative to launch 13 mega projects to mitigate infrastructural gaps, which are expected to contribute not only to the investment sectors but also to the overall socio economic development. The primary challenges, however, are institutional and regulatory reforms, land constraints, and capacity in terms of human capital, financing and other resources.  
After the peaceful delimitation of maritime boundaries with neighbouring Myanmar and India, the Blue Economy emerged as a vibrant sector for Bangladesh offering huge economic opportunities. The Government has identified shipping, sea ports, shipbuilding and recycling, marine fisheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources development and governance as key priorities with potentials to contribute significantly to our socio economic development. We have outlined specific strategies in both 7th FYP and Delta Plan 2100 to reap maximum benefits that the ocean can offer. The challenges are lack of capacity and knowledge, resource constraints, and adequate financing. As for example, we have not been able to expand marine fishing beyond shallow and shelf waters due to lack of appropriate vessel, fishing technologies and human capacity. We are also concerned about the health of the ocean although our contribution to ocean pollution has historically been insignificant. We are committed to contribute our part to preserve the ocean and ensure its sustainable use in future and stand ready to be part of international solidarity among governments, citizens, and business in this regard. 
Bangladesh recognizes the importance of global partnership in achieving SDGs. In that sense, we consider goal 17 as central and value its structural relations with other goals. Indeed, partnership and resource mobilization-two key components of goal 17 have overarching influence on the success of other 16 goals. In our context, financial constraints appear to be the biggest obstacle for implementation of SDGs. We have considerable challenges in the areas of mobilizing domestic resources, efficiency gain in public expenditure, scaling up official development assistance and attracting FDI. We are keen to remain part of all possible means of global cooperation including through South-South, North-South and Triangular partnerships to overcome these challenges. 
3.8. Institutional Mechanisms 
Bangladesh has taken up following institutional measures to implement the SDGs: 
3.8.1. Mapping of key ministries and government agencies 
The government has mapped out lead, co-lead and associate Ministries against each goal and target of the 2030 Agenda and published a book titled \0xECHandbook on Mapping of Ministries by Targets in the Implementation of SDGs aligning with 7th Five Year Plan (20162020). This exercise is expected to bring about synergistic impacts by avoiding duplication of efforts. 
3.8.2. Data gap analysis for SDGs monitoring 
Data gap is a major challenge for performance assessment of SDGs implementation. Keeping this in mind, we conducted a review of various means of data generation in the country. We documented the findings in \0xECData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): Bangladesh Perspective (January, 2017), which is expected to be an effective instrument for monitoring the SDGs achievement. 
The analysis reveals that Bangladesh has readily available data for 70 indicators and partially available data for 108 indicators. We need to devise new mechanism for data mining for the remaining 63 indicators. 
 
3.8.3. Web based data repository system for result based M&E 
A macro level data repository system is in progress under the Access to Information (a2i) Project of Prime Ministeris Office so as to get updated information on a regular basis and to expedite the assessment of performance in SDGs. The data repository system will gather all relevant information and statistics, all relevant outcome and output indicators of results framework of medium term plan and SDGs. The system is aimed at facilitating data analysis, reporting, progress tracking, monitoring and evaluation, thus helping policy decision. 
3.8.4. National M&E framework for SDGs 
We are working towards developing an SDG Monitoring & Evaluation Framework based on the Data Gap Analysis Report. We planned to a series of consultations involving all relevant stakeholders.  
3.8.5. SDGs needs assessment and financing strategy 
We have done an estimate to determine the financing needs for SDGs implementation with a view to mobilizing internal and external resources. The preliminary assessment reveals that we may require around US$ 1.5 trillion additional resources for full implementation of 
SDGs. 	 
Chapter 4 
4. Means of implementation 
 
SDG # 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 
 
4.1. Introduction 
The importance of global partnership in achieving SDGs can hardly be overemphasised. The preamble of the SDGs declaration identifies partnership as one of the five Ps capturing the broader scope of the 2030 Agenda.  Goal 17 of the Agenda exclusively focuses on the global partnership theme and highlights the same as one of the driver goals to achieve the other goals of the Agenda. The 60th paragraph of the declaration reinforces further the significance of \0xECrevitalized and enhanced Global Partnership to achieve the goals and targets of SDGs. Addis Ababa Action Agenda and its policies and actions have also identified revamped partnership in different forms, i.e. South-South, North-South and Triangular as an integral part of SDGs realization. 
Bangladesh has initiated the process of implementing the 2030 Agenda through several coordinated measures. We have prepared and adopted Mapping of Ministries by Targets in the implementation of SDGs aligning with 7th Five Year Plan (2016-20), according to which responsibilities of the relevant Lead and Co-Lead ministries in achieving the SDG 17 targets and indicators have been identified (Table 4.1). 
Table 4.1: SDG 17 at a glance with the identified concern Ministries of Government of Bangladesh to achieve the corresponding targets and indicators 
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development (under different prescribed categories) 

Finance 
Technology 
Capacity 
Building 
Trade 
Systemic issues 





Policy and institutional coherence 
Multistakeholder partnerships 
Data, monitoring and accountability 
Targets 
17.1-
17.5 
17.6-17.8 
17.9 
17.10-
17.12 
17.13-17.15 
17.16-17.17 
17.18-17.19 
Lead 
Ministry 
PMO, 
FD  
ERD, 
IRD, FID 
MoST 
MoEF 
ICTD 
PTD  
MoFA 
ERD,MoE, MoEF,  
MoP, 
MoPA 
MoEWOE 
MoC 
MoFA 
PMO 
FD 
GED 
PMO 
MoFA, NBR 
ERD, GED 
MoEWOE 
SID 
Cabinet 
Division,  
PMO 
Source: GED, Planning Commission 
 
In preparing this report, we analysed our performance with regard to policy formulation and implementation. All five categories (i.e. Finance, Technology, Capacity Building, Trade and Systemic Issues) have been analysed in the light of previous experiences. In doing so, we have taken into account our learnings and experiences during the MDG period and the first year of SDGs implementation.  
4.2. Finance  
4.2.1. Domestic Resource Mobilization 
We recognize the importance of domestic resource mobilization and has given its due priority in our national policies, plans and strategies.  We would, however, like to put equal emphasis on the need for international support to help us mobilizing resources for SDGs implementation.  
The 7th Five Year Plan of the Government emphasised domestic resource mobilization to achieve the priority development goals with special focus on human resources development, enhanced productivity, environmental sustainability and infrastructure development. The Plan offers important guidelines for increasing revenue-GDP ratio significantly, which had remained almost stagnant at 10-12% for years (Figure 4.1). The Plan has targeted to elevate revenue-GDP ratio to 16.1% by FY2019-20. In order for achieving this target, the required revenue growth rate would need to be about 24% per annum during the whole Plan period. We are confident of achieving this tough target.  We stand ready to do our part and expect international community to provide reform support through training, capacity building and exposure to best practices. 
Figure 4.1: Domestic Resource Mobilization since the inception of MDGs 

Source: NBR, BBS 
 
Given our past performance in Revenue-GDP ratio, we reckon that we would require intensive efforts to change the tide. We have already taken some concrete actions in the area of Tax Policy Reforms which include, among other things, enactment of VAT and Supplementary Duty Act 2012, and drafting of a new Direct Tax Code. Both the income tax and indirect tax administration reforms are going on along with digitization of tax collection. 
Figure 4.2: Proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes, % 

Source: FD, NBR 
The proportion of domestic budget financed by domestic revenue is shown in Figure 4.2. It depicts that the expenditure of the Government mostly depends on domestic taxes (about 63%), whereas dependency on domestic and external loan is around 37%. 
4.2.2. Official Development Assistance (ODA)  
ODA has been identified as an important source of financing to implement 2030 Agenda both in our national framework and internationally. Addis Ababa Action Agenda offers policy suggestions regarding ODA for the developing countries and LDCs. We recognize ODA as an important window of cooperation between the North and the South. 
The global scenario of partnership in terms of ODA has not been so encouraging so far. Paris declaration and 2030 Agenda recognized this fact. In the recent past, we observed a moderate increase in the flow of ODA toward developing and the least developed countries. UNDESA suggested that in 2015, net ODA from member countries of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) totalled $131.6 billion which was 6.9% higher in real terms than in 2014. The figure seemed apparently optimistic. Notably, however, only seven countries out of 34 member-states of OECD met the United Nations target for ODA of 0.7% of gross national income in 2015 which are Denmark, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom. 
In the case of Bangladesh, the disbursement of ODA as a proportion of GDP has fallen from 5.59% in 1990-91 to 1.56% in 2014-15. Per capita ODA disbursement fluctuated between US$ 15.60 and US$ 19.27 during this period (Figure 4.3). The net ODA received by Bangladesh was US$ 1,732 million in 1990-91 and the amount went up to US$ 3,043 million in 2014-15. On an average, Bangladesh received US$ 1,788 million ODA every year.  
 
Figure 4.3: ODA received in Bangladesh during FY91-FY15 

Source: ERD 
Bangladesh is aware of different challenges regarding effectiveness on ODA and working together with the development partners to address those. 
4.2.3. Additional Multiple Sources of Financing 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI): Other than official development assistance, the 2030 development agenda also puts due emphasis on additional financing scopes from multiple sources such as FDI, remittances and South-South Cooperation. Bangladesh has mixed experience in exploring the opportunities of FDI to support its endeavour for socioeconomic development. Recently, Bangladesh Investment Development Authority (BIDA) has been established by merging two institutes namely Board of Investment (BoI) and Privatization Commission. In recent years, FDI inflow has increased and reached US$ 2.0 billion in FY2015-16. However, the pace has not been higher than the regional counterparts. The 7th FYP envisioned attracting US$ 9.6 billion FDI in FY 2020. We are working hard to improve our position in doing business index and creating a much congenial investment climate by investing heavily on infrastructure, energy and transportation to reach that target. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4: Total Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) flows in Bangladesh during FY01-FY16 

Source: Bangladesh Bank 
Remittance: Remittance has huge potentials to emerge as an important source of financing for SDGs. While it generally channels through individual level, the government has introduced many fiscal incentives including Wage Earnersi Bond to encourage higher level remittances. Bangladesh has more than 8.0 million expatriates living and working abroad, with huge concentration in Middle East and South-East Asia. The amount, non-residential Bangladeshis remit each year, is around US$ 15 billion (Figure 4.5). The higher cost of remitting faced by the overseas employees appear to be a major impediment for ensuring its effectiveness as a financing tool. Both the sending and receiving countries of workers need to play their part to remove the obstacles to overseas employment and remittance inflows. To ensure and promote safe, regular and responsible migration in line with the SDG target 10.7, the Government of Bangladesh has been engaging itself with different regional and global forums such as Colombo Process (CP), Abu Dhabi Dialogue (ADD), Budapest Process, Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD), Global Compact on Migration (GCM). The Government has recently decided to abolish all charges for remittance through formal banking channel. This initiative is expected to substantively discourage informal channels of money transfer. 
Figure 4.5: Remittance inflows towards Bangladesh in Million US$ 

Source: Bangladesh Bank 
Debt Sustainability: At about 35% of GDP, the level of government debt in Bangladesh is not high by any international standards. And, it has been showing a declining trend in relation to GDP in recent years. Notably, in the history of Bangladesh, it never failed any debt repayment instalment. Indeed, Bangladesh has always been a star performer in managing debt.  Debt-GDP ratio, especially the external debt had always been below the IMF declared risk level. Debt service as a percentage of Export has a long declining trend since 1990s as the trade openness expanded the export volume (Figure 4.6). 
Figure 4.6: Debt Service as a Percentage of Exports of Goods and Services, 1990-2015 
 
Source: Flow of External Resources 2014-2015, ERD 
 	 
4.3. Technology 
We have been working hard to transform Bangladesh into a digitally advanced country as envisioned in the governmentis Vision 2021. We have taken initiatives to utilize South-South co-operation for widening internet connectivity. We have collaborated with Nepal, Bhutan and India to establish a regional information highway through South Asian Sub-regional Economic Cooperation (SASEC) in order to ensure broadband information communication, information related knowledge exchange and access to ICT in inaccessible areas.  
Furthermore, we are implementing a project called \0xECInstallation of Wireless Broadband network for Digital Bangladesh (4G, LTE), which is expected to make high speed fibre optic cable network available for everybody. This project will cover all 64 districts, and 300 Upazilas with an approximately 19,000 km optical fibre cable network.  
4.4. Capacity-building  
The major obstacle for implementation of SDGs for Bangladesh happens to be in the areas of finance; mainly in mobilizing domestic resource, scaling up official development assistance and attracting FDI. 
Bangladesh joined the global communityis journey for implementation of 2030 Agenda very early. We had the opportunity to develop the national plan, the 7th Five Year Plan (2016-20), in light of SDGs.  While we have been working with the 7th Five year plan at the domestic level, the 2030 Agenda was in the process of making 	at 	the 	UN. 	This 	offered 	us 	a tremendous opportunity to integrate the priorities of 2030 Agenda in the 7th Five year plan (2016-2020). The SDGs were also given 
emphasis while setting up the priority areas of the 7th FYP. However, we reckon that implementation part of the 2030 Agenda in alignment with 7th FYP is going to be more challenging than planning part. As any other developing countries, Bangladesh lacks capacity in taking up the multifaceted challenges that SDGs implementations are expected to offer.  
4.5. Trade 
International trade has been identified as a great window of cooperation among the developed, developing and least developed countries in the SDGs front. We reckon that the implementation of the Doha Development Agenda and subsequent rounds of World Trade Organization (WTO) as well as Nairobi (2015) and Bali (2013) Packages are going to be critical for trade to evolve as an important enabler in the SDGs implementations.  Here, it is important to point out the institutional initiatives through which countries like Bangladesh, as an LDC, receives preferential treatment in trade. There are primarily four categories of initiatives namely (a) various WTO provisions providing special and differential treatment (SDT) (b) autonomous, non-reciprocal initiatives through various countriesi Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) schemes (c) preferential market access initiatives of various regional trade agreements (RTAs) (d) bilateral trade initiatives. Bangladesh has been able to take significant advantage of the preferential market access provided under the aforesaid initiatives. Lower-duty or duty-free entry has given Bangladeshis exports a competitive edge in developed and developing country markets. We have emerged as a leading exporter of apparels in the global market. Notably, in FY 2015-16, value of export from Bangladesh to preference granting countries was US$ 24.7 Billion, which accounted for 72% of total export of Bangladesh (Table 4.2). According to available information, majority of export to those countries enjoyed DFQF facilities under LDC preferential Scheme. 
Table 4.2. Export of Bangladesh to the countries granting DFQF treatment in FY 2015-16 
Country 
Value in US$ million 
Canada 
1,112.88 
China 
808.14 
India 
689.62 
Japan 
1,079.55 
Korea, Republic Of 
280.09 
Turkey 
661.89 
Russian Federation 
314.29 
European Union 
18,687.79 
Australia 
705.64 
New Zealand 
73.63 
Switzerland 
125.66 
Norway 
142.06 
Total DFQF Export 
24,681.23 
Total Export of Bangladesh 
34,241.82  
Share of DFQF Export (%) 
72.08% 
    Source: EPB 
Since developed country markets account for about 90% of Bangladeshis total exports, preferential market access in these countries is of special significance to us. Bangladeshis export basket has so far remained limited to RMG. We need to take advantage of potential opportunities by exporting other products which are eligible for preferential market access. The challenges, however, are lack of GSP coverage, weak ability to comply with Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) agreement, Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs), and inadequate trade-related supply-side capacities. A particular case in point is the market access issues for Bangladesh apparel products in the USA. As the USA does not offer DFQF facilities to our RMG products, every year we pay more than USD 500 million as duty which is three times higher than the total aid received by Bangladesh from the USA. We need cooperation from the developed countries in sustaining and expanding our trade capacities as well as transferring a substantive portion of our trade gains to SDGs implementation. 
4.6. Private Sector Partnership  
The Government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina is keen to ensure private sector participation in SDGs implementation. We are keen to engage them more than ever before to ensure their sustained contribution to the SDGs. A large number of targets of SDGs are related to growth, employment, and the delivery of key services such as education, health and sanitation, where participation of private sector is indispensable.  
4.7. Data Availability to Monitor the Implementation of SDG-17 
There are 19 targets under this goal (goal with the highest number of targets) with 25 indicators to monitor the progress. However, metadata related to 6 indicators are yet to be finalized by the UNSC (17.5.1, 17.6.1, 17.7.1, 17.14.1, 17.17.1, 17.18.2). According to the \0xEBData Gap Analysis for Sustainable Development Goals: Bangladesh Perspectivei Report (2017), data related to 7 indicators are readily available in Bangladesh. Once the metadata is finalized, the NSO will take appropriate steps to generate relevant data in consultation with relevant stakeholders. The available baseline figures and their milestone targets against the SDG indicators are provided in Annex-7. 
 
Chapter 5 
5. Next steps 
5.1. Way forward 
The previous chapters highlight our implementation status of SDGs and also the preparedness to take up challenges. We have particularly examined how well the SDGs fit into our national development plans namely 7th FYP (2016-2020). SDGs implementation is an ongoing process. As such, our SDGs journey will coincide with two more national plans i.e. 8th FYP (2021-2025) and 9th FYP (2026-2030). We reckon that we are at a very nascent stage of SDGs implementation. As we move forward, we have identified the following steps to double pace our efforts: 
\0xEF The Government of Bangladesh envisions transforming Bangladesh into a developed country by 2041. We have now a perspective plan in place (2010-2021) under which we are working towards transforming Bangladesh a middle income country by 2021. Essentially, as we are working on our next perspective plan (2021-2030), we will ensure proper reflections of SDGs issues in it.  
\0xEF The Government is in the process of finalizing the SDG Action Plan. This would make it much easier to allocate adequate resources to Ministries/ Agencies in their respective annual budgets for sector specific projects and initiatives.  
\0xEF The Government has taken up a bottom up approach to prepare a clear roadmap for localisation of the 2030 Agenda through proper consultation with local government institutions.  
\0xEF In order for ensuring \0xECWhole of Society Approach in our future SDGs efforts, we will develop institutional mechanisms to regularly engage with NGOs, CSOs, Businesses, Development Partners, marginalized segment of the society, professional groups, labour associations, women network, media, and Major Group of Other 
Stakeholders.  
\0xEF The government has completed a financing needs assessment for sector specific demand of resources in implementing SDGs. In order for supplementing its regular budget for SDGs implementation, the Government plans to explore innovative ways of financing through intense bilateral and multilateral engagements and putting additional focus on domestic resource mobilization. In the process, we will seek enhanced support from global partners including through South-South, North-South and Triangular Cooperation as well as financing windows like Green Climate fund. 
\0xEF We are working towards developing a strategy on the role of private sector in implementing SDGs which will encourage private investment in public good. 
\0xEF The Speaker of the parliament has decided to form goal specific parliamentary sub committees to offer regular guidance to the government in implementing SDGs and also oversee the progress. 
\0xEF The Ministries are working towards finding out gaps in the existing laws, rules, regulations and policies which may obstacle SDGs implementation. The idea is about aligning those with 2030 Agenda.   
\0xEF We will strengthen the capacity of the NSO of Bangladesh, the BBS, to spearhead the process of coordination with other data generating agencies so that it can contribute more as the national repository for all kinds of disaggregated data including gender, age, income, and geographic location. The BBS will also establish an integrated framework for ensuring availability, authenticity and reliability of administrative data collected by different Ministries/ Agencies.  
\0xEF Bangladesh plans to participate in all major initiatives in the region and beyond regarding SDGs implementation to learn from the experiences and best practises of other countries and stakeholders.  
\0xEF In order for ensuring the wider participation of people in general in SDGs implementation, we will continue our efforts to popularize core philosophies of SDGs through massive awareness campaigns.  
5.2. Conclusion 
We have decided to participate in the VNR at the HLPF as part of our commitments to engage in the global process of sharing knowledge, experiences, and best practices as we have just kicked off the implementation of the ambitious 2030 Agenda in Bangladesh. We expect that the HLPF platform will be instrumental in developing an effective mechanism for supporting our shared vision for overcoming the structural as well as the goal specific challenges that the 2030 Agenda offers. 
This Report, the first of its kind in our national context, captures the progress of our journey towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda during the last two years, identifies challenges, and informs our plans and strategies to move forward.   
Bangladesh could start the SDGs implementation early as the preparatory phase of our 7th FYP coincided with the formulation process of the 2030 Agenda. In a mutually reinforcing way, this has offered us a tremendous opportunity to contribute substantively to the global document while also appropriately reflecting the SDGs priorities in our national plan. As regards our progress, we have already completed SDGs Mapping outlining the specific responsibilities of Ministries/ Agencies. In addition, we have done Data Gap Analysis to identify the monitoring and evaluation challenges.  We are at the final stage of formulating the SDGs Action Plan to align the efforts of individual Ministries/ Agencies with the targets of the SDGs.  Another exercise to find out the financing needs is under process. Together, all these documents will provide us a consolidated framework for the SDGs implementation.  
The 7th FYP has laid down specific strategies and priorities for addressing Poverty (SDG 1), Hunger (SDG 2), Health (SDG 3), Education (SDG 4), Gender (SDG 5), Water and Sanitation (SDG 6), Power (SDG 7), Growth and Employment (SDG 8), Infrastructure development (SDG 9), inequality (SDG 10), Urbanization (SDG 11), Environment and Climate Change (SDG 12, 13, 14 and 15) and Governance (SDG 16) in Bangladesh context. In this report, we have examined the correlation between the 7th FYP and the 2030 Agenda with particular focus on the 7 Goals being considered under VNR 2017. Our analysis reveals that the two documents (i.e. 7th FYP and 2030 Agenda) are indeed well aligned.  
This report also points out both structural and goal specific challenges for SDGs implementation. It  has identified resource mobilization, stakeholdersi engagements, data availability and management, localization of SDGs, and incorporating three dimensions of sustainability, i.e. social, economic and environmental protection in development activities as major structural level challenges. As we chart our future courses of actions, we have decided to have wide consultations among all relevant stakeholders to device ways and means to overcome these challenges. 
In our way forward, we are keen to build on our experiences and lessons learned during the MDGs era and the first two years of SDGs implementation. We want to continue the momentum in our journey towards the SDGs. The Government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina envisions transforming Bangladesh into a developed country by 2041.  The 2030 Agenda fits quite well with this vision. We consider Agenda 2030 as an important guiding document enabling us to design our own development journey in a sustainable manner.  
Indeed, the 2030 Agenda has ushered in a new era of global hopes and aspirations for inclusive development. We are aware that we may have to traverse through a rough terrain in fulfilling this ambitious agenda. We need to join our hands together and act collectively so that we can build a safe, peaceful, and prosperous world where no one will be left behind.   