
INTRODUCTION 

This review is the result of Brazilis first systematic effort to evaluate the fulfillment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is also an exercise of accountability, first and foremost before the Brazilian society, as regards our Governmentis measures towards a more prosperous and fair Country, with opportunities for all - including for future generations. 
Our first step in restoring this perspective to Brazilians was to face the fiscal crisis that had hit the country and which had compromised not only economic growth, generating unemployment and poverty, but also the Stateis ability to advance public policies in the social and environmental areas. 
In Brazil, we have learned, in practice, that it is meaningless to address social and environmental responsibility in the absence of fiscal responsibility. By restoring order in public finance, we recover confidence, which translates into increased quality investments, greater economic activity, more decent work. Treating taxpayersi money rigorously, we recover budgetary space so that the State fulfills the role of efficiency expected from it in a democracy as ours: efficiency to provide basic services, such as education and health, efficiency to maintain and improve the necessary income transfer and housing programs, efficiency to ensure sustainable means of production.
Dialogue is a central feature across all our efforts - both with society, and with the National Congress. We chose responsibility as our principle, and dialogue as our method. 
In implementing the Sustainable Development Goals, we respond faithfully to this spirit of listening and building together. In order to materialize the 2030 Agenda, the Brazilian government has adopted a participatory model, which benefits from contributions from the municipal, state and federal levels, as well as from varied social segments. Given the comprehensive and multidisciplinary nature of the 2030 Agenda, it could not be any different. 
This document also comprises an assessment of the challenges we still face in our struggle to eradicate poverty. It is, therefore, a working tool for all those dedicated to the cause of the 2030 Agenda. 
The journey ahead is a long one. But the progress shown in this report demonstrates we are in the right direction, and its recommendations give us confidence to go forward.  
Michel Temer 
President of the Republic
BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFACE
In September 2015, 193 UN Member States gathered at the institutionis headquarters in New York and agreed to take transformative steps to shift the world on to a sustainable path. They adopted a new global agenda committed to people, to the planet, to promoting peace, prosperity and partnerships: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The 2030 Agenda includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals, the SDGs, which, in turn, list 169 targets, all aimed at a universal, integrated and transformative vision for a better world. The SDGs were built on a participatory basis, building on the successful experience of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), responsible for major advances in promoting human development between 2000 and 2015.
Brazil has been an example of success during the MDGs, since, with the joint efforts of government, civil society, development experts, academia, the private sector, among other sectors, Brazil achieved and went beyond most MDGs targets before 2015. We are confident that this important legacy, coupled with Brazilis leadership in the negotiations that led to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, reinforces the commitment to achieve the SDGs by 2030.
The Sustainable Development Goals and their targets challenge all countries to be ambitious and innovative in order to establish inclusive, efficient and transparent means of implementation to bring to reality this complex development agenda, from the global to the subnational level. 
These means of implementation, as recommended by the document \0xECTransforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development include, among others, the mobilization of financial resources, capacity-building, international public funding, and the availability of high-quality, up-to-date, reliable and disaggregated data. That is, multidimensional solutions to multidimensional challenges.
Thus, in order for the 2030 Agenda to be effectively implemented, governments have the primary responsibility to follow up and review, at the national, regional and global levels, the progress made in implementing the Goals and targets by 2030. 
To that effect, Brazil is in the foreground by presenting, less than 2 years after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda its first Voluntary National Review at the 2017 High-Level Political Forum, which will focus on SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 14, and on the central theme \0xECEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a Changing World. This first report will be of extreme relevance for the continuity of follow-up and review exercises of SDGs progress in the Country.
In addition to Brazilis substantive role in the global forum, the internal commitment to SDGs implementation was fostered by the creation, in 2016, of the National Commission for 

BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 
the Sustainable Development Goals, an essential institutional coordination mechanism for the achievement of SDGs in the Country. 
The United Nations recognizes that following up and reviewing progress in implementing the Goals and their targets depend not only on multi-sector efforts and inter-agency coordination - led in the case of Brazil by the Presidency of the Republic - but also on the definition of indicators and data availability. These are the key tools for benchmarking progress, and the availability of disaggregated data is a basic condition for the most vulnerable people and groups to be prioritized on the road to sustainable development. 
The United Nations in Brazil also recognizes the important efforts made so far by the institutions, as well as civil society organizations 

BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 	BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 

The aim of the present Voluntary National Review is to provide information on the Brazilian preparation process and the strategies for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda as of September 2015, when the Federal government committed in the United Nations General Assembly to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and their targets.
Initially, information that depicts Brazilian reality is provided based on social, economic and environmental data. The Review then outlines the steps that the country has taken towards the development of strategies for the internalization and localization of the 2030 Agenda.
Chapter 4 presents a study on the convergence between the Federal governmentis planning instrument, public policy implementation and the SDGs targets. By analyzing the relation between the programs, goals, targets and initiatives of the 2016-2019 Multi-Year Plan and the 169 targets of the Sustainable Development Goals it became possible to identify the current alignment between the 2030 Agenda and the Federal governmentis main planning instrument.
In light of the challenges posed by the new Agenda, the Review highlights the creation of the National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals, the main institutional governance mechanism for fostering dialogue, engagement and integration of the initiatives carried out by subnational entities and civil society. The aim of the Commission is to internalize, disseminate and ensure the transparency of the 2030 Agenda implementation process. 
The initiatives carried out by civil society, subnational governments, the Legislative branch and external control institutions are subsequently discussed. In order to draft Chapter 6, several actors were invited to share their experiences regarding the new Agenda. Their valuable contributions underscore the range and plurality of initiatives currently underway in support of the SDGs.  
In order to establish a basis for the follow-up of the SDGs targets  proposed by the 2030 Agenda, the relevant global role played by Brazil in the discussions regarding the formulation of global indicators is highlighted, in addition to the process of definition of national indicators.
In accordance with the central theme of the 2017 High-Level Political Forum n, Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world n, Chapter 8 discusses the results achieved by Brazil in recent years and the efforts of the current government regarding SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17.
In the social dimension, progress made towards eradicating poverty and hunger, ensuring healthy lives, and promoting gender equality is presented in the Review. In the economic dimension, the Review underscores actions that promote greater fiscal discipline and the expansion of investments in infrastructure, which are among the main challenges faced by the Brazilian government. In the environmental realm, it is highlighted that the Brazilian energy mix continues to be one of the cleanest in the world. The diversification of the countryis energy sources and the increase in the proportion of renewable sources, as well as an approach for greater efficiency in the sector, comprise an essential strategy from both the economic and environmental perspectives and directly addresses the Goals of the 2030 Agenda.
In addition to the short-term challenges that the country has been facing and overcoming, particularly in the economic dimension with the structural reforms introduced by the Government and currently under discussion and approval by the Legislative branch, there are many other challenges that need to be faced in the medium-term and long-term, such as guaranteeing, improving and expanding recent achievements and advancing towards new ones.
The next steps to be taken as outlined in this Review are aimed at better public administration, ranging from the production of statistics to the implementation of sectorial programs, from governance practice to engaging networks of actors, as well as optimizing public spending.
This first Voluntary National Review outlines the main challenges we have before us, which will guide the planning and monitoring of Brazilian public policies over the coming years. This document is an initial assessment of the country and the challenges to be faced towards the eradication of poverty and the promotion of a more prosperous and sustainable Brazil.




The 2030 Agenda, understood as a plan of action that proposes global sustainable development strategies for 15 years, lists the 17 SDGs entailing the social, environmental and economic dimensions in an integrated and indivisible manner across all of its 169 targets. 
In the scenario of diversity that defines Brazil, the UN Development Agenda becomes an opportunity for the improvement of public management and consolidation of policies that promote greater fairness and solidarity for the country. 
Committed to contributing to the achievement of the SDGs, the Federal Government worked on the planning and preparation of the necessary bases for their realization. Their implementation requires efforts to structure and coordinate integrated actions, as reflected in the strategies to internalize and localize the 2030 Agenda in the country. Considering the challenges for the internalization of the Global Agenda into the national reality, Brazil defined as essential the following steps: 
\0xEF National Governance. The creation of the National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals, an advisory and parity body, aiming to internalize, disseminate and confer transparency to the 2030 Agenda implementation process, constituting the space for integration, engagement and dialogue with federate entities and civil society.
\0xEF Adequacy of Targets. The adequacy of global targets to the Brazilian reality should take into account regional diversity, Brazilian Government priorities, national development plans, current legislation, and the socioeconomic situation experienced by the country (Figure 1).
\0xEF Definition of National Indicators. With adequate targets, indicators will be defined considering data availability and the possibility of monitoring at the national and local levels. 

Taking into account the different regional, economic, social and environmental contexts, the SDGs should reach all Brazilians. Therefore, local policies must dialogue with the 2030 Agenda action strategy and consider it as an opportunity to face historical inequalities. To that effect, local governments play an essential role in the adaptation of national targets and indicators to the local reality, with actions that take into account SDGs targets in their planning and budgeting, including civil society participation and engagement. 
Through the lessons learned from the Millennium Agenda, in addition to the Brazilian Governmentis planning instruments, one intends to stimulate the creation of local governance structures, which will lead the process of localizing the 2030 Agenda in the territories.
The localization strategy will include the integration and mobilization of different civil society actors, engagement of subnational governments, recognition and appreciation of good practices, and the follow-up of targets. Thus, the localization of the 2030 Agenda in the territories comprises the following proposals:


     TRAINING  PUBLIC MANAGERS 
Figure 2: Proposals for localization of SDG
Some tools by initiative of the government and civil society will support the planning and the dissemination of the SDGs in the localization process, among which the following are highlighted:
\0xEF DialogaBrasil n a digital participation platform where citizens can make suggestions to assist in the debate and formulation of Federal Government public policies including those to reach SDGs targets. http://dialoga.gov.br/ .
\0xEF Participa.br Portal -a social media instrument providing participation tools for citizens, networks, social movements and organizations, enabling dialogue among governmental bodies and society, through public consultations, debates, conferences and online events. http://www.participa.br/.
\0xEF SDGs Strategy - an electronic website bringing together organizations representing civil society, the private sector, local governments and academia, with the aim of broadening and enhancing the debate on SDGs and mobilizing, discussing and proposing means of implementation for the 2030 Agenda. http://www.estrategiaods.org.br/ .
\0xEF The 2030 Agenda Platform na platform structured into three axes: 
i) information - presenting the process of developing the follow-up agenda for the SDGs and their targets, as well as providing publications and contents on the 2030 Agenda in Brazil; ii) monitoring and review- which provides information on the monitoring indicators and will present graphs and database with SDGs outcomes in the federated entities; iii) participation - whose main target audience comprises users and institutions wishing to follow up discussions and advances regarding the SDGs. http://www.agenda2030.com.br/.
\0xEF Map of Civil Society Organizations -a georeferenced platform with data on civil society organizations, allowing for the dissemination of the 2030 Agenda, as well as follow-up of activities carried out by these organizations and their relation with the respective SDGs targets. http://mapaosc.ipea.gov.br/.
\0xEF Municipal Vulnerability Atlas -a platform comprising the Social Vulnerability Index (IVS), based on indicators of the Human Development Atlas1. Organized in three dimensions - Urban Infrastructure, Human Capital, and Income and Labor - the Social Vulnerability Index allows mapping out exclusion and social vulnerability in 5,565 Municipalities and in Human Development Units of the main metropolitan regions of the Country. This tool assists Municipalities to assess and plan actions focused on local  http:// ivs.ipea.gov.br/ivs/.
Because they are a complex planning and management model, in addition to the challenge of wide dissemination, the SDGs need to reach several stakeholders. To that effect, in order to democratize the 2030 Agenda and align internalization and localization strategies, wide communication is essential, involving all of Brazilian society. Mobilization for this purpose must start from the interaction and partnerships between civil society and governments, especially sub-national governments. 



The 2030 Agenda should be seen as integrated to national development strategies. In this regard, it represents an opportunity for the Brazilian Government to strengthen priorities and optimize strategies towards actions and public policies that promote an inclusive and sustainable development model.
The Multi-Year Plan (Plano Plurianual - PPA) is the main instrument for medium-term planning of government actions. Provided for in the 1988 Federal Constitution, the PPA is composed of programs, goals, targets and initiatives (attributes) and includes public administration guidelines for a four-year period. 
The first step in the phase of internalization of the 2030 Agenda was to check the correspondence of SDGs targets with the attributes established by the 2016-2019 PPA, in a mapping out exercise carried out in the second 
half of 2016. The correspondence of SDG targets and indicators with PPA attributes aims to identify the congruence between the Goals declared by the 2030 Agenda and the Federal Government planning instrument, linking the medium-term vision of government action with the expectation of implementing the commitments contained in the SDGs.
For the accomplishment of the study, a database was developed allowing to relate each of the SDGs targets and indicators to one or more attributes of the 2016-2019 PPA, providing the systemic and cross-cutting vision required to coordinate the efforts towards the achievement of the targets (Figure 3).

	SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS	MULTI-YEAR PLAN
SDG GOALS = 17

PPA PROGRAMS = 54
SDG TARGETS = 169

PPA GOALS= 303
SDG INDICATORS = 241

PPA TARGETS = 1,132 
PPA INITIATIVES = 3,094
Figure 3: Composition of the 2030 Agenda and the 2016-2019 Multi-Year Plan
Based on this initiative, it will be possible to monitor the attributes of the 2016-2019 PPA as related to the 2030 Agenda, through the Integrated System for Budget and Planning, allowing the generation of data, analyses, and management reports regarding Federal Government efforts to achieve the SDGs. 
Graphs 1, 2 and 3 show that the public policies in the 2016-2019 PPA cover a large part of the targets and indicators proposed by the 2030 Agenda. In this first survey, one can observe that 86% of the targets and 78% of the indicators of the SDGs show convergence of purpose with the attributes of the current PPA.
GRAPHS 1 AND 2: Convergence between SDGs targets and 2016-2019 PPA attributes

	SDG TARGETS	SDG INDICATORS
	86% CORRESPONDENCE	78% CORRESPONDENCE

Source: SEPLAN / Ministry of Planning, Development and Management, 2016

GRAPH 3: Number of 2016-2019 PPA attributes related to SDG

Source: SEPLAN / Ministry of Planning, Development and Management, 2016
The study also revealed the correspondence of the number of PPA attributes with each ministry in charge of the implementation of public policies that will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs. One can observe that one agency can be related to different targets of the 2030 Agenda, that is, different Federal Government agencies may contribute to the achievement of one same target. This reinforces the importance of inter-ministerial integration and liaison in the realization of initiatives that rationalize the use of budgetary resources and confer greater effectiveness to the execution of public policies aimed at the 2030 Agenda.

As the main institutional mechanism for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, Brazil created the National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals, through Decree No. 8,892, of October 27th, 2016. The National Commission for the SDGs is a parity collegiate body, of an advisory nature, responsible for conducting the process of integration, engagement and dialogue with federate entities and civil society, aiming to internalize, disseminate and confer transparency to the 2030 Agenda.
It is the responsibility of the National Commission for the SDGs:
\0xEF Prepare an action plan for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
\0xEF Propose strategies, instruments, actions and programs for the implementation of the SDGs;
\0xEF Follow-up and monitor the development of the SDGs and prepare regular reports; 
\0xEF Prepare inputs for discussions on sustainable development in national and international fora; 
\0xEF Identify, systematize and disseminate good practices and initiatives that contribute to the achievement of the SDGs; and
\0xEF Promote integration with public entities and agencies of the Federate Units, for SDGs dissemination and implementation at the state, district and municipal levels.  
The National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals is composed of 16 representatives from Federal, State, District and Municipal governments and civil society. In order to compose the first mandate of the National Commission for the SDGs, groups of entities were selected with significant representation capacity in their respective segments:
\0xEF Production sector: 27 State Federations of Industries, and 536 companies represented by the National Confederation of Industry (CNI) and by the Ethos Institute for Business and Social Responsibility (ETHOS);
\0xEF Third sector: 2,294 entities represented by the Abrinq Foundation for the Rights of Children and Adolescents (ABRINQ Foundation), Brazilian Society for the Advancement of Science (SBPC), General Workers Union (UGT), World Vision, and National Council for Extractivist Populations (CNS);
\0xEF Academic community: 67 federal higher education institutions represented by the National Association of Directors of Federal Higher Education Institutions (ANDIFES);
\0xEF Municipal Governments: 4,972 Municipalities, represented by the National Confederation of Municipalities (CNM); and
\0xEF State and District Governments: 27 State environment secretariats and 21 state environmental entities part of the Brazilian Association of State Environmental Entities (ABEMA).
The Federal Government is represented by the Secretariat of Government of the Presidency of the Republic (SEGOV); Office of the Chief of Staff of the Presidency of the Republic (Casa Civil); Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE); Ministry of Social Development (MDS); Ministry of Planning, Development and Management (MPDG); and Ministry of Environment (MMA).  In addition, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) participate as permanent technical advisory bodies.
It is important to point out that other governmental and civil society actors may participate as collaborators in the National Commission, especially through the Thematic Chambers. With the purpose of elaborating studies and proposals for SDG implementation, the Thematic Chambers will expand the participation and representation of the National Commission. 


Figure 4: Composition of the National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals
The National Commission will be, above all, an institutionalized space of exchange and cooperation among government bodies and segments of civil society for the convergence of activities that foster the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and targets in the country.

6.1. Civil Society Initiatives
Organized civil society has played an important role in the achievement of MDGs targets and continues to participate in the process of transition to the Post-2015 Agenda. Since the launching of the 2030 Agenda, several fora and networks of organizations have engaged in including the SDGs in their respective agendas through different lines of action, implementing projects and initiatives for localizing the SDGs.
To contribute to this Voluntary National Review on the SDGs, the Brazilian government made available an electronic form to collect information on the initiatives developed by civil society. Several actors with experience on engagement and awareness-raising to support the 2030 Agenda were invited to submit information, which provided inputs to the development of this section2. The dissemination of such initiatives will facilitate the identification and exchange of good practices, which can be replicated or scaled up by other civil society and government actors.
In order to mobilize and engage the Brazilian society to follow up and work towards the SDGs implementation in Brazil, networks have been created in the form of coalitions of organizations of civil society, private sector, governments and academia. These networks are intended to broaden, democratize and enhance the debate on the SDGs in Brazil and to mobilize, discuss and propose effective means of implementation for the 2030 Agenda in the country. To that effect, they work for political coordination, knowledge production and dissemination, strengthening of network members and strategic partnerships, qualification of social actors aiming at the dissemination of collaborative actions, construction of a convergent agenda, and the insertion of the 2030 Agenda in social participation spaces.
Among the main networks, fora, movements and coalitions focused on the 2030 Agenda, the following should be pointed out: Civil Society Working Group for the 2030 Agenda, SDGs Strategy, SDGs Brazil Network, and the N\0xDBs Podemos (We Can) National SDGs Movement, organized at both national and subnational levels. There are also coalitions and networks created for specific SDGs audiences and issues, such as Ciranda 2030 (aimed at targets with direct impact on the lives of children and adolescents); The SDSN-Amaz\0xD9nia Network (promoting exchange and collaboration for the sustainable development of Continental Amazon); and SDSN Brasil (working especially on sustainable development issues in cities).
It is worth mentioning some dissemination and social engagement projects entailing innovative initiatives aligned with the 2030 Agenda, such as the SDGs Lab (a laboratory dedicated to solving public problems, with multi-actor arrangements, for the coproduction of solutions, alternatives and partnerships to overcome the challenges involved in the implementation of SDGs in Brazil), The Big Hackathon Campus Party and Hackathon Global UN Influx (for the development of technological solutions and promotion of entrepreneurship), as well as the SDGs Music Project (for mobilization and engagement of the artistic and cultural sector with emphasis on outskirts and vulnerable areas).
In addition to the fundamental role of mobilization and coordination, Brazilian civil society organizations are also in charge of the implementation of several actions with impact on the social dimension of the SDGs, working on thematic areas such as reducing gender, race and ethnicity inequalities; promotion of human rights; safeguarding the rights of traditional peoples and communities; the rights of children and adolescents, youth and the elderly; fighting violence and sexual exploitation against children and adolescents; eradication of child labor; visibility and elimination of child marriage; promotion of the rights of girls and women, rights of persons with disabilities, migrant rights, sexual and reproductive rights; food and nutrition security, transparency, and access to information, among others.
With the participation of communities and rights-holders, using participatory planning, Brazilian civil society implements projects in the areas of education, social and professional qualification, popular culture, sports, arts and citizenship, income generation, culture of peace, insertion of people in vulnerable situations into the formal labor market, and citizenship education. In the area of health, civil society involves local health councils to foster integrative and complementary health practices, especially cancer prevention projects, to provide support and assistance to people with HIV/AIDS and drug addiction, and to contain new communicable diseases (Zika and Chikungunya).
Civil society also carries out projects for the conservation and restoration of Permanent Preservation Areas, reforestation, development and dissemination of social and environmental technologies for access to potable water in isolated regions, estimation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, preservation of protected areas remaining from the Atlantic Forest, management of water resources to increase the quantity and quality of water, construction of domestic sewage treatment systems, and other soil and water conservation practices.

In the area of solid waste management, civil society initiatives encourage selective waste collection and conscious consumption, diversification of business models involving recyclable waste collectors, and assist in the creation of innovative solutions for social-environmental challenges. They also play a key role in integrated actions of education on sustainability-focused environment, valuing community actions and seeking to stimulate small individual habits and organizational initiatives that contribute to major social-environmental transformations. 
In the economic dimension of sustainable development, non-profit organizations and cooperatives stand out with initiatives for solidarity economy, incentives to entrepreneurship (especially for young people, women, and migrants), social inclusion and income generation for recyclable material collectors and their families, promotion of decent work and fostering family farming.
The business sector has also been engaged in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, seeking to expand the culture of corporate sustainability, disseminate knowledge, and promoting campaigns among companies to join the Brazil Network of the Global Compact (currently the 4th largest local network in the world and the largest in the Americas, with over 700 signatories). Companies have carried out lectures and events for mobilization, awareness-raising, and alignment of corporate social responsibility actions with the Sustainable Development Goals. As guidance for the sector, publications were produced such as the \0xECGuide for Implementation of SDGs by Companies3 and the study \0xECIntegrating Sustainable Development Goals into the Business Strategy4.
In addition, civil society contributes to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the local level. Advocacy and mobilization actions during the 2016 municipal elections led to the commitment of several elected mayors to the implementation of the plan of targets and inclusion of the SDGs in their government programs. There are also several actions focused on stimulating sustainable cities, such as working with communities in the revitalization of neighborhoods, networks of solutions for urban development, and the development and dissemination of the Localization Manual for SDG 11 in Brazilian metropolitan areas.
In this line of initiatives, one highlights the Sustainable Cities Program, aiming to raise awareness, mobilize and provide tools for Brazilian cities to develop in an economically, socially and environmentally sustainable manner. The program offers public managers an agenda structured into 12 thematic axes, accompanied by a set of indicators and a database of good practices. Between 2012 and 2016, 285 Brazilian Municipalities, accounting for 33% of the national population, joined the Sustainable Cities Program. As of 2015, the initiative emphasized SDGs targets that can be adopted at the municipal and regional levels, precisely those on which Municipalities play a central role.
6.2. Initiatives by Subnational Governments 
In 2017, 5,570 Brazilian Municipalities are preparing their multi-year planning for the 2018-2021 period. In this context, there are initiatives by the largest municipal organizations in Brazil concentrating efforts to align the planning instruments of local governments with Sustainable Development Goals and targets. 
In the mobilization for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, initiatives of some municipal entities should be underscored, among them the National Mayors Front (FNP)5, which has been adopting, since Rio+20, sustainable development as a central theme in its national meetings, providing training and engaging mayors in the planning of initiatives and public policies that contribute to this end. The biennial Meeting of Municipalities with Sustainable Development (EMDS) aims to mobilize public managers of the three levels of government to include the theme of sustainability in their government programs and create propositions for local sustainable development. 
Topics such as increasing opportunities for small businesses, public management allied to entrepreneurship, urban environmental quality, productive inclusion, eradication of poverty and issues related to urban mobility were some of the agendas discussed at the Meeting. In its fourth edition, held from April 24th to 28th, 2017, in Bras\0xCClia-DF, the theme debated was \0xECReinventing Financing and the Governance of Cities. 
Another outstanding initiative, held in 2016, was the launch of the \0xECGuide for Localization of SDGs in Brazilian Municipalities - What Municipal Managers Need to Know6 by the National Confederation of Municipalities (CNM)7. The publication addresses the importance of the 2030 Agenda for local management, as well as the relationship between the Goals and municipal competences.
The action aims to strengthen the role of the Municipal Governments in the materialization of the Agenda, from the prioritization of Goals and targets to the identification of means of implementation and indicators to monitor progress. To that effect, in 2016, regional seminars were held for newly elected municipal managers, providing training and raising awareness regarding the incorporation of the 2030 Agenda into their future administration.
The National Confederation of Municipalities also made available to Municipalities the \0xECGuide for Incorporation of SDGs into Municipal Multi-Year Plans for the period 2018-20218, providing guidance on incorporating the 2030 Agenda into the development of the next multi-year planning. In addition to the initiatives for inclusion of the SDGs Agenda in the municipal PPA, the Confederation will provide mayors with the tool \0xECMunicipal Performance Mandala for the follow-up of results in relation to the established targets.
Other municipal associations, such as the Brazilian Association of Municipalities (ABM)9, chose Municipalities with a Human Development Index (HDI) below the national average (0.754) to concentrate their capacity-building activities for managers to formulate sustainable development policies and implement the 2030 Agenda. 
It is worth mentioning that some municipal governments adopted the insertion of the 2030 Agenda into government planning instruments. An example is the municipality of Barcarena, in the State of Par\0xB7, which revised its Master Plan for Urban Development based on the SDGs and institutionalized it through Municipal Complementary Law No. 49, dated October 17th, 2016 and Decree No. 436 of 2017-GPMB, dated February 8th, 2017.
Among State Governments there is mobilization in favor of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, especially in the Federal District, Paran\0xB7 and S\0x201Eo Paulo, with the creation of working groups to coordinate the integration of public action in SDGs implementation and inclusion in their respective plans. 
Other states, such as Bahia, already include several SDG targets in the Multi-Year Plan, especially regarding hunger eradication, improvement of education, and social development. The State of Para\0xCCba includes among its actions in support of the SDG Agenda a Pact for Learning, aimed at improving social indicators in the Municipalities of the State. Rio de Janeiro, in turn, instituted the Award for Partners of the Sustainable Development Goals, aimed at conferring recognition to the work of institutions and individuals contributing to the fulfillment of the SDG. 
The dissemination of these initiatives contributes to the promotion of other practices that support, mobilize and encourage State Governments and Brazilian Municipalities as catalysts for dialogue in their territories and in aligning 2030 Agenda Goals and targets with local government programs.
6.3. Legislative Branch Initiatives 
The Brazilian National Congress has been dedicating efforts to assist in the adoption of the SDGs in Brazil, and, in December 2016, created the Joint Parliamentary Front to Support the UN Sustainable Development Goals. This nonpartisan action brings together more than 200 house representatives and senators, equivalent to a third of the parliamentarians, and was structured to address the demands arising from this theme. Among other objectives, the Front aims to maintain and consolidate joint action in favor of SDGs focused policies, foster the regulation and discussion of laws to encourage sustainable development. 
Working with the Commission on Environment and Sustainable Development of the House of Representatives, the Joint Parliamentary Front promoted the Seminar \0xECTransforming our World - the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Held at the end of 2016, the sustainable development event brought together representatives of the three levels of government and civil society to discuss the 2030 Agenda: principles, goals, targets, transparency, governance and means for their implementation, among others. 
Aware that the SDGs express the new global commitment, the National Congress signals the understanding that the possible way forward for the planet requires the inclusion of sustainable development in the core of the agendas of signatory countries. Thus, the Brazilian Federal Legislative has much to contribute to the 2030 Agenda. 
6.4. External Control Institution Initiatives
The Brazilian Federal Court of Accounts (TCU), as an external control institution and being the Brazilian Supreme Audit Institution (SAI), has the potential to contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
If the monitoring of the 2030 Agenda is being structured around global indicators, with standardized calculation methods that allow data comparability and consolidation, the follow-up of this process by control entities should also follow this very direction. Hence, it becomes necessary to develop methods and tools that allow for standardization of evaluations and the communication of their results. To that effect, the TCU created the SDGs Project, whose initiatives include audits of the preparation of the Government for SDGs implementation, the development of methods and instruments for this purpose, and the provision of training on the subject.
One of these initiatives was the Pilot Audit of Preparation on SDGs, conducted by the Court between 2016 and 2017 in order to evaluate how the Brazilian Federal Government is preparing to implement the 2030 Agenda. The aspects evaluated include the processes of institutionalization and internalization of the agenda by the Government, the alignment of the national strategy with the SDGs, and the monitoring, evaluation and transparency of results concerning these goals.
In this pilot audit, a diagnosis was carried out of the coordination and alignment of Brazilian public policies related to target 2.4, which addresses sustainable food production systems. To that effect, not only policies directly linked to the achievement of this target were analyzed, but also other governmental actions with potential to impact its accomplishment, such as tax exemption policies on pesticides.
In addition, the Brazilian federal external control institution participated in an initiative led by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) for the production of the Guidance on Auditing Preparedness for Implementation of SDGs. The TCU also developed a training course on the role of SAI in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. This course was offered in the first half of 2017 to Latin American countries and addressed topics such as public governance focused on SDGs and the preparedness audit.
These actions support the Coordinated Audit in SDGs in Latin America, held in 2017, within the framework of the Organization of Latin American and Caribbean Supreme Audit Institutions (OLACEFS), with the participation of 12 countries. This audit is coordinated by the Brazilian federal external control institution and is intended to support national governments in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, focusing on SDGs target 2.4. This work is intended to produce a diagnosis on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Latin American countries.
Therefore, through partnerships, cooperative efforts, and the use of standardized control tools, one expects to enable the identification of similar problems that affect a number of governments and often have common causes and consequences. Thus, the TCU hopes to contribute to the Global Agenda, fostering a culture of long-term planning and integrated government action, which will allow the effectiveness of public policies and promotion of sustainable development.



BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 	BACK TO THE TABLE OF CONTENTS 

7.1. Brazilis work on building global and regional indicators 
Brazil, through the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), participates in the two global groups established by the 46th Session of the United Nations Statistical Commission, whose objective is the construction of global indicators for monitoring the 2030 Agenda. 
In the Interagency Expert Group on Sustainable Development Indicators (IAEG-SDGs), Brazil represents Mercosur countries (Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela) and Chile, aiming to develop and propose a framework of global indicators for the follow-up of the 2030 Agenda; provide technical support for the implementation of the approved framework of indicators; review regularly methodological innovations and issues related to indicators and their metadata; report the progress of Goals and targets at the global level, based on global and regional aggregates. Brazil also participates in the three subgroups created under the IAEG-SDGs, which address: the standard of data documentation - SDMX, integration of statistical and geospatial information, and interlinkages between targets and indicators.
At the High-Level Group for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity Building for Statistics (HLG-PCCB), Brazil participates as an ex-officio member, since the IBGE currently chairs the United Nations Statistical Commission. At these meetings it collaborated in the development of the Cape Town Global Plan of Action for Sustainable Development, presented during the first United Nations World Data Forum in South Africa, January 15th-18th, 2017.
At the regional level, Brazil participates in the Statistical Coordination Group for the 2030 Agenda in Latin America and the Caribbean, whose objective is to coordinate the process of developing and implementing the SDGs monitoring indicators and to foster the construction of the necessary statistical capacity in the region.
The group is composed of representatives of national statistical institutes of the IAEG-SDG member countries and those belonging to the HLG-PCCB, maintaining the sub-regional representation scheme. It addresses issues related to the promotion of coordination of initiatives for development and strengthening of statistical capacity and technical assistance at the global, regional and subregional levels. 
7.2. National indicators
The IBGE, shortly after appointment to the IAEG-SDGs, held the Meeting of Producers aiming at the Post-2015 Development Agenda, from June 29th to July 1st, 2015, attended by around 350 people, including representatives of information production institutions of the Federal Government and of United Nations agencies in Brazil, as well as several professionals involved in the national debate of themes related to the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The purpose of the meeting was to initiate the discussion on the indicators for SDGs follow-up. The initial proposal for global indicators was discussed in 17 roundtables (one for each Goal). This event brought about a channel of interinstitutional consultations that have substantiated Brazilian positions in the international debate. 
Since then, the Brazilian government has been working to build sound technical backing, not only to guide the discussion on global indicators, but also to prepare subsidies for the discussion on the definition of national indicators.
Another outstanding initiative was the 3rd National Conference of Producers and Users of Statistical, Geographical and Environmental Information (INFOPLAN), from December 5th to 9th, 2016, with 111 roundtables, 10 plenary sessions, and 29 lectures, attended by over 1,800 people and about 210 institutions. 
The event brought to discussion topics related to: strategic issues for the National System of Official Information; social, economic and environmental statistics and information (food and nutrition security; justice and security; statistics on agriculture, livestock, and forestry production; energy; living conditions, poverty and inequality; tourism; environmental economic accounts; natural resources, ecosystems, land cover and use; climate change); references and representation of territories; organization and analysis of territories; methods and classifications, among others. 
In addition, relevant issues were addressed for the definition of indicators for SDGs follow-up, such as information sharing and access to administrative records, integration of geospatial and statistical information, big data, interconnection and pooling of data sources, technological resources and information security, and communication and dissemination.
Brazil began the evaluation of the adequacy of its databases to estimate the availability of indicators to monitor the SDGs. A preliminary IBGE study, conducted in the first quarter of 2016, identified the following situation in Brazil as regards the 241 global indicators: 
\0xEF 105 indicators (Tier I) - have a defined methodology and information sources;
\0xEF 39 indicators (Tier II) - have some kind of information, however, they need methodological improvement;
\0xEF 68 indicators (Tier III) - have no calculation methodology or data available; and
\0xEF 29 indicators - under analysis based on the classification process adopted by the UNSC.10
GRAPH 4: Classification of the availability of Brazilian indicators by the TIER methodology
\0xAA Tier I
\0xAA Tier II
\0xAA Tier III
\0xAA Under review 
Source: IBGE, 2017
To advance the definition of national indicators and their methodologies, the information-producing bodies have met in 17 thematic groups, each associated with a specific SDG, replicating the method used in the discussion of the proposal for global indicators. In addition, these groups have the role of liaising among the various producers and stakeholders involved with the sustainable development theme.



Focusing on SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17, the theme proposed for the session of the United Nations High-Level Political Forum of 2017, \0xECEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a Changing World, brings in its core the three crucial issues for the SDG: poverty, prosperity and transformation. 
Eradicating poverty
At the United Nations Summit for the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda, countries have made the broad commitment to end poverty in all its forms, including the eradication of extreme poverty, by 2030. This is how the first aspect of the central theme of the 2017 Forum session - Eradicating poverty - represents an opportunity to rethink the relation of poverty, in its many aspects, to the current global development model, which excludes millions of people from prosperity.
Promoting Prosperity
The second aspect of the theme of the 2017 Forum Session - Promoting prosperity - refers to the need to share human development with all. For the 2030 Agenda, achieving prosperity is to ensure that all human beings have access to the results of economic development, and that they can benefit from a prosperous and fulfilling life. This necessarily requires sharing the innovations of the different fields of knowledge, infrastructure, basic sanitation, health, education, communication, among others. 
In a Changing World
A changing world means to start the implementation of a different development model, in which the use of technology considers climate change, respects biodiversity and promotes resilient systems. It is a call for all countries and individuals to immediately begin to change the form and paths of the development policies in force, and the patterns of production and consumption, in such a way that they do not compromise the lives of future generations.
Brazilian Context and Challenges
The recent economic crisis faced by Brazil has raised the fear of regression as regards the social advancements achieved in the last decades. At present, there is no way of thinking of resuming economic growth - and hence the growth of employment and household income - without a structural change in the fiscal regime. The question that emerges, therefore, is how to make the public sector more efficient so as to ensure the continuity of public policies to eradicate poverty and improve health care and education for the population. It is believed that such improvements could increase the growth potential of our economy and reduce income inequality in a structural manner.
Through Constitutional Amendment No.95, dated 2016, the Brazilian government outlined as the main strategy to deal with the fiscal crisis the control of expenditures by freezing the real value of primary expenses - which will imply a strong reversal in the growth trend of these expenditures as compared to the last decades, while maintaining the constitutional floors for health and education spending.
In addition, investments in infrastructure will be an important growth factor for the coming years and have relevant positive externalities to the rest of the economy. To that effect, the Brazilian government is working on an agenda of careful regulatory changes, which is essential to re-attract investors for long-maturing projects and therefore should be considered a priority for the growth of the countryis economy and development.
In the discussions about development strategies, the interconnections between poverty and the environment are evident. On the one hand, poverty can be one of the main drivers of environmental devastation. On the other hand, high income and consumption tend to lead to the degradation of natural resources. Poverty can be aggravated by environmental problems, such as deforestation, air pollution and water contamination, among others. These problems affect both rich and poor. It is in this sense that the management of natural resources is not only essential, but also indicates it is possible to combine environmental conservation with job and income generation. 

END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE
Brazilis fight against poverty has made significant progress, having surpassed the target established by the Millennium Development Goals to halve extreme poverty. However, as a result of the recent economic crisis, poverty and extreme poverty rates rose again in 2015, as compared to 2014, with the percentage of poor people in Brazil fluctuating from 6.5% to 7.8% in the period, while the extremely poor went from 2.6% of the population to around 4.0%. Recent measures taken to overcome the crisis, together with the social protection measures underway, will help return the fight against poverty to priority level in the national development strategy.
To contribute to the achievement of the targets proposed under SDG 1, the National Policy for Social Assistance (PNAS), implemented through the Unified Social Assistance System (SUAS), organizes the provision of social assistance benefits, services, programs and projects nationwide aimed at reducing poverty and improving the living conditions of the most vulnerable population.
Social assistance services are structured according to the complexity of situations at two levels: Basic Social Protection and Special Social Protection. The purpose of Basic Social Protection is to prevent risk situations in families in situation of social vulnerability. Special Social Protection is aimed at individuals and families in situations of personal or social risk of threat or violation of rights, such as physical or psychological violence, abandonment and neglect; sexual abuse or exploitation; removal from family life due to the application of protective measures; street and begging situations; child labor; discrimination based on sexual orientation or race / ethnicity.
In the field of basic income guarantee, improvements were made in the management and targeting of the Continuous Cash Benefit (BPC) and the Bolsa Fam\0xCClia Program (PBF n Family Grant Program). In Brazil, the Continuous Cash Benefit is a constitutional right for the provision of a monthly income for the elderly and people with disabilities living in extreme poverty (per capita household income of less than  of the minimum wage). In the second half of 2016, rules were adopted to increase efficiency and improve governance of this benefit, such as compulsory registration in the Single Registry for Social Programs of the Federal 
BOX 1 \0xAA Early Childhood Development Policies
In October 2016 a new initiative nthe Another relevant initiative was the Happy Children Program - was esta- creation of the Cross-sector Commitblished and included in the institutio- tee on Public Policies for Early Chilnal arrangement of the National Poli- dhood, in March 2017. It aims to coorcy for Social Assistance. The Program dinate the actions for protection and seeks to promote comprehensive promotion of rights of children in eardevelopment of children in early chil- ly childhood. The Committee is made dhood, considering their family and up of representatives of civil society contexts. The strategy aims to stop appointed by different National Couthe vicious circle in which malnutrition ncils such as the Councils for the Riand poverty affect early childhood ghts of Children and Adolescents, Heand jeopardize the future of genera- alth, Social Assistance, Education and tions, limiting the opportunities of a Cultural Policy, as well as represenlarge share of the population. tatives from the Ministries of Social Development, Human Rights, Health, 
Education, Culture, and Planning, De-
Among the objectives of the Happy velopment and Management.
Children Program, one points out the following: fostering the development of 0 to 6 year-olds and the streng- One should also highlight the sancthening of family and community tioning of Law No. 13,431, dated 2017, ties; qualification of care in the ser- which organizes the system for safevices of prioritization of foster care guarding the rights of children and for children removed from family life; adolescents victims or witnesses of and the development of training and violence. The new legal framework continuing education actions that ad- creates mechanisms to prevent and dress care and attention to pregnant curb violence, and establishes assiswomen, children in early childhood, tance and protection measures for and their families. So far, 2,547 Mu- children and adolescents in situations nicipalities have joined the Program, of violence. which aims to follow up about four million children by the end of 2018.
Government and biennial review of benefits. In the two following years, 2.7 million people will be enrolled in the Single Registry, amounting to approximately 60% of the beneficiaries; together with the regular review, which has not been carried out since 2008, these measures will have an impact of around R$ 2.2 billion (US$ 690.43 million11) in 2017, resulting from the cancellation of undue benefits. 
The Bolsa Fam\0xCClia Program, in turn, complements the income of poor and extremely poor families, especially those with children and adolescents. The benefit is conditional to compliance with health and education requirements consisting of school attendance, vaccination of children, and prenatal care visits by pregnant women. In June 2016, benefit values were adjusted by 12.5% and the poverty and extreme poverty lines were changed to R$ 170.00 (US$ 53.35) and R$ 85.00 (US$ 53.35), respectively. In December 2016, the Bolsa Fam\0xCClia Program provided an average benefit of R$ 181.15 (US$ 56.85) to about 13.6 million families (24% of the Brazilian population). 
Programs aimed at improving housing conditions for the most vulnerable population also promote SDG 1. The Home Renovation Card Program, for example, grants subsidies for the purchase of building materials and technical assistance of civil construction professionals to beneficiary families, enabling renovation, expansion or conclusion of housing units. An initial investment of R$ 1 billion (US$ 313.83 million), covering 170 thousand people, is expected for 2017. It is worth noting that the program assists families not included in the Minha Casa Minha Vida Program (housing program), which has ordered over 4.5 million housing units and delivered more than 3.2 million units, benefiting approximately 13 million people by December 31st, 2016. The investments, in the order of R$ 332 billion (US$ 104 billion), have a strong impact on the countryis economy in terms of income generation and direct and indirect jobs. In 2017, the goal is to order 600 thousand units. In addition, we highlight the establishment of the National Rural Housing Program, targeted at family farmers and rural workers.
In addition to these initiatives, the National Policy on Risk Management and Disaster Response (PNPDC) and the Risk and Disaster Management Program of the 2016-2019 PPA contribute to the achievement of SDG 1, especially as regards target 1.5, i.e., by 2030 build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations, and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters.
Considering the strategic nature of land regularization for urban and rural development and for the realization of the constitutional right to housing, the Federal Government issued Provisional Measure No. 759, of 2016, regulating Rural and Urban Land Regularization. With the objective of recognizing informal occupations and guaranteeing property to families in vulnerable conditions, the regulation favors access to public services, such as sanitation and infrastructure, as well as credit, increasing their consumption and investment possibilities. In the case of rural land regularization, the Federal Government aims to deliver 250,000 land titles to beneficiaries of the National Agrarian Reform Program by 2018.
END HUNGER, ACHIEVE 
FOOD SECURITY AND 
IMPROVED NUTRITION AND 
PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
A set of Brazilian public policies is focused on combating hunger and food insecurity, ranging from social protection policies - especially income transfer programs - to specific policies to foment agricultural production, through credit provision and public programs for procuring the production of family farming. The SDG 2 represents an additional challenge to the MDG target of reducing hunger by half, achieved by Brazil.
Poverty in Brazil has markedly rural traits. The reduced access to land and income by small farmers is historically associated to the land concentration prevalent in the country; to very low rates of labor formalization in the field; and to the scarcity of public services in rural areas. Policies aimed at small rural productive units - over 4 million establishments countrywide - have built strategies for overcoming poverty, essentially based on productive inclusion actions, combining social protection and promotion, as well as Rural Land Regularization mentioned in the SDG 1. 
The Program for Food Acquisition from Family Agriculture Production (PAA) purchases products from family farming, remunerating food producers that supply social and welfare entities. The purposes of the program are linked to compliance with several SDGs, insofar as it: i) fosters family farming, promoting its economic and social inclusion and boosting sustainable production, food processing and industrialization, as well as income generation; ii) fosters the consumption and appreciation of food produced by family farming; iii) promotes access to food for people in situations of food and nutritional insecurity in the required quantity, quality and regularity; iv) generates public food stocks produced by family farmers, and v) foments cooperatives and associations.
So far, the PAA has acquired food from 75,500 family farmers and distributed it free of charge to 14,100 entities (food banks, subsidized restaurants, community kitchens, education, health and justice units, among others). In order to expand the purchase of family farming products and to make effective improvements as regards their economic conditions, the Federal Government has also fomented government procurement actions by public agencies, and intends to allocate R$ 2.5 billion (US$ 784.58 million) by 2019. 
One should also mention the National School Meal Program (PNAE), which allocates 30% of the funds for purchases from family farmers for the provision of meals to more than 40 million students in basic education, in addition to stimulating healthy nutritional habits.
In the area of agricultural production, it is worth mentioning the Harvest Guarantee program, which benefits especially the rural population of the Brazilian semi-arid region through public insurance against the risk of loss of agricultural production. The program had the adhesion of 991,853 family farmers from 1,220 Municipalities in the 2015/2016 harvest. Due to the drought, 508,405 family farmers with proven loss of production have already begun to receive payment from the Harvest Guarantee, equivalent R$ 850.00 (US$ 266.76).
In 2016, the II National Plan for Agroecology and Organic Production (PLANAPO) was launched to strengthen agroecological and organic production, expand the supply and consumption of healthy foods, support sustainable use of natural resources, and disseminate knowledge in agroecology. 
ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES 
AND PROMOTE WELLBEING FOR ALL AT ALL AGES
The Unified Health System (SUS) is essential to provide health care and promote the well-being of all Brazilians. Currently, over 70% of the population depends almost exclusively on the public health service to receive medical care. This structure has contributed to the achievement of the target of reducing child mortality and combating HIV/ AIDS, malaria and other diseases under the MDGs.
The Unified Health System provides access to health goods and services at all levels of care: provides approximately 95% of basic healthcare; funds almost 70% of hospitalizations in the country; is the primary responsible for urgent and emergency care; is in charge of almost all public health services (e.g. vaccination); provides coverage for high-complexity, high-cost treatments, such as antiretroviral therapy for HIV and transplants, among others. 
The Family Health Strategy (ESF) integrates actions of basic health prevention and promotion through multiprofessional teams (physicians, nurses, nursing auxiliaries or technicians, and community health agents), who work in defined geographical areas and their populations. The Family Health Strategy covers more than 60% of the population and is present mainly in less affluent locations (more than 85% of registered households have monthly household per capita incomes of up to 2 minimum salaries). The prospect is to expand Family Health Teams to as many as 43 thousand in 2017, and 46 thousand in 2019.
In order to expand access to basic services and allocate physicians in the outskirts of major cities, inland and in isolated regions, the More Doctors Program allocated 18,240 physicians in 4,058 Municipalities and 34 Special Indigenous Health Districts, providing health coverage to 63 million Brazilians by 2016. The Governmentis priority is to make the country self-sufficient in the supply of physicians, expanding the participation of Brazilian professionals in the Program. The target is to replace 4 thousand physicians from partner countries by Brazilians in three years.
In the Brazilian population, some groups and regions still present high incidence of infectious diseases. Thus, Brazilian public health works to fight such diseases, especially through: i) the National Tuberculosis Control Program; ii) the National Malaria Prevention and Control Program and the National Surveillance Policy; and iii) the actions for Prevention and Control of HIV, AIDS and other Sexually Transmitted Infections and Viral Hepatitis.
These initiatives provide standardized diagnoses and treatments through the public health network and some localities are innovating by introducing active outreach of cases for the treatment of people with tuberculosis and malaria. In the fight against HIV/AIDS, the Unified Health System (SUS) works with prevention through education and awareness-raising campaigns and massive distribution of condoms, in addition to offering comprehensive medical care, emphasizing on guaranteed access to antiretroviral therapy (ART).
Throughout 2016, there has been an intensification of actions of mobilization and fight against the mosquito Aedes aegypti by means of the National Plan to Combat the Aedes. This Plan has three axes: i) mobilization and mosquito control; ii) care and assistance to people; and iii) technological development, education and research. 
Also noteworthy was the investment of R$ 119 million (US$ 37.35 million) for the purchase of 3.5 million rapid tests for the Zika virus in 2016, aimed at supplying the health network for 12 months. Produced by a Brazilian laboratory, the tests are targeted to pregnant women, children under one year of age, and people with symptoms of the disease. The tests allow to identify if the patient is or has ever been infected by the Zika virus. 
The promotion of well-being and healthy lives cannot be dissociated from the demands that arise from increased life expectancy of the population, and from risk factors such as obesity, sedentary lifestyles, and stress, which contribute to continuous increase in the incidence of diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. Under SUS, the Fitness Gymnasium program provides infrastructure, equipment and qualified professionals for physical activities, promotion of healthy eating, education in health and healthy lifestyles. In 2016, the Federal Government supported 635 Fitness Gymnasium hubs.
Other issues that require cross-sectoral interventions are those resulting from traffic violence. In addition to providing assistance to accident victims, the Life in Traffic Program aims to reduce accidents through educational campaigns, intervention in risk factors, and improvement of information systems on accidents, injuries and fatalities. In a complementary way, the Urban Mobility and Traffic Program contributes by supporting urban public transportation systems and promoting education campaigns for road safety and accident prevention.

ACHIEVE GENDER 
EQUALITY AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
In Brazil, women represent just over half of the population, but are underrepresented in jobs and positions of power. Even though they have greater schooling on average which enabled MDG 3 to be achieved in Brazil n they are still paid lower wages and face more obstacles to entering and remaining in the labor market.
Gender inequalities are interrelated to regional, class and racial/color inequalities, so that women in the poorest regions of the country, indigenous women, and black women also have less access to public services, to economic resources and political participation. In addition, domestic violence is still a serious problem, which is being addressed through legal measures and public policies. Therefore, the struggle against inequality is the struggle for the redistribution of economic, political, cultural and symbolic resources. Historically, women, especially the poorest, are those who have been left behind and kept away from accessing the gains and advancements achieved by humankind.
The program Policies for Women: promoting equality and fighting violence has been built on two main pillars: i) promoting equality, including economic autonomy, strengthening womenis participation in politics and in decision-making bodies and authorities; and ii) National Policy for Fighting All Forms of Violence against Women.
Among equality-promoting policies, the action Pro-Equity of Gender and Race aims to foster more equitable working relations in public and private enterprises, already covering 122 registered companies. 
It is also worth mentioning the Women and Science initiative, which in 2016 opened registrations for the 11th edition of the Building Gender Equality Award so as to increase the participation by girls, young women and women in scientific, technological and innovation areas.
In order to fight violence, it should be highlighted the adoption of important legislative measures such as the Maria da Penha Act and the Feminicide Act, as well as the inclusion of the principle of organization of specialized public assistance for women and victims of domestic violence in the Unified Health System by Law 13,427, dated March 30th, 2017.
In addition, training has been carried out for the organization and integration of assistance to victims of sexual violence by public security professionals and health professionals of the Unified Health System. The goal is to provide for a more humanized attention, so as to reduce the exposure of persons who suffered violence, as well as to improve evidence collection and production for perpetrators to be held accountable.
Another relevant initiative in support of victims of violence is the Womenis Assistance Center - Call 180 Hotline, a free and confidential public service. The Center receives reports of violence, complaints about services of the womenis service network, and provides guidance to women on their rights and current legislation. In 2016, the Call 180 Hotline dealt with more than 1 million calls. 
The Womenis Assistance Centers in border regions seek to expand care and support to migrant women in situations of violence; fight human trafficking and sexual exploitation; offer guidance about regularization of documents; provide psychosocial care; provide legal assistance, and make referrals to the Centeris services or to the network of specialized services. In addition, the Mobile Units n specially adapted buses and boats n expand the service to women living in rural, forest, quilombola and riverine communities in situations of violence.
BUILD RESILIENT 
INFRASTRUCTURE, 
PROMOTE INCLUSIVE 
AND SUSTAINABLE 
INDUSTRIALIZATION AND FOSTER INNOVATION
For sustainable development, as important as the construction and maintenance of adequate economic and social infrastructure - energy, transportation, telecommunications, water and sewage supply, housing, hospitals, and schools - is the existence of a national innovation system able to incorporate, adapt and produce new technologies.
Actions focused on infrastructure, innovation, the business environment, and workforce qualification, among others, become ever more important in the agenda of the Federal Government. Thus, achieving SDG 9, that is, Build resilient infrastructures, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation, integrates the Brazilian strategy to restore economic growth with social inclusion.
Investment in energy infrastructure, for example, is seen as one of the key factors for poverty eradication, since the provision of energy in abundance at a low cost has always been considered a major factor of human well-being and development. At the same time, and in line with sustainable development, the Brazilian energy matrix remains one of the cleanest in the world: in 2014, almost 40% of the domestic energy supply derived from the use of renewable sources (15.7% from sugarcane biomass, 11.5% from hydroelectric plants, 8.1% from firewood and charcoal, and 4.1 % from lye and other sources, such as wind and solar), as compared to 13.2% of the world average. Currently, wind power is the fastest growing source. According to the Brazilian Association for Wind Energy, in six years the installed capacity is expected to increase almost 300%. 
A number of initiatives by the Brazilian Government have been undertaken with the objective of expanding investments in infrastructure, such as the Investment Partnership Program (PPI) created to generate jobs and growth for the country through new funds for infrastructure and privatization projects, which consolidates and improves the strategy of privatizing the funding and operation of these enterprises. 
The Investment Partnership Program strengthens the coordination of investment policies in infrastructure through partnerships with the private sector. The objective is to reformulate the concession model in Brazil, in addition to strengthening legal certainty and regulatory stability, as well as modernizing governance. The Program will bring about business opportunities and will help the country restore the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth. 
Under the program, four auctioned airports - Porto Alegre-RS, Salvador-BA, Florian\0xDBpolis-SC and Fortaleza-CE - were sold for a total of R$ 3.72 billion (US$ 1.17 billion), with a premium of 93.75% in relation to the minimum offer (R$ 754 million, circa US$ 236.63 million). Together, the winning bids represent the largest fixed contribution to the airport system. 
The Federal Government auctioned the Santar\0xC8m-PA port terminals (R$ 68.2 million, equivalent to US$ 21.4 million) and the passenger terminal at the Port of Salvador-Bahia (R$ 8.5 million, equivalent to US$ 2.7 million). It also leased the public area, together with its public infrastructure for handling and storing solid grains of plant origin, especially wheat from the Organized Port of Rio de Janeiro-RJ (R$ 515.797 million, equivalent to US$ 161.8 million).
Brazil has a solid structure of scientific and technological research, from research laboratories to pilot plants and observatories. A recent mapping by IPEA has identified about two thousand laboratories and other centers in more than one hundred universities and research institutions in Brazil. In addition, over 70% of these units have received significant investments in the latest five years or less, and much of them made the last investment less than a year ago. These advances in updating and expanding the countryis science and technology system are a response to the resources invested by various sources in recent years, especially by sectoral funds, through the Infrastructure Sector Fund, CT Infra.
In the area of science, technology and innovation, due to the strengthening of institutions, policies, and infrastructure related to scientific and technological research in the last decades, today Brazil also has a framework of tools to foster innovation comparable to most developed countries, ranging from direct financial support, to credit, tax incentives, and regulatory measures. The National Program Startup Industry Connection, for example, aims to identify industry needs and map out startups that can supply them. By the end of 2017, R$ 10 million (US$ 3.2 million) will be allocated to this initiative.
The program My Smart City was conceived building on two different programs: Digital Cities and Smarter Brazil. The program connects to the Internet, through the national fiber optic network, public agencies and cities, in order to modernize municipal management and the use of government services. The localities will also have smart city solutions that allow, for example, public security monitoring, transportation and street lighting. In two public calls, the Digital Cities program selected 334 Municipalities throughout the country. The expected investment for the completion of the program is over R$ 241 million (US$ 75.64 million), which will be applied in the construction of 987km of networks, in the connection of more than 6,000 points, and in the deployment of 840 free access points. 
Another important initiative in the area of infrastructure innovation is the launching, in May 2017, of the Geostationary Satellite for Defense and Strategic Communications, which will enable communication between federal public administration agencies and bodies, security in the traffic of information, and broadband expansion to remote locations. The satellite will enable, for example, schools, hospitals and health clinics in remote locations to have access to broadband internet, allowing the exchange of information. 
CONSERVE AND 
SUSTAINABLY USE THE 
OCEANS, SEAS AND 
MARINE RESOURCES 
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
The seas and oceans cover over two-thirds of the Earthis surface, provide a variety of resources to mankind, and harbor rich biodiversity. National policies for the seas and marine resources strongly reflect the countryis commitments with international conventions and treaties, with special emphasis on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Brazilian coastal zone covers approximately 514 thousand km\0x2264, of which 324 thousand km\0x2264 correspond to the territory of coastal Municipalities distributed in 17 States. Out of the 36 Brazilian metropolitan regions, 19 are on the coast. According to the latest demographic census (2010), 45.7 million people (24% of the countryis population) lived in the coastal zone, which imposes pressures on natural resources. Notwithstanding, the densely populated areas are interspersed by large extensions with disperse occupations, inhabited by a diversity of traditional populations, such as artisanal fishermen, remnants of quilombos, and indigenous peoples. 
Brazil, through governmental planning, develops programs to promote the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources, which contribute to the eradication of poverty, promoting prosperity and taking into account a changing world.
The Program for Oceans, Coastal Zone and the Antarctic promotes the qualification of human resources, research, monitoring and logistics necessary for generating knowledge about marine resources and their sustainable use, especially concerning the Antarctic, as well as the development of actions that enabled the implementation of the National Policy for Sea Resources (PNRM). The objectives of the Program are to: guarantee the Brazilian presence in the Antarctic region, developing scientific research for the conservation of the environment; research the mineral and biological potential as well as the oceanographic variables in International Areas and in the Brazilian Continental Shelf; promote shared use of the marine environment and conduct coastal zone management in a sustainable way; promote scientific research, technological development, sustainable use of resources and ocean observing systems, expanding Brazilian presence in national, international waters and in oceanic islands; and establish the outer limit of the Brazilian Continental Shelf to guarantee the rights of exploration and use of its natural resources.
To that effect, it is worth highlighting the Federal Governmentis position to establish the outer limit of the Brazilian Continental Shelf before the United Nations Continental Shelf Limits Commission, as well as to bring Brazil to the forefront of deep ocean research, through the signature by the Brazilian Geological Service (CPRM) and the International Seabed Authority (ISBA) of the contract for the exploitation of cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts at Rio Grande Rise.
With regard to coastal management, the Integrated Coastal Management Project (Orla Project) n one of the instruments included in the National Coastal Management Plan n is an action focused on organizing coastal areas. Thus, the updating of the macro-assessment of 100% of the coastal zone is in progress, to be achieved by 2019. In the case of the Orla Project, the goal is to increase from 5% to 20% the total number of coastal Municipalities with defined guidelines for use and occupation of coastal areas, enabling them to face the conflict between the fragility of coastal ecosystems and the rise of disorganized and irregular use and occupation of seafronts, as well as the increase of erosive processes and contaminating sources.
It is worth mentioning the linkages with the Climate Change Program, with respect to promoting the countryis adaptation to the effects of climate change in coastal and marine areas, through the implementation of the National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change (NAP), launched in 2016.
The Program for Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity has been developing actions to expand coverage, strengthen and structure the management of conservation units in coastal and marine zones; to reduce the risk of extinction of endangered species, and control invasive alien species. Regarding protected areas, the targets include, by 2019, the consolidation of 11 federal conservation units, and the expansion of the marine and coastal protected area system from the current 1.5% to 5% of the Brazilian marine territory (equivalent to 17.5 million hectares). 
In addition, Brazil has sought to contribute to environmental conservation also by increasing income and social and productive inclusion of communities living in conservation units of sustainable use, including those in coastal and marine areas. By 2016, 12,100 families living in protected areas of sustainable use were served by the Green Grant Program, created for that purpose.
With regard to the Fisheries and Aquaculture Program, fishery management plans covering several relevant species (lobsters, sardines, crabs, shrimps, mullets, elasmobranchs and seahorses) have been developed in recent years and are currently in different implementation stages. In addition, several fishing regulations were published aiming at the protection of biologically vulnerable marine megafauna species. It is also worth noting the satellite Vessel Monitoring System (VMS), which includes tracking of more than 2,000 vessels, being used in enforcement actions on the Brazilian coast to fight illegal fishing.
STRENGTHEN THE MEANS 
OF IMPLEMENTATION 
AND REVITALIZE THE 
GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP 
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
The Sustainable Development Goal that prescribes strengthening the means of implementation and revitalizing the global partnership for sustainable development differs from other Goals as it focuses on ensuring the means for each country to achieve the SDGs.
International Financial Institutions
In 2016, agreements and commitments were signed to expand and consolidate Brazilian presence in international economic and financial institutions and fora, especially in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), where the Brazilian quota rose from 1.78% to 2.32%, as well as in the World Bank, and the G-20.
Brazil actively participates in international dialogue in favor of greater global macroeconomic stability. From the beginning, the Brazilian Government has supported the G20 agenda of improving international financial regulation and committed to implement, within the established deadlines, the agreed regulatory reforms, seeking convergence with international standards, greater robustness and security of the national and international financial system. 
Nonetheless, the country has underlined the importance that international standardization bodies take into due account the different levels of development of financial markets when elaborating and recommending new standards and regulations. Not all recommendations for advanced economies are applicable, or even desirable, to emerging and developing countries.
In 2016, Brazil also ratified the OECD Convention on Mutual Assistance in Tax Matters, which became effective in the country as of January 1st, 2017. Such accession will allow the country to participate, as of 2018, in the automatic exchange of information that will occur under the scope of this instrument among approximately 100 jurisdictions that have already committed to this initiative. This has allowed, along with the exchange of financial information through the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act of the USA, the regularization of Brazilian assets abroad and the subsequent increase in tax revenues.
Another important initiative was the agreement for the creation of the New Development Bank (NDB) by the BRICS member countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa). With the motto Building a Sustainable Future, the institution has an initial amount of US$ 50 billion for the implementation of sustainable infrastructure and development projects.
International Trade
In line with goal 17.10, Brazil continues to prioritize the World Trade Organization (WTO) as a central tool to promote sustainable and inclusive economic development on a global scale. 
The current context is especially challenging for the WTO and for international trade. Since 2009, economic recovery has been slow and uneven, with a decline of industrial jobs in the developed world, loss of economic dynamism in some developing economies, financial volatility, and slow growth of international trade. 
To that effect, Brazilis objective continues to be the achievement of tangible results in the 11th WTO Ministerial Conference (MC11) in Buenos Aires, in December 2017. The country will continue to support the terms of the Doha Development Agenda as a reference in the negotiations.
International Cooperation for Development
Development cooperation has been a component of Brazilis international relations for decades. It contributes to the advancement of important initiatives of economic development, social inclusion and sustainable development. Brazil supports the development of other nations facing challenges similar to those of Brazilian society. 
The 2016-2019 Multi-Year Plan of the Federal Government establishes several initiatives in areas such as technical cooperation, education, scientific and technological exchange, humanitarian actions with focus on resilience, protection and support to refugees, participation in peace-

keeping operations associated to other modalities of international cooperation, as well as the negotiation of financial transactions with governments and international organizations focusing on development. 
International technical cooperation is an important and diversified modality of the countryis contribution to the development of institutional and individual capacity of developing countries in Latin America, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia and Oceania.
The following are among the main areas of technical cooperation: agriculture (agriculture and livestock-raising, family farming and food security); public health (maternal and child health, drug production, fighting endemics, professional training, health surveillance, etc.); education; public administration (applied economic research, public policy-making, etc.); urban development; human rights; and the environment. The Brazilian Government has also promoted exchange programs for experts in the areas of experiences in renewable and non-renewable energy and energy efficiency.
As the host country of the RIO+20 Conference and with a strong commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Brazilian Government has great expectations in the formulation of new partnership models that will boost and strengthen the means of implementation for sustainable development. 

This first Voluntary National Review is a picture of the challenges ahead, which should guide the planning and monitoring efforts of Brazilian public policies in the coming years. This document is a diagnosis of Brazilis situation on the path towards poverty eradication and the promotion of a more prosperous and sustainable country. It also allows reflecting on the next steps required for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The 2030 Agenda is essentially a plan of action that will serve as a strategy for economic, social and environmental development, which, in turn, highlights the interdependence and need for a balance among these three dimensions in public policy planning and implementation around the world. It leads to less sector-focused actions and allows a more holistic integration of public policies and their execution contexts. This broad and ambitious plan of action transcends political terms of office and finds its first and foremost challenge in the need for long-term planning. 
In the very first ideas of this report one can find the urgent need for integration and mobilization of networks of actors to face the complexity of implementing such a global commitment. Especially with regard to the coordination of integrated actions and initiatives to internalize and localize the SDGs, the efforts will need to encompass the various sectors of civil society and different government spheres. 
The nature of the 2030 Agenda is global; however, its purpose and targets are directly in line with national, regional and local policies and actions. It is an essential step for the successful achievement of the 2030 Agenda to take into account subnational contexts in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, from the establishment of priorities to the identification of the means of implementation. Internalization and localization are, therefore, central challenges for the applicability of the SDGs in the Brazilian territory. 
While the localization of the Goals in Municipalities represents an opportunity to mitigate the great regional, social and economic disparity in the national territory, the adoption and incorporation of SDG targets in subnational government Multi-Year Plans go beyond the capacity of mobilization of the Federal Government. Thus, civil society participation is essential to achieving the 2030 Agenda. In terms of institutional mechanisms, the National Commission for the Sustainable Development Goals is, above all, an institutionalized space for exchange and cooperation among government bodies and segments of civil society, 

with the particular challenges of coordinating the dialogue among different actors and promoting the follow-up of the 2030 Agenda.
Initiatives for the engagement of subnational governments, civil society, the Legislative Branch, and TCU show how different actors have been incorporating the 2030 Agenda. One can observe relevant mobilization in favor of the SDGs, from the establishment of mechanisms and networks for the coordination of actions and initiatives by civil society up to the evaluation of the processes of institutionalization and internalization of the Agenda in the Brazilian Government by the supreme audit institution.
With regard to the international participation of Brazil in the discussion on indicators, the national statistical agency has been working to establish a set of indicators more appropriate to national reality, initiatives and priorities. 
The 2017 High-Level Political Forum
The central theme of the 2017 session of the High-Level Political Forum, \0xECEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world, brings in its core three issues that are crucial to the SDGs: poverty, prosperity and transformation. Chapter 8 of this report presented public policies to eradicate poverty in Brazil and also noted how the social, economic and environmental dimensions are intrinsically related to the eradication or perpetuation of poverty.
In the social dimension, progress has been made in the areas of eradication of poverty and hunger, promotion of healthy lives and gender equality. In the economic dimension, areas of infrastructure, industrialization and innovation were highlighted. In the environmental dimension, the report briefly showed the paths Brazil has taken to protect its oceans, seas and marine resources.
It is worth noting of the greatest social advances in Brazil in the last decades has been in the fight against extreme poverty. The aforementioned reduction was only possible thanks to the improvement of policies that broadened the bases of social protection in the country. This process also benefited from the contribution of the formalization of the labor market, increased access to credit and consumption, and the appreciation of the minimum wage. The successes observed in Brazil in recent years, however, should not overshadow the imperative of accelerating the process of social inclusion underway.
The main challenges for Brazil suggest the need for addressing SDG 1, End poverty in all its forms, in a multidimensional manner. It is necessary not only to promote the increase of the monetary income of the poorest, but to try to overcome all the other deprivations derived from poverty. Other development spheres, such as transportation infrastructure, energy, basic sanitation, which could improve Brazilis productive capacity, represent a certain accumulation of vulnerabilities in the poorest groups. For public policy, the challenge is to address this overlapping of disadvantages.
With regard to health, with a universal and free of charge public system, Brazil is in a privileged position to pursue the targets set in the SDG. However, the country needs to deal with issues that are difficult to solve, such as the incidence of mosquito-borne diseases and continued increase in chronic illnesses such as hypertension and diabetes. 
Overcoming gender inequalities and combating violence against women require systematic action by governments and society. In spite of the significant normative framework available in Brazil to address this issue, overcoming gender disparities still constitutes an important challenge for the country, especially as regards poor and black women, where the overlapping of inequalities creates a scenario of complex vulnerabilities. Access to public services, economic resources and political participation should guide the implementation and improvement of actions towards equity.
In order to introduce the environmental issue in the scope of the SDGs, the report presents some interrelationships between poverty and the environment. Behind numbers indicating huge natural capital, Brazil also faces a number of environmental issues that affect the population, especially the poorest.
Ensuring access to basic sanitation n sewage treatment and solid waste management n should receive significant attention, as it is the most frequent type of environmental degradation in Brazilian cities and has very adverse impacts on the health of the population. In addition, the growing urbanization in the country has generated environmental problems, with social consequences: precarious housing conditions for the poorest populations, often in irregular areas such as riverbanks and hill slopes, making them more susceptible to natural disasters such as floods and landslides. 
 
Water, however abundant, is unevenly distributed throughout the territory. In the Northeast Region, with almost one third of the Brazilian population, there are severe and regular droughts, particularly in the semi-arid region. Population pressure on the fragile natural resource base, in turn, aggravates the factors leading to desertification. Without state intervention, this vicious circle of cause and effect can lead to a scenario of expansion of the areas susceptible to the phenomenon, with impact of agricultural production, which consequently leads to increased poverty for the region.
As a highlight in the environmental area, one mentions that the Brazilian energy matrix remains one of the cleanest in the world. In Brazil, the diversification of energy resources, with increase in the share of renewable energy sources, coupled with the tactic of increasing efficiency in the sector, is an essential strategy, both economically and environmentally speaking, and it is directly aligned with the goals of the 2030 Agenda.
In the economic dimension, the report mentioned fiscal actions n greater discipline in expenditures and increased public savings n as one of the great demands for the Brazilian Government. Another challenge will be to resume and significantly expand investments in infrastructure through the creation of a new financing paradigm, in which private sources acquire relevance, as well as the implementation of a set of initiatives to strengthen legal security and regulatory stability.
In terms of science, technology and innovation, it is noted that the diversification of the ST&I system is necessary not only through new policies and instruments, but also through new institutional models. For the consolidation of the innovation system, updates will be necessary, such as investing in big science and in open research infrastructures; increase public investment in results-oriented R&D; internationalize Brazilian science, with a greater flow of people and ideas.
Finally, on Partnerships and means of implementation, considering the countryis position as the host of the Rio+20, and with a strong commitment to the 2030 Agenda, the Brazilian Government has great expectations regarding the formulation of new partnership models that lead to the success of the SDGs and to sustainable development in partner countries, corresponding unequivocally to the spirit of the new agenda.
Final considerations
The significant heterogeneity of the social reality in the Brazilian territory culminates with the constant challenge of improving the instruments of management and governance. The institutional arrangements to include the scope and depth of transformations proposed by the 2030 Agenda go through the challenge of coordination between government departments and other actors in the search for understanding the integration and intersections between the environmental, social and economic dimensions.
It is also worth mentioning the need for systematic evaluation and monitoring of public policies, not only to ensure greater efficiency in program execution, but also to optimize the quality of public spending. The issue emerging is, therefore, how to make the public sector more efficient so as to ensure continuity and improvement of public policies aimed at fulfilling the 2030 Agenda. 
Another important challenge concerns the improvement of the institutional capacity of Brazilian Municipalities and greater coordination among the three spheres of public administration. Such a complex and integrated Agenda requires multilateral efforts from government action, while addressing the accumulation of structural and overlapping inequalities is not the sole function of the State. Therefore, partnerships and networks with different civil society actors become imperative for the achievement of SDGs. 
The 2030 Agenda is a unique opportunity for Brazil to address its historical ills as regards reducing inequality. The global strategy is in line with the fact that the reduction of Brazilian regional disparities will only be effectively confronted if addressed under coordinated and convergent action by several public policies, with real expression in territories, which are reflected in the 17 SDGs and its 169 targets. The Brazilian challenge of reducing our historical inequalities is in full alignment with the 2030 Agenda action strategy.
The next steps pointed out by this first Voluntary National Review are the improvement of public management, from the production of statistics to the execution of sector programs, the exercise of governance, and coordination of networks of actors. The complexity inherent to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, in its due scope, requires a permanent effort to coordinate and integrate social, economic and environmental policies, as well as to promote interaction among the different levels of government, and between the government and society.

