Summary 
Denmark shares the vision for our world and planet expressed by the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Danish government is committed to an ambitious follow-up nationally as well as internationally. It acknowledges the interdependent and holistic nature of the SDGs and the transformative nature of the 2030 Agenda. The government also emphasises the need for all stakeholders across society to contribute to achieving the SDGs.  
 
Denmark is a frontrunner in sustainable development with e.g. a universal healthcare and educational system, gender equality, a generous social safety net, cooperation among social partners, responsible business, clean and efficient energy production and personal freedom. It reflects a longstanding Danish tradition of pursuing solutions that are sustainable in the long term. 
 
Methodology and process for preparation of the review 
The Ministry of Finance has drafted and coordinated the present report. Stakeholders from civil society, businesses, local government, youth and academia were requested to deliver and have delivered independent contributions that highlight their contribution to achieving the SDGs nationally and internationally. The Ministry of Finance held an initial meeting with relevant stakeholders prior to the drafting of the main messages while another meeting was held shortly before the submission of the present report.    
Policy and national framework 
Creating ownership 
Denmarkis public sector is substantially decentralised and the municipalities account for 70 per cent of public consumption. Central and local government agrees that cooperation and strong partnerships across society are needed to achieve the SDGs. 
  
Civil society, businesses and other relevant stakeholders are already working extensively with the SDGs. Several primary and secondary schools have also taken measures to increase awareness and work with children and young people to develop solutions to the SDGs. There is, however, a need to raise awareness of the SDGs among the general public.  
 
Incorporation of the SDGs in national frameworks 
The Danish government has, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda, formulated an Action Plan in light of the need to adapt targets to national circumstances. The Danish government is adamant that progress needs to be measured. As such, the Action Plan contains 37 concrete (mostly) national targets that are to a great extent measurable and quantifiable. This will allow systematic stocktaking and evaluation of progress going forward.  
 
The government will publish annual progress reports on the 37 targets which will be sent to the Danish Parliament. Every fourth year, the progress report will be replaced by a more comprehensive status report that will also contain initiatives for achieving the SDGs and possible adjustments to the Action Plan. 
 
Institutional mechanisms 
The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the coordination of the national implementation of the SDGs and the Action Plan adopted by the government. Line ministries, however, are responsible for integrating the SDGs in policy. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the SDGs in the context of the United Nations and other international fora as well as in Danish foreign and security policy, trade policy and development policy. 
Integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development 
Denmark already assesses new legislative proposals in terms of their economic, environmental and gender equality consequences. The government supports policy coherence in sustainable development and line ministries integrate sustainable development in policymaking. As part of the Action Plan, the government will henceforth assess the consequences of new legislation and major initiatives for the SDGs when considered relevant in a Danish context and in case the impact is significant.  
Global commitment 
The 2030 Agenda and the SDGs shape Denmarkis global engagement. The common global vision and ambition expressed in the SDGs is in line with Danish interests, values and principles for which Denmark has worked globally for decades. Denmarkis global engagement contributes to realising the SDGs n a world without extreme poverty and with sustainable development in its three dimensions n economic, social and environmental n where no one is left behind.  
Means of implementation 
Implementation of the Action Plan and sustainable development in general is funded by the budget allocations approved by Parliament in the annual budget negotiations for the coming fiscal year. The government will continue to provide 0.7 per cent of GNI in ODA. It is also committed to mobilising significant resources in developing countries and is therefore preparing to launch an SDG Fund that will combine public and private funds to mobilise further private capital.   
 	 Next steps 
There are a series of deliverables in the short to medium term, including finalising the SDG Fund and the concept for assessing the consequences for the SDGs of legislative proposals, preparing the format for the annual progress report to Parliament and implementing the Action Plan. Just as important is the continued commitment of the government to designing and implementing solutions that are sustainable for all three dimensions. 

 Introduction 
Denmark chaired the session that resulted in the adoption of the SDGs in September 2015. That gives us a special responsibility to spearhead the implementation of the SDGs. 
Denmark also took active part in the negotiations. Denmarkis key priorities were gender equality and the rights and empowerment of women and girls n including sexual and reproductive health and rights; quality education as a foundation for development and gender equality; sustainable inclusive economic growth, including sustainable management of water and energy; and addressing the challenges of climate change; conflict prevention and capacity building in fragile states as well as human rights, justice and inclusive, accountable and transparent institutions  
The SDGs are universal, mutually dependent and reflect a balance of the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. As a consequence of their universality, the SDGs have a national as well as an international dimension connecting the global and the local.  
World leaders committed themselves to a broad political and universal agenda for which we all carry the responsibility to deliver on.  
The 2030 Agenda, the global agreement on combating climate change from COP21 in Paris and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on financing for development together represent the international communityis consensus on the overall direction of global sustainable development up to 2030: a world in balance without poverty and with sustainable development that provides future generations at least the same opportunities for a good life as we in the present enjoy.  
Denmark has a long tradition of developing and designing solutions that are sustainable in the long term. Several international studies place Denmark at the very top of the leaderboard in terms of being on track for achieving the SDGs.  
We have achieved this position through responsible economic policies, personal freedom, gender equality, education for all, anti-corruption, a social safety net, protection of the environment and climate, an open democracy with transparent and accountable institutions, and respect for human rights.  
The government is committed to further developing the Danish model of an inclusive and sustainable society by developing and implementing sustainable solutions and integrating sustainable development into policy. 

 
 	 
 
Denmark also assumes responsibility internationally. We contribute to peace and security through, inter alia, active participation in UN-mandated peacekeeping operations. Denmark also gives significant contributions to long-term economic development in developing countries as well as assistance to crisis-afflicted areas. 
This report is Denmarkis first voluntary national review of its implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the 17 SDGs. 
 

12 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
 	 
 
 

Methodology and  process for preparation of the review 
Nyt kapitel 
 
On 13 June 2016, the government decided to formulate an Action Plan for the follow up on and implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. The drafting of the Action Plan involved all ministries and was coordinated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance. 
The action plan was approved by the government on 22 March 2017. As part of the Action 
Plan, the government commits to participate in the Voluntary National Review at the High Level Political Forum 2017 and to conduct two further Voluntary National Reviews before 2030. 
In line with the Danish tradition of inclusion and involvement of stakeholders, the Ministry of Finance held an initial meeting with relevant stakeholders on 3 May 2017 to discuss the process leading up to the HLPF. The government has chosen to include contributions from civil society, businesses, municipalities and regions, youth organisations and academia in the Main Messages and Voluntary National Report. The purpose of the meeting was also therefore to discuss the various contributions of the main messages and report respectively.  
Participants included representatives from civil society, businesses and investors, municipalities, youth organisations, academia and the independent national human rights institution. 
The present report was drafted by the Ministry of Finance in coordination with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The report is to a great extent based on the Action Plan which was drafted with the involvement of ministries.    
The report focuses primarily on Denmarkis domestic follow-up. This reflects an understanding that the 2030 Agenda and SDGs are universal and therefore pertain to all countries. The report therefore focuses on the national Danish contribution to the realisation of the SDGs. Our international contribution is described, but will not form the core of the report. 
The government has invited members of Parliament and other stakeholders to participate in the Danish delegation at the High Level Political Forum and accommodated requests from other stakeholders as well. 



 Policy and national framework 
Nyt kapitel 
 
Creating ownership of the SDGs 
Denmarkis public sector is largely decentralised and the municipalities account for 70 per cent of public consumption. Each year the government negotiates the budget for the following year with and for the municipalities and regions. An agreement for 2018 was reached on 1 June 2017 with local governments and 6 June with regional governments. The government and municipalities and regions agree to cooperate to achieve the SDGs and integrate sustainable development in policymaking. There is agreement on the need to foster partnerships across society as well as the need for other relevant stakeholders to contribute. 
 
In the years leading up to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs held consultations with civil society, businesses and other relevant stakeholders. This constructive input was incorporated in the Danish priorities in the negotiation of the 2030 Agenda. Stakeholders are taking active ownership of the SDGs, as depicted in Annex 
1.  
 
There is, however, a continued need to raise awareness among the general public. A recent survey in Denmark shows that 12 per cent of the Danish population has heard of the SDGs, which despite an increase from 10 per cent in 2015, leaves room for improvement. The government will do its part to increase awareness of the SDGs by communicating the SDGs whenever relevant and encouraging other stakeholders to do the same and actively engage with people. The potential is there.  
Incorporation of the SDGs in national frameworks 
The 2030 Agenda and the 17 SDGs are universal and applicable to all countries, including Denmark. This is reflected in the targets in the Action Plan, which are mainly focused on domestic priorities. However, the 2030 Agenda and SDGs also constitute the platform for Danish development cooperation and humanitarian action as reflected in the new strategy, \0xECThe World 2030. 
 
The Action Plan does not include Greenland and the Faroe Islands as most of the elements fall within the jurisdiction of Greenland and the Faroe Islands. Statistical reporting and status for the follow-up in Greenland and the Faroe Islands may be included as separate sections in Denmarkis reporting to the UN in the future. 
 	 
 
The SDGs can be seen as guidance for global development moving towards 2030. They imply that expectations of responsibility and sustainability will increasingly affect and condition the growth prospects of companies and create new markets and business opportunities. The government believes that there is a business case for companies and investors alike in working strategically with the SDGs. This is already happening in Denmark, where several larger companies in particular are actively working to integrate the SDGs in their business models, strategies and investments, including by implementing the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and by actively engaging in the UN Global Compact. The Government, in collaboration with partners, hosts a series of workshops aiming to accelerate companiesi n small and large n engagement with the SDGs. 
 
The Danish approach to the SDGs and therefore also the Action Plan reflects the internal tension in the SDGs. The goals are interdependent, but at the same time some goals represent conflicting interests. These tradeoffs are inherently political.  
 
The goal of creating more decent jobs and increasing employment (SDG 8) may in some cases increase income inequality (SDG 10). This should, however, be considered in light of national circumstances and Denmark is one of the most equal societies in the world. As such the government will continue to work for more and better jobs and increase life opportunities. 
 
Another example is the goal of better infrastructure (SDG 9) and goals of protecting life below water (SDG 14) as well as life on land (SDG 15). Denmark is an island nation. Building bridges is therefore part of our DNA. Large infrastructure projects such as bridges will inadvertently affect life below water and life on land. This will not prevent the government from expanding infrastructure when necessary with due consideration to life below water and life on land.         
 
There are no easy answers to these inherent dilemmas. It is up to responsible governments to weigh these choices against one another. 
The National Level 
The Action Plan for the follow-up on the SDGs 
It is necessary to make the SDGs concrete and actionable. The governmentis Action Plan delivers on this. The Action Plan is centered on the 5 Ps: Prosperity, People, Planet, Peace and Partnerships. For each of these n except partnerships, which are cross cutting n the government has formulated a number of targets (37 in total), which n in most cases n integrate and cut across several SDGs. They reflect the governmentis ambition to prioritise. Each target has one or two national indicators, which are in large part measurable and quantifiable.  
 
The Action Plan does not constitute the entirety of the governmentis contribution to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. It is a prioritised document that in a relatively simple way highlights some of the essential contributions.  
 
Several international studies, including from OECD and SDSN, place Denmark at the very top of the leaderboard of countries on track for achieving the SDGs, but also point to certain challenges. Some of the international analyses point to challenges related to e.g. level of investments (SDG9), pollution in cities (SDG11) and recycling of waste (SDG 12). 	 
Prosperity 
The government is committed to increasing economic growth and employment. This increases the means at our disposal, allows us to do more and gives families economic freedom and job security. The government will continue to conduct responsible economic policy through growth-enhancing structural reforms, including increasing the labour supply and improving the competitiveness and framework conditions of Danish businesses. This is essential to increasing productivity, increasing investments and creating more jobs in the private sector.   
 
Denmark is and has long been a small and open economy that relies on free trade with other nations and close economic integration with the countries around us. The government will continue to promote free trade and ensure that globalisation works for all. The example of Denmark illustrates that multilateralism and openness is compatible with inclusive growth and equal opportunities for all. 
 
From that excellent starting point, the government has set forth nine concrete national targets, as shown in table 1.  
 

Table 1 
Prosperity 
Target 
National indicator(s) 
SDG 

1. Strengthen economic growth. 
GDP effect from new initiatives. 
8 

2. Strengthen employment. 
Employment effect from new initiatives. 
8 

3. Strengthen framework conditions for business, ensuring ease of business and low costs by e.g. maintaining competitive corporate taxation, simple rules and better infrastructure. 
Easing of burdens for business. 
8,9 

4. Strengthen research and ensure solutions are marketable. 
Public funding for research at 1 per cent of GDP. 
9 

5. Maintaining an efficient tax system and tax policy that incentivises work and improves familiesi economic conditions, and is simple and competitive for business. 
The net effect of discretionary tax initiatives. 
1,8,16 

6. More refugees in employment. 
Employment rate for refugees and rejoined family members. 
4,5,8 

7. Promoting partnerships and investments in developing countries contributing to sustainable development and development of the private sector in the developing countries and Denmark. 
Mobilisation of total and private capital through Danidais business platform. 
1,6,7,8,9,
11,12,13,
15,17 

8. Using EU trade policy to ensure open markets and a trade system that supports growth globally, including in the least developed countries. 
a. Number of new EU free trade agreements. 
b. Index of registered trade barriers in the world. 
1,2,3,8,10 

9. Promoting women and menis equal access to participation in the labour market. 
Women and menis employment rate. 
5,8 

  


Notes:  Translations are provisional. Source: Denmarks National Action Plan.  
People 
Personal freedom and responsibility is a core value of Danish society. Individuals need freedom to improve their lives and those of their families while assuming responsibility for their actions. An important condition for freedom is gender equality. Denmark is a front runner for gender equality and the government will continually work to maintain this position. Denmark has a low maternal mortality rate, which has been achieved by comprehensive sexuality education, access to sexual and reproductive health services including modern methods of contraception, information and counselling as well as the right to abortion. These factors as well as the protection and fulfillment of sexual rights including for LGBT people have contributed to the development of Danish society. 
The government will help people gain a foothold in the labour market and reduce dependence on public transfers. This increases self-worth and opportunities in life. We want to ensure that young people get an education and a starting point in life that allows them to achieve their dreams.  
Denmark has a unique society with equal access to education and healthcare where remedies for illness or misfortune do not depend on your economic or social status. This is a cornerstone of Danish society which the government will continue to promote and protect. Building on this, the government has set forth 10 concrete national targets, as shown in table 2. 
 	 

Table 2 People 
Target 
National indicator(s) 
SDG 

10. Strengthen gender equality in education between girls and boys, including by reducing differences in wellbeing and grades. 
a. Girlsi and boysi grade point average in public school. 
b. Result of national survey on well-being. 
4,5,8 

11. Increase skill levels, as well as quality and relevance of education content. 
Scores for degree of competency in public school. 
4,8 

12. Doing more for the least skilled students. 
Share of students with poor test scores in Danish and mathematics. 
4,10 

13. Increased proportion of students with a vocational education. 
Proportion of students choosing a vocational education after public school. 
4,8,9 

14. Continued development of a good healthcare system and worthy care for the elderly, including through a focus on coherent patient treatment and inclusion. 
a. Patient satisfaction with treatment from hospitalisation to discharge and inclusion. 
b. User satisfaction surveys on help in own home and homes for the elderly. 
3 

15. Increased effort in combatting chronic and lifethreatening diseases, including cancer, COPD, diabetes (type 2), dementia and the elderly patient. 
a. 5-year survival rate after cancer and acute somatic hospitalisations among patients with COPD and diabetes (type 2). 
b. Preventable re-hospitalisations among elderly patients. 
3 

16. Increase participation in employment, including persons with disabilities. 
a. Total employment rate. 
b. Share of persons with disabilities in edu-cation or employment. 
4,8,10 

17. Furthering support for adults and children exposed to violence in close relationships. 
Follow-up on the effort by the national unit against violence in close relationships 
5,16 

18. Increase well-being for children and young people as well as development and learning for children in day care. 
a. Share of students that thrive in primary and secondary school, vocational schools and high school. 
b. Follow-up on the implementation of \0xEBA strengthened plan for teachingi. 
4 

19. Sustain Denmarkis role as an active international advocate for gender equality and sexual and reproductive health and rights. 
A notable and visible effort in the EU and UN. 
3,4,5,10,16 

  


Notes:  Translations are provisional. 
Source: Denmarks National Action Plan.  
 
 
 
 	 
Planet 
Denmark is and will continue to be a front runner in the transition to a green economy, sustainable use of natural resources and energy efficiency. The Danish position has been established based on decades of high ambitions. The government will therefore continue an ambitious and efficient green transition while at the same time ensuring jobs and competitiveness.  
Emissions need to decrease further. The global nature of this challenge necessitates international solutions. In this regard, Denmark is working to speed up the green transition globally and has ratified the Paris Agreement. 
The government will continue to prevent and limit the spread of contaminating agents that are harmful to human health. And we will maintain a strong agriculture and food industry that continues to focus on sustainability and resource efficiency.  
Denmark has diverse plant and animal life. The government will promote opportunities to enjoy nature and to prioritise the effort to stop regression of biological diversity and protect marine life. In this regard the government has set forth 10 concrete national targets, as shown in table 3. 
 	 

Table 3 Planet  
Target 
National indicator(s) 
SDG 

20. Halt the regression of biological diversity 
Conservation status for habitat nature and species. 
12,14,15 

21. Protect water and the sea environment 
a. Condition of water environment (Water Framework Directive). 
b. Industrial utilisation of fish stock in general accordance to MSY principles. 
6,14 

22.  Prevent and limit contamination with harmful agents. 
a. Development of air quality and health effects of air pollution in Denmark. b. Number of drugs with hormonedisrupting properties assessed and proportion thereof covered by EU regulation. 
3,8,9,11,12 

23. Sustain Denmarkis leading role in developing sustainable cities and viable cities. 
a. Number of municipalities with agenda 21 and climate adaptation plans. 
b. Rate of recovery for household waste.  
11,13 

24. Promote a circular economy, including through better (re)application of resources and prevention of waste.  
a. Resource productivity (DMC/GDP to be replaced by RMC/GDP). 
b. Reapplication of total waste (excluding soil and mineral waste). 
9,12,13 

25. Sustainable companies and products. 
a. Number of companies.  
2,8,9,12 

26. Sustainable food 
a. Household food waste. 
b. Resource productivity in the food sec-tor. 
2,12 

27. Reach Denmarkis obligation for reducing non-ETS in 2020 and 2030. 
Forecast of CO2 in non-ETS relative to 2005 level. 
7,13 

28. Contribute to EU goal of 27 per cent renewable energy and at least 27 per cent energy efficiency in 2030. 
Proportion of renewable energy, development in energy consumption relative to a 2007 baseline of forecast energy consumption. 
7,13 

29. The government has a national goal to cover 50 per cent of Denmarkis energy needs with renewable energy in 2030. 
Renewable energy share is measured according to the EU-method. 
7,13 

  


Notes:  Translations are provisional. 
Source: Denmarks National Action Plan.  
 
 	 
Peace 
Denmark is internationally renowned for being one of the happiest nations in the world and a nation with a high degree of trust in one another and the authorities. This mutual trust is an anchor and a cherished state that underpins our safe and peaceful society. It is a fundamental priority for the government to maintain and promote this unique Danish trait. The government will therefore promote an efficient, responsible and inclusive democracy and exercise of authority.  
A precondition of safety and personal freedom is the freedom of movement in all corners of the country. To that end, the government will maintain a tough stance on crime and terror. However, the pursuit of security needs to go hand in hand with respect for the principle of rule of law. 
In a global context, the government will continue to work for an international order based on fundamental values of democratic governance and human rights, including the rights of women and girls. A strong defence guarantees the sovereignty of Denmark and the rest of the commonwealth. 
To aid fulfilment of these objectives, the government has set forth eight concrete national targets, as shown in table 4. 
 	 

Table 4 Peace 
Target 
National indicator(s) 
SDG 

30. Maintain Denmarkis position among the least corrupt countries in the world. 
Transparency International ranking. 
16 

31. Protect freedom of speech. 
Freedom of speech is measured by Freedom House score. 
16 

32. Promote a well-functioning and present police force. 
Additional funds to the police in the multiannual agreement (2016-2019). 
16 

33. Crack down on organised and gang crime. 
Follow-up on initiatives in agreement on \0xECPutting gangs behind bars 
16 

34. Prevent and combat extremism, radicalisation and terrorism. 
Sustaining a strengthened focus on combatting extremism, radicalisation and terrorism. 
16 

35. Promote an international order based on values of democracy, rule of law, human rights and gender equality. 
The governmentis international effort, including candidacy for the UN Human Rights Council 2019-2021. 
16 

36. Contribute to the protection of vulnerable people and increased resilience in developing countries. 
Denmarkis development assistance will contribute to increasing resilience in developing countries. 
16 

37. Promote international stability and security through contributions to international military operations as well as peace and stabilisation efforts. 
Increased stability and security in areas with military as well as non-military Danish contingents. 
16 

  


Notes:  Translations are provisional. 
Source: Denmarks National Action Plan.  
 
Institutional Mechanisms 
Domestic policy 
The Ministry of Finance is responsible for coordinating the national implementation of the SDGs. Efforts are mainly coordinated through the inter-ministerial SDG work group and bilaterally between the Ministry of Finance and the line ministries. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was chair of the group until the adoption of the Action Plan, after which the Ministry of Finance took over the chairmanship. This shift reflects the governmentis wish to ensure that sustainable development is integrated into domestic policy and the daily workings of the government.  
  
While the Ministry of Finance is responsible for coordination, it is important to stress that policy expertise is located in the line ministries responsible for designing policies addressing the SDGs.  
International policy 
The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the EU follow-up in order to maintain a holistic approach and create links to the national follow-up. The Ministry of Finance coordinates with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and line ministries when relevant.  
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for the follow-up on the SDGs in the context of the United Nations and other international fora as well as the international engagement in support the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs, which is mainly defined in Strategy for Development Policy and Humanitarian Assistance, The World 2030, and also pursued through Denmarkis foreign, security and trade policy.   
Monitoring, follow up and review  
Sustainable development is defined and achieved in the long term. Quick solutions are not an option. As such, the government is committed to reviewing progress at regular intervals and to adjusting the course if necessary. As part of the Action Plan, the government will produce an annual progress report on the Action Plan and the 37 national targets. The progress report will be made public and sent to the Parliament. The first progress report will be presented in summer 2018. 
 
Every fourth year the government will present a status report on the Action Plan. The status report will replace the progress reports in those years. The status report will include the same elements as the progress report, but in addition may contain initiatives for achieving the SDGs and possible adjustments to the Action Plan. The status report will be presented to Parliament for discussion. 
 
The government has tasked the national statistical bureau, Statistics Denmark, with providing the UN with an annual statistical report on the global indicators developed by the UN Statistical Commission. The first report will be sent to the UN before the High Level Political Forum in 2017. The information will also be made available to the Danish public. At present, Statistics Denmark does not have data on all global indicators. Statistics Denmark estimates that 32 per cent of the indicators are in Tier 1, 13 per cent are in Tier II, 15 per cent are in Tier III and that 23 percent are not clarified, 14 per cent are non-statistical and have to be collected from other sources, and 4 per cent are not relevant to Denmark. 
 
The government also considers partnerships a possible avenue for (peer) learning and review. The government encourages civil society and academia to challenge and criticise the government so that we may continue to improve. Academia in particular has an important part to play in providing evidence-based research that may guide practical policy and enhance the efficiency of the resources available, public as well as private.         
Integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development  
Globalisation and the integration of the world economy foster global value chains. As a consequence, sustainable development cannot be implemented in one country alone. It is therefore necessary to assess the sum of economic, social and environmental consequences across countries which require global solutions. 
 
Denmark already assesses the economic, environmental and gender equality consequences of new legislation. As such, several of the SDGs are already covered by existing procedures.  
 
The government supports policy coherence in national and international sustainable development and line ministries integrate sustainable development in policymaking.  
 

As part of the Action Plan, the government will henceforth also assess the consequences of new legislation and major initiatives for the SDGs where considered relevant in a Danish context and where the impact is significant. There is ongoing work to develop a more specific concept for this assessment. 
 
The Government finds that the SDGs and human rights are interrelated in a mutually supportive way in which human rights can guide the follow-up on the SDGs just as the SDGs can contribute to the realisation of human rights.  
The Global Level 
The 2030 Agenda and the SDGs shape the governmentis global engagement. The common global vision and ambition expressed in the SDGs are in line with Danish interests, values and principles for which Denmark has worked globally for decades. The governmentis global engagement contributes to realising the SDGs n a world without extreme poverty and with sustainable development in its three dimensions n economic, social and environmental n where no one is left behind.  
Foreign and security policy and trade policy 
The governmentis overall foreign and security policy contributes to the SDGs in several ways, directly and indirectly, including through trade and investments, development cooperation, economic and sectorial cooperation, and by promoting peace, security, respect for human rights, gender equality, rule of law and good governance, and by combatting climate change.  
 
The SDGs therefore play a prominent role in the governmentis strategy for foreign and security policy 2017n2018. The strategy integrates the SDGs across various policies as part of a comprehensive approach, including in trade and investment, development policy, globalisation and technological development. It highlights how Danish companies with strong footholds n e.g. in relation to health, energy and climate change technologies n can contribute to the implementation of the SDGs, and how the SDGs in turn can represent business opportunities for Danish companies. It also highlights the importance of sustainable economic development for the Arctic region in line with the SDGs.  
 
The governmentis trade policy aims to allow more free trade on a global basis, thereby creating national and global growth and prosperity. Through active involvement in the EU, Denmark aims to utilise trade policies to create better conditions for the least developed countries and to supports the least developed countries by enabling them take advantage of the market access that they already have to the EU. The government will also work for progress in the WTO and to promote the interests of the least developed countries in this context. Danish trade policy and Danish companies with key trades and expertise play a significant role in achieving the SDGs and thereby contribute directly and indirectly to achieving several of the SDGs.  
Development cooperation and Danish priorities 
The SDGs constitute the platform for the governmentis development cooperation and humanitarian action as reflected in the Danish strategy for development cooperation and humanitarian action, \0xECThe World 2030. As a small country in a big world, we acknowledge the need to concentrate our efforts to make an impact, and as such the necessity of prioritising the 17 SDGs. Our prioritisation is based on areas where Denmark has competencies and experience that enable us to contribute to progress. Different SDGs are prioritised in different country contexts. When prioritising certain SDGs, it does not mean that the opportunities and needs represented by the other Goals are ignored. It is acknowledged that results within one Goal are often dependent on results within other Goals. 
 
The government applies a human rights-based approach to developments as this represents a strong means of building sustainable societies where the individual can create a future for themselves and their family. 
 
The government considers SDG 16 regarding peace, justice and institutions and SDG 17 regarding partnerships to be the foundation for Denmarkis entire development engagement and for achieving results within other Goals. At the same time the government has selected five SDGs as global key issues in our global development policy which Denmark will pursue particularly actively in international negotiations and global cooperation: gender equality (SDG 5), sustainable energy (SDG 7), climate (SDG 13), peace, justice and institutions (SDG 16) and partnerships (SDG 17).  
 
Young people are another key priority in the governmentis global development engagement. We will strengthen cooperation with our youth organisation partners. Our aim is the development of and development with young people, not merely for young people.  
Need for investments and mobilization of resources  
As one of very few countries in the world, Denmark has fulfilled the UN objective of providing 0.7 per cent of its gross national income to official development assistance (ODA) since 1978 and we will continue to do so. Since 2016, the SDGs have been integrated into the national bill pertaining to the budget for development cooperation indicating which SDGs are addressed by each budget allocation. 
 
However, considerably bigger global investments will be required if we are to achieve the SDGs. Development assistance financed by public funds cannot and should not solve this challenge alone. ODA will continue to be one of the most important sources of capital injection in the least developed, most fragile and poorest countries, but going forward, partnerships which can catalyse and mobilise private funding, knowledge and new technology are needed. This includes partnerships with civil society organisations, research institutions, businesses, investors, etc. Our strength is what Denmark contributes as an overall society.  
 
The government assists developing countries by supporting them to mobilise their own resources through strengthening and enhancing the effectiveness of the national and local tax systems, combatting tax havens, and an improved business climate, which encourages private investments, economic freedom and respect for private property. Danish authorities use their experience and expertise within legislation, regulation and implementation of sustainable societal solutions and welfare to assist a number of developing countries who are confronted with fundamental social and value choices related to the SDGs. Through the initiative \0xECPartnering with Denmark n Danish Authorities in international cooperation, Denmark contributes to developing sustainable solutions with our partners. One example is South Africa, where water scarcity is a limiting factor for growth and already affects the livelihoods of the increasing population. Here Danish solutions and know-how on water management and efficiency are provided in a close partnership with the responsible public institution. 
 
The government invests in promoting human rights, democracy, rule of law and gender equality. We help build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions and democratic structures that respect and comply with human rights, promote participation and are representative. In line with this, we have announced our candidacy for the Human Rights Council in 2019n2021. We place sexual and reproductive health and the rights of women and girls at the centre of our work, and we will work for societies that do not discriminate based on gender, sexual orientation or any other grounds. By working to secure equal opportunities for everyone and eliminating discriminatory legislation, policies and practice, we will fight poverty and thereby reduce inequality.  
Peace, security and protection  
The government prioritises the prevention of conflicts and stabilisation efforts in and around fragile states and regions. Where appropriate, and with the aim of ending armed conflict and protecting civilians, the government deploys military forces within the frameworks of the UN, NATO or coalition operations. In a comprehensive way, the Peace and Stability Fund is another example which seeks to deepen integration between the areas of diplomacy, defence and development in order to enhance the impact and sustainability of Danish efforts. In parallel, Denmark invests in peace, stability, protection and increased resilience in developing countries. In neighbouring areas of crisis and conflict, Denmark supports internally displaced people, refugees and local communities and provides support via strengthened protection and improved livelihoods, education and employment opportunities. Demark will support democracies in their right to be democracies, including in their right to participate as equal partners in multilateral organisations. In Eastern Europe, we are involved in initiatives under the Danish Neighbourhood Programme for Eastern Europe and in the Middle East and North Africa we have the Danish-Arab Partnership Programme. 
Engaging at local, regional and international level 
The government will engage at local, regional and international level in the realisation of the SDGs. The EUis global influence is greater than that of Denmark alone. The government is therefore working to ensure that the EU and its member states integrate the SDGs in new policies and initiatives. The new European Consensus on Development and the Council Conclusions on a Sustainable European Future are important steps in this regard.  
 
Denmark, Faroe Islands and Greenland, participating in the Arctic Council as the Kingdom of Denmark, support the follow up on the SDGs in the work of the Council. Considerations are on the way on how to further integrate the SDG's in the strategic planning of the Council and it is highlighted as a priority for the Arctic Council working group on sustainable development under the next two years of Finnish chairmanship. 
 
Moreover, Denmark gives high priority to the realisation of the SDGs in the Nordic region through our engagement in the Nordic Council of Ministers. Denmark works together with other Nordic countries to develop concrete initiatives to follow up on the SDGs in the Nordic region. Similarly, the government is engaged in the follow-up of the SDGs in the Baltic region.  
 
The government will also work to realise the SDGs in the UN and other international fora and institutions, including the international financial institutions. In this regard, reform of the United Nations is crucial in order to maximise coherence among UN agencies in delivering on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and in order to foster greater collaboration, especially at country level, so that the UN as a whole delivers flexible and efficient solutions needed at the individual country levels to meet the SDGs. Denmark will push for such reforms, including through work in agency board meetings and by standing UN committees. 
 

 	 
 
 



 Means of  implementation  
Nyt kapitel 
 
Financing 
Government implementation of the Action Plan and sustainable development in general is funded by budget allocations as approved by Parliament in the annual budget negotiations for the coming fiscal year. As such, every ministry and government agency etc. is responsible for the allocation of sufficient resources. In case additional funds are requested, the government will assess such requests on its merits and according to regular procedure.  
 
Increasingly, Denmark will use public funds (ODA) to mobilise private investments in order to increase the contribution of the private sector to sustainable development in developing countries. This includes the Investment Fund for Developing Countries (IFU) as the central Danish development investment institution. By providing risk capital and advisory services, the IFU supports commercially viable projects in developing countries and emerging markets, which due to their profitability create a return on investment as well as having lasting positive development impacts in terms of job creation and positive environmental and social impacts. Moreover, Denmark has in partnership with Danish pension funds and other institutional investors established a Danish Climate Investment Fund (DCIF, in 2014) and an Agribusiness Investment Fund (DAF, in 2016) as innovative public-private partnerships. The DCIF offers risk capital and advice for climate investments in developing countries. The DAF invests in projects throughout the entire value chain \0xECfrom farm to pork. 
 
A good example of DCIF investments is the Lake Turkana wind power project in Kenya. It will be the biggest wind park south of the Sahara with a capacity of 300 MW producing around 15 per cent of Kenyais current power consumption. Danish wind turbine producer Vestas is supplying 365 wind turbines. This example illustrates that sustainable development can be a win-win-win for government, businesses and developing countries.  
 
The government is also preparing to launch an SDG Fund in 2018. Like the DCIF and DAF, the SDG Fund will be a public-private partnership between the Danish government and institutional investors. The fund will have a significantly larger capital base than previous funds and mobilise at least five times as much capital. This is an example of the way in which public funds can be leveraged to increase private investment, thereby becoming catalytic. 
 
 	 
 
Partnerships 
Partnerships are essential for achieving the SDGs as vehicles of innovation, investment, disseminating solutions and leaving no one behind. The government is committed to including players across society in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. This commitment is reflected in this report with independent contributions from civil society, businesses, municipality/regions, youth organisation and academic institutions.  
 
One example of this is the conference that was organised by civil society organisations and businesses in February 2017. 

 
Box 1  Conference Denmarkis follow-up on the SDGs 
The conference was held in anticaption of the governmentis Action Plan. The conference was organised as a multi-stakeholder forum to shed light on the possibilities and challenges that the SDGs present. After an opening speech by the Minster of Finance and the CEO of Novozymes, participants split up for group discussions where a panel consisting of members of Parliament, the private sector, civil society, etc. discussed different subjects, e.g. how to raise public awareness or ensure a measurable action plan. 

 
Another example is a recent conference on health in relation to SDG 3, as shown. The government encourages other stakeholders to follow these excellent examples. 
 

 
Box 2 Conference on health (SDG 3) 
One example of a partnership is in the health sector where the Doctors Association, Patient Association and Health Network invited a diverse group of stakeholders from the public and private sectors to participate in a discussion of the Action Plan and SDG 3. Each of the targets of SDG 3 were discussed, including possible new ways for stakeholders to engage with the target and proposals for the government in the work ahead. 
 
Universities, businesses, civil society organisations, municipalities and the government were represented. 

 
Another example is the initiative taken by Chora Connection to engage a number of artists and designers to make artistic interpretations of the 17 SDGs. The income from the exhibitions and sale of the paintings has been used for local projects for sustainable development and the organisation has also generated public debate on the role of art in promoting sustainable development and lifestyles. 
34 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 

 
Box 3 Chora Connection  
Danish organisation Chora Connection, which works to develop prototypes for sustainable solutions, has also held six seminars and a major workshop on the entry-points of Be, Eat, Grow, Learn, Live and Make. With the participation of a wide variety of stakeholders in society n from politicians, civil society organisations, businesses and those working in the public sector to artists and academics n Chora Connection has collected 130 original ideas and 20 concrete initiatives, which are now being developed to help meet the SDGs in Denmark. 

 
In the education sector, primary and secondary schools have taken initiatives to integrate learning about the SDGs, global development and sustainability into the curriculum and to work with children and young people to develop solutions to the SDGs. 
 
As appears from the above examples, many stakeholders in Danish society are committed to achieving the SDGs and actively working with the SDGs. This has tremendous value for the follow-up in Denmark and internationally as a union of efforts allows us to assume a greater burden/make a greater and more effective contribution. It is also a precondition for achieving the SDGs as all ideas, knowledge, experience and capital are needed to take advantage of the opportunities and deliver the solutions to the challenges that the SDGs present. 
 
In order to promote and ensure exchange of ideas, the Ministry of Finance will conduct formal meetings with relevant stakeholders. The purpose of the meetings will be to exchange ideas as well as to discuss possible courses of action. One of the meetings will be held after the presentation of the annual progress report, as this will be an occasion to review progress on the SDGs, not only for the government but for all relevant/involved stakeholders.  
 
The Ministry of Finance is also launching internal work on how to further develop partnerships. Partnerships created without government participation as well as partnerships with government participation are necessary.   
Engaging with Parliament  
The government wants to ensure that Parliament is included in the work to deliver on the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. This is especially the case in Denmark, as most governments are minority governments that need support in Parliament on a continuous basis.  
 
The Danish Parliament normally works through thematic standing committees corresponding to the governmentis division of labour along ministerial lines, e.g. for the Ministry of Energy, Utilities and Climate there is e.g. a corresponding Energy, Supply and Climate Committee in Parliament. Reflecting the cross-cutting nature of the SDGs and the need to work across party lines, Parliament in 2017 decided to organise itself in a network including members from across the standing committees. The network has held a public debate to identify priorities for its work, including the task of raising public awareness of the SDGs. 



 Conclusion and  Next Steps 
Nyt kapitel 
 
Denmark is committed to achieving and implementing the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. At a national level, the government has adopted an Action Plan for following up on the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs while stakeholders across Danish society are working actively to achieve and fulfil this ambitious agenda. The government is in dialogue with local and regional governments, and agrees that cooperation is needed to achieve the SDGs and create partnerships across society. 
The government has chosen to make the Ministry of Finance responsible for coordinating the implementation of the SDGs to ensure that it is integrated into domestic policy. To further this aim, the government will henceforth assess the consequences of new legislation and major initiatives for the SDGs. 
Finally, the government is seeking new ways to form partnerships across Danish society. Stakeholders across society are working ambitiously with the 2030 Agenda. There is great potential to be unlocked. 
At a global level, the 2030 Agenda constitutes the platform for Danish development cooperation and humanitarian action as reflected in the Danish strategy for development cooperation and humanitarian action, \0xECThe World 2030. The 2030 Agenda also plays a prominent role in the strategy for Denmarkis foreign and security policy 2017n2018. 
There are a series of deliverables in the short to medium term, including finalising the SDG Fund and the concept for assessing legislative proposals for SDGs, preparing the format for the annual progress report to Parliament and implementing the Action Plan.  
The government expects to contribute around 450 million USD to the SDG fund, which will be matched by an equal contribution from institutional investors. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is conducting negotiations with institutional investors and the government expects to launch the fund in 2018. 
The government will continue work on developing a model for assessing new legislation in relation to the SDGs, and also start reflection work on the progress report on the Action Plan to be presented in 2018 for the first time. 

 	 
 
The government will focus on the implementation and follow-up of the 37 targets set forth in the Action Plan. And perhaps just as important, the government will continue to integrate sustainability in policymaking and maintain Denmarkis position as a frontrunner in sustainable development. 
 	 

38 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
 	 
 
 



Annex 1.  Civil society, business,  municipalities, youth, academia 
 
 
Common message from stakeholders 
 
In Denmark, we have a long tradition of an open dialogue and cooperation with stakeholder groups. We collaborate on specific processes and in partnerships in and outside of Denmark. In connection with the negotiations for the UN Sustainable Development Goals, the Danish Government invited stakeholders to share their expectations of and wishes for the SDGs. The Danish stakeholders look forward to continuing this collaboration and sharing what we have learned n good and bad n as we continue with the aim of supporting a constructive learning environment. Given the challenges ahead we expect to be involved to a higher degree in future processes. In the following annexes, we have described our current status and we are happy to clarify and elaborate further if needed.  
 



 Civil society 
Contribution to the achieving the SDGs  
Civil society organisations from the two networks the Danish 92 Group and Global Focus see the realisation of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) as a new global visionary framework for the creation of sustainable societies for the worldis future generations. Members of the two networks have from an early stage engaged in SDG processes in Denmark and at an international level. Today, Danish civil society organisations play a vital role in achieving the 2030 Agenda in relation to the implementation, follow-up and review, engagement of different stakeholders and raising awareness. After the adoption, the individual members of the two networks have continued a two-pronged approach to the work with the implementation, follow-up and review:  
1) An upscaling of partnership-driven implementation efforts both in developing countries and with partners in Denmark and at a global level. 
 
2) Strengthening accountability measures in Denmark, focusing on Denmarkis domestic and foreign commitments to the agenda as well as increasing awareness-raising activities with the clear purpose of engaging a wide variety of Danish stakeholders and the general public. 
We consider strong commitments from the Danish government and from all relevant stakeholders to the 2030 Agenda crucial to the future of our planet. The implementation of the SDGs is of the utmost importance if we want to achieve sustainable, socially balanced development. We all need to do our part and to cooperate closely with different stakeholders for this to happen. From our perspective, implementation needs to include the following: a thorough gap analysis, an integration of strategies and work plans nationally and globally, identification of major domestic challenges, raising of national awareness, advocacy, policy coordination and recommendations and involvement of all relevant stakeholders. 
Implementation of the SDGs by members of the Danish 92 Group and Global Focus 
Shortly after the adoption of the goals in September 2015, the Danish 92 Group and Global 
Focus identified the need for more detailed discussions of the implementation of the SDGs by 
Danish civil society organisations and consequently arranged a two-day CSO event at UN 
City, Denmark. The overall aim of the event was to mobilise and engage Danish CSOs in the 2030 Agenda and to draft recommendations for the Danish government on the implementation of the goals. More than 100 CSO representatives participated and discussed national and global recommendations for all the 17 goals together with recommendations for implementation structures and communication. As a result, a report consisting of general recommendations on implementation, follow-up and review mechanisms, as well as two specific recommendations n one national and one global n for each of the 17 goals was published and presented to the Danish government at a high-level event in February 2016. Members of the Danish 92 Group and Global Focus continue to have a dialogue and share knowledge on work in relation to SDGs among themselves and to further develop methods on how to engage and increase the capacity of national CSOs on the 2030 Agenda. 
Political engagement and commitment 
Danish CSOs consider awareness, involvement and commitment of the Danish Parliament and politicians at national and local level critical to a successful implementation of the SDGs. To promote political engagement, a debate was organised at the Danish Parliament in March 2016 where members of Parliament and representatives from Danish CSOs discussed first steps for implementing the SDGs in Denmark. 
Furthermore, Danish CSOs are developing recommendations for the Danish government and Danish members of Parliament on a regular basis to encourage political engagement and commitment. We have contributed through the recommendation report mentioned above and through five specific recommendations for the national action plan, which was launched in March 2017 by the Danish government. Moreover, Danish CSOs wrote an open letter in April 2017 together with other stakeholders on how partnerships and collaboration between different stakeholders n including at a political level n are important to achieving the SDGs. 
Finally, Danish CSOs play a key role in forming a new cross-party parliamentary network for the SDGs in the Danish Parliament. Global Focus is the secretary for the network, working with strategic assistance from the Danish 92 Group. Several meetings of the new network have already taken place, and Danish CSOs have contributed with multiple inputs to the future work of the network. 
Multi-stakeholder involvement  
Among the key recommendations to the Danish government from Danish CSOs is the establishment of a multi-stakeholder platform, which is yet to materialise. As a first step towards the establishment of such a platform, Global Focus and the 92 Group arranged a multistakeholder roundtable meeting in February 2017 with relevant partners from other sectors. It demonstrated that a cross-sectoral discussion could result in more than 100 recommendations on Denmarkis implementation of the SDGs. With over 130 participants n including participants from the Danish Ministry of Finance, civil servants from different Danish ministries, municipalities, public institutions and stakeholders from all sectors n the meeting reflected a great interest and a demand to create an institutional multi-stakeholder platform that brings all stakeholders together.  
The two networks will in the coming months continue their efforts, together with other relevant stakeholders, to actually establish a multi-stakeholder platform to continue the dialogue 
44 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
among all stakeholders on the implementation of the SDGs in Denmarkis domestic and foreign engagements including progress, challenges, new partnerships, lessons learned, etc. There is a risk of a silo approach where businesses, civil society organisations, government entities and research institutions work in parallel as opposed to collaborating without a multistakeholder dialogue. Furthermore, there is a risk that valuable opportunities for interlinking between different sectors and goals have been missed. A multi-stakeholder platform could also strengthen and promote important knowledge-sharing between different stakeholders. 
Examples of contribution to the implementation of the SDGs: 
 
Sustainable development through raising awareness, mobilisation and the creation of new methods with use of partnerships and a focus on all three dimensions of sustainability 
Danish CSOs have contributed with new ways of raising awareness, new ways of mobilising people at all levels of society and new partnerships to create sustainable development within all three dimensions of sustainability n both in Denmark, in Europe and in the Global South. Below you will find a list of examples: 
\0xEF The World's Best News is a multi-stakeholder initiative, originally initiated by the Danish CSOs. Since 2015, a core objective of the news platform is to communicate the SDGs to the wider Danish population. WBN is campaigning nationwide in partnership with CSOs, the private sector, the UN, the Danish government and, in particular, the Danish youth associations. WBN is also coordinating the Worldis Largest Les-son, targeting Danish primary and secondary schools.  
 
\0xEF Oxfam IBIS has for more than ten years been developing massive outreach and highquality in-depth engagement with Danish school children about the situation of children in developing countries, the SDG framework and the right to quality education. Every year the campaign reaches a third of all school children n 180,000 n in the entire country, incl. Greenland. This is strengthening the global perspective of Danish children. 
 
\0xEF The Danish Family Planning Association (DFPA) works with partners from the Global 
South and North to integrate efforts on sexual and reproductive health and rights (target 
3.7), population dynamics, health (SDG3) and gender (SDG5) with environment (SDG15) and climate change adaptation (target 13.1) using a human rights-based approach. 
 
\0xEF ActionAid Denmark, UNDP and Global High Schools has developed and launched the educational website Verdensm\0xC2lene.dk, targeting teachers and students at secondary schools. To facilitate use of the site, ActionAid Denmark held workshops for teachers and students, reaching approximately 1,500 people and amassing 45,000 site visits. The site is mentioned in the Danish Global Goals Action Plan. 
 
\0xEF WWF supports the MSC certification of mussels from small-scale producer cooperatives in the Ben Tre province in Vietnam. The mussel production is sustainable in environmen-
 
tal, social and economic terms. Men and women alike are members of the cooperatives, have the same rights to the resources and to make decisions, and share equally the increased income from the MSC mussels. 
 
\0xEF \0xECEducation for Global Responsibility is a collaboration between 10 partners across Europe co-ordinated by the Danish UN Association with support from the European Commissionis Erasmus+ programme, involving NGOs in Bulgaria, Croatia and the UK, municipalities in Romania and Turkey, a vocational school in Slovakia and a high school in Denmark. It aims to mainstream education based on the SDGs and the partners are developing resources, including a methods box with practical examples of how to work with the SDGs, additional curriculum and a certification system: a self-assessment SDG checklist. The official launch will be in 2018, and the website is accessible online at globalresponsibility.eu.   
 
\0xEF CARE Danmark has strategically prioritised working with SDG17 to enhance multistakeholder partnerships. This has led to partnerships with three Danish companies, Chr. Hansen, Arla and Coop, in three unique projects that are all contributing to sustainable development by strengthening access to markets and new technology for poor farmers. 
 
\0xEF IWGIA has contributed to the development of "The Indigenous Navigator" n a community-based tool for collecting disaggregated data, recommended by the UN as a tool for monitoring the implementation of Indigenous Peoplesi Rights in relation to the SDGs. IWGIA also works to raise indigenous peoplesi awareness of the SDGs and enable their engagement and contribution to national review and follow-up processes in Asia, Africa and Latin America.  
 
\0xEF Beginning in the autumn of 2016, Save the Children Denmark, Childrenis Welfare and the National Council for Children ran a nationwide campaign to raise awareness in collaboration with Danish National Broadcasting bureau DR on Ending Violence against Children (VaC), linking to SDG 16.2, which commits all countries to ending VaC by 2030. Among other things, it includes a social media campaign involving Danish school children and parliamentarians from all Danish political parties. The campaign is expected to lay the foundation for long-term efforts, mobilising relevant players from all societal sectors to contribute to goal 16.2 in the next 13 years.  
 
\0xEF In the project \0xECMening og mestring (\0xECMastering/Coping course), Disabled Peoples Organisations Denmark, DPOD, has in collaboration with four Danish municipalities developed methods to develop new coping strategies and skills to include persons with disabilities in the labour market. The project is used as an example in our collaboration with disability umbrella organisations in Ghana and Uganda. 
Challenges and next steps 
Engaging national stakeholders is a key challenge and obvious next step for Danish civil society organisation. Efforts already made include the organisation of a multi-stakeholders roundtable in February 2017, as mentioned above. As a follow-up to this, the Danish Health and Development Network is organising an SDG3 conference to engage national stakeholders working on health domestically and in foreign policy as part of implementing the health 
46 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
goal. Furthermore, members of the Danish 92 Group and Global Focus will continue to contribute to the creation of a multi-stakeholder platform that can bring a range of stakeholders together in the work to implement the SDGs.   
 
A challenge for the Danish civil society organisations has been getting involved in the Danish governmentis implementation process, especially in relation to making the Danish SDG Action Plan. This n in the view of the civil society organisations n was a relatively closed process with limited opportunities to engage with the relevant ministries and civil servants. As a sector with a focus on broad engagement and mobilisation, we hope to see greater involvement of civil society organisations and other relevant sectors in future initiatives.       
  
The next step for the Danish 92 Group and Global Focus is to jointly come up with a strategy for how to accelerate and strengthen our own work with the SDGs. This includes capacitybuilding, policy and programme work n both in Denmark and internationally. For the members of the two networks, next steps will include mobilisation of political engagement in Danish society n engaging a wide variety of decision-makers and government representatives.  We will also continue our ongoing monitoring of the governmentis delivery on its commitments in relation to the SDGs in Denmarkis domestic and foreign diplomatic policies and financial engagements. In the latter step, our focus will be on whether major domestic challenges are identified, and we will continue advocating for increased ambitions in the Danish SDG Action Plan. 
 
 



 Business 
Contribution to the achievement of the SDGs  
Preface 
The Danish business community welcomes the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), recognising that the SDGs address global issues and call for ac-tion. We need to work on broader alliances between governments, within the business community, between civil society organisations and within academia to contribute to the achievement of the goals in Denmark and internationally. As a business, it is part of our responsibility to rethink production and consumption systems, to develop new innovative solutions across sectors and to explore digitalisation, technologies and services to create a more sustainable world. Businesses have a leading role in ensuring economic growth and good jobs in terms of social and environmental impacts, and as an engine of innovation to enable the transition towards a more sustainable world economy. We see opportunities for business growth both nationally and internationally in the SDGs, and we will: 
\0xEF contribute by playing our part in achieving the goals 
\0xEF include the goals in business priorities and business development 
\0xEF communicate our progress and share lessons learned when feasible 
\0xEF collaborate in partnerships with stakeholders to achieve sustainable solutions 
\0xEF Recommend that the Danish government support responsible business and awareness of the SDGs. 
What are we already doing?  
Businesses are set to play a crucial role in helping to achieve the SDGs either through activation of private finance or through business actions. Since the adoption of the 17 SDGs in September 2015, a significant number of businesses have embraced the Goals and are considering how they can reduce negative impacts and increase positive impacts. The experience of the Danish business community shows that there is no one-size-fits-all solution and that we will see many different ways of responding to the SDGs.  
The SDGs can be seen as a lighthouse for businesses of all sizes to identify their positive and negative impacts and identify how their strategies and activities might contribute to the achievement of the Goals. The Goals can be integrated directly into a business model or they can form part of factors considered in an investment decision. 
 

 
Case 1 
Sustainability as business case for SMEs: 
Reuse and refurbishment of IT (SDG 8,9 & 12) 
Refurb purchases used IT equipment for the purpose of refurbishing and remarketing it. 95 per cent of all acquired used products are reused and the last 5 per cent is recycled. Reused IT products offer 50 per cent budget savings and reduce CO2 emission by 80 per cent as the need for new production is reduced. Refurb also involves 20 per cent of its workers from the edge of the workforce, which means a business model with no production waste and sustainability in relation to the environment, socially and economically. 

Source: www.refurb.dk. 
 
The transformative potential of the SDGs cannot be reached without partner-ships. By combining our skills and leveraging our individual competences, partnerships enable us to work and impact change at a systemic level outside of our operational spheres. The partnership culture is strong in Denmark and public-private partnerships for research and innovation have resulted in new sustainable solutions and products in the Danish business sector. New knowledge has constantly raised the bar and put Denmark in a leading position globally. Partnerships across sectors and stakeholders can serve to create markets for sustainable solutions as well as building knowledge, competitive skills and new business cases.  

 
Case 2 Partnership for resource efficient water consumption in the food industry (SDG 12 & 17) 
DRIP will reduce water consumption in the Danish food industry by 15n30 per cent by developing new sustainable water and production technologies without compromising on product quality and food safety. The ambition is to produce more with less water, to create new export successes for the Danish technology and knowledge providers, and to improve the competitiveness of the food industry. DRIP is a public-private partnership between food companies, technology providers, universities, approved technology service institutes and national authorities. 

Source: www.drippartnership.com. 
 
According to a survey of Danish signatories to the UN Global Compact in May 2017, 71 per cent of the respondents are already working actively with the SDGs. Most state that they either work with the SDGs or want to work with them. The majority use the SDGs as a tool to brand and communicate about initiatives. 
Moreover, the survey reveals that the SDGs provide a common language for communicating how businesses contribute to sustainable development. In Den-mark, there is a long tradition of companies accounting for their performance beyond financials. Today, it is a legal requirement that the largest Danish companies disclose their material corporate responsibility 
50 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
impacts in their annual reports, covering human rights, climate, environment, employee conditions and anti-corruption. This year a large proportion of Danish businesses have included the SDGs as a part of their annual non-financial reporting. 

 
Case 3 Finding new ways to communicate and partnering the case of Danfoss (SDG 12) 
Together with forward-thinking retailers around the world, Danfoss has taken sustainable food retail solutions to the next level through the constant development of sustainable technologies and service concepts. Danfoss cooling solutions not only ensure the perfect conditions for food in temperaturecontrolled environments, they also help achieve near-zero downtime for store applications to improve food safety and reduce food loss, thereby meeting Goal 12.3 (by 2030, halve per capita global food waste at retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses). 

Source: www.danfoss.com. 
 
There is a long tradition in Denmark of companies integrating and building their business on a foundation of sustainability.  

 
Case 4 Commitment and Partnering the case of Novozymes (SDG 17) 
Novozymes has championed sustainability for many years. The SDGs have inspired their long-term strategy and targets, which include catalysing five global partnerships for change and saving 100 million tonnes of CO2 through innovation and the use of novozymes products. Novozymes is committed to having a positive impact on society by supporting wider UN goals, issues and initiatives such as Sustainable Energy For All, including a multi-stakeholder initiative designed to support the development and deployment of sustainable bioenergy around the world, working with IUCN, UN FAO, the Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials (RSB), Bloomberg New Energy Finance and the Carbon War Room. 

Source:  https://report2016.novozymes.com/sustainability/ungc-cop. 
 
The Danish business community does however cover a wide range of different sectors and companies of all sizes, and far from all of them have yet endeavoured to work with a sustainable business approach. The SDGs may therefore be an opportunity and a framework that drives the wider business community to adopt a sustainable business approach over time. There is much to gain from integrating the goals with the businessi priorities and business development to prepare for future market demands. To do so, businesses that are not yet working with the goals need inspiration, knowledge and motivation from those companies that are already working with the goals.  
 

 
Case 5 Reducing maritime corruption in partnership (SDG16) 
Maersk Line was among the founders of the Maritime Anti-Corruption Network (MACN) in 2011 n a network working towards a vision of a maritime industry free of corruption, enabling fair trade to benefit society at large. MACN is a cross-sector partnership comprised of vessel-owning companies, cargo owners and service providers, and collaborates with key stakeholders, including governments and international organisations, to identify and mitigate the root causes of corruption in the maritime industry. 

Source: www.maritime-acn.org. 
 
What will we do more of? 
Statistics Denmark has initiated work internationally to ensure the availability of timely, quality and granular data to help assess and monitor progress in achieving the SDGs. The business community recommend that we together with Statistics Denmark, the Danish government and other non-state actors collaborate to de-fine how the impact from the many Danish initiatives on the SDGs are measured. Our hypothesis is that such cooperation will form a multistakeholder-based dataset for sound decision-making that can be used for the governmentis annual review on progress towards the SDGs and potentially enable scalable solutions. 
To report on progress and share what we have learned, annual datasets and re-ports will not be enough. Other communication channels must be considered, not just by large companies but also by SMEs. The Danish business community will investigate how results can be measured and reported. In addition, we will share what we have learned n good and bad n to support a constructive learning environment, which we hope other stakeholder groups will support as well. 

 
Case 6 Evaluating the long-term impact of improving care of patients with type-2 diabetes in China (SDG 3) 
Novo Nordisk has examined the health economic impact of improving care for patients with diabetes in China and how this relates to meeting target 3.4 (reducing premature mortality due to noncommunicable diseases by one third by 2030). From the analysis, we have learned that activating other data streams, such as long-term outcome data and the cost of treating diabetes-related complications, generates information which can assist not just businesses but also governments in prioritising actions needed to achieve the SDGs. 

 
Our tradition of broad alliances across sectors and stakeholders needs to be pre-served and to grow around the SDGs to support innovation and other opportunities and growth. Companies should be incentivised to develop sustainable business models to contribute to a strong and growing economy based on a strategic and commercial approach to the SDGs. The 
\0xECBetter Business, Better World report (2017) concludes that life sciences, resource efficien-
52 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
cy, circular economy and bio-economy are among the 60 hotspots that will grow much faster than the global economy. These all encapsulate global challenges and Danish strengths.  
While there is growing interest in working with sustainable development issues and integrating this in business with high-level commitment, we have not yet reached the tipping point for the majority of Danish companies to include the SDGs actively in their strategies, plans or projects. To fully benefit from working with and delivering on the SDGs in a national context, the Danish business com-munity at large needs more guidance and awareness of the longterm benefits to be had from integrating the goals into core business. The fact that the goals will also catalyse national initiatives and services in Denmark is a driver for getting the wider business community involved in work on national sustainability initiatives and new markets.   
What do we recommend governments do to scale business  involvement? 
1. Governments should assist local businesses in translating the SDGs into local focus areas to raise awareness and thereby create an enabling environment for local businesses to get involved. The large and global companies play an important part, but to scale this up and get the wider business community to unlock their sustainability potential, we need to translate the goals into concrete action areas.  
 
2. The government must provide unambiguous long-term direction and certainty by defining consistent and predictable framework conditions that deliver both positive societal impacts and business benefits, and ensure that the business community is fully involved in consultation processes for the development and deployment of the SDGs. 
 
3. The government needs to consider how to increase investments in education and R&D as a basis for the development of new and the retaining of existing strengths. 
 
4. Governments can upscale business impact and investment by securing peaceful societies (goal 16). 
 
5. Fulfilling the SDGs will require immense levels of financing. While governments should play an important role, the bulk of the financing will have to come from financial institutions such as banks and institutional investors. Financial institutions see major opportunities in investing in sustainable development and activities that support the SDGs, but are often restricted from making certain investments by regulations and fiduciary duty. Governments should prioritise the use of public finance to leverage private capital for SDG investments. This can be done through mechanisms such as blended finance, where investors are insulated from some of the risk or have priority for some of the returns. The Danish Climate Investment Fund and the Danish Agribusiness Fund are examples of such mechanisms. 
 
6. The UN should consider increased investments in education and R&D as a basis for the development of platforms where innovation is needed. 



 Local and regional government 
Nyt kapitel 
 
Contribution to the achievement of the SDGs  
Regions and municipalities in Denmark 
The Danish governance system is decentralised and municipalities and regions are in charge of 70 per cent of public consumption and have a relatively strong political mandate, handling a wide range of tasks with a high degree of autonomy. 
Municipalities, regions and the Danish SDG Action Plan 
Being responsible for delivering the vast majority of all public services in Denmark, municipalities and regions are essential partners in achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 and delivering on the four priority areas of the Danish action plan: Growth and affluence; People; Environment and climate; and Peaceful and safe communities. 
Regions and municipalities play a key role as: 
\0xEF Public authorities regulating the fields of social services, environment and technology, education, health (SDG 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17).  
\0xEF Administrators and providers of essential physical infrastructure and utilities as well as climate measures (SDG 7, 9, 11, 13).  
\0xEF Facilitators of partnerships and of development and growth n both in civil society and in businesses (SDG 8, 11, 12, 16, 17).  
\0xEF Developers and administrators of much of the data needed as indicators for achieving the SDGs (SDG 17, all SDGs). 
\0xEF A link between the local and the global n from localising SDGs to citizen involvement and international development collaborations (SDG 11, 12, 13, 17). 
 
Implementing the SDGs is all about translating global agendas at a local and regional level through partnerships with relevant stakeholders. Danish municipalities and regions have a position of strength regarding working in multi-stakeholder set-ups, e.g. co-ownership of incineration plants, public-private partnerships in transportation and construction, or Agenda 21 activities involving citizens, businesses and civil society organisations. They can also contribute with experiences of collaboration between different authorities, and of creating legitimate, democratic systems and structures. 
 
The SDGs provide an opportunity for system export and a platform for developing new solutions for a range of municipal and regional tasks. 
 
They also provide common terms for describing and concretising sustainable development and framing the regional and municipal agendas regarding modernising the public sector, growth and employment, and export. 
KL 
Local Government Denmark (KL) is the national association of Danish municipalities and represents all 98 Danish municipalities. KL is primarily an interest group that safeguards the interests of the municipalities at a national and EU level. Besides this, KL is the employer organisation for all municipalities and has been assigned the right to negotiate binding agreements on salaries as well as terms and conditions of employment for a total of around 500,000 municipal employees. This makes KL one of the largest employersi associations in Denmark. Finally, KL negotiates the economic framework for the municipalities with the government. 
KLis Executive Committee has decided that KL shall support municipal activities related to the SDGs and take a lead in implementing the SDGs. 
Danish Regions 
Danish Regions is the national association for the five regions in Denmark. Its overall purpose is to safeguard the interests of the regions nationally as well as internationally. 
The most important tasks of the organisation are to safeguard regional government interests within healthcare, hospitals, special education, regional development, environment and finances, to act as spokesperson on behalf of the regions vis-\0x2021-vis the national government, the EU, other interest organisations and the media, and to negotiate pay and working conditions for regional employees. 
Cooperating with the national government to fulfil the SDGis 
In relation to the SDGs, KL and Danish Regions are, as representative organisations for local and regional governments, key stakeholders in terms ofto linking national and local/regional level initiatives, supporting municipalities and regions with resources and knowledge sharing, and influencing legislative and financial frameworks to facilitate decentralised authorities in delivering on the world goals. 
The associations of Danish Regions and Local Government Denmark are cooperating with the government to fulfil achieve the SDGis. Their vision is to keep Denmark as a free, prosperous and safe society by continuously incorporating the SDGs into political initiatives. As public authorities, the three parties agree on the need to establish partnerships across society to reach achieve the SDGs. 
Current situation 
The process of implementing the SDGs has only just started in Denmark, but there is a plethora of relevant experiences in Danish municipalities and regions which can be drawn on both nationally and abroad, whether these experiences are from within the SDG framework or not.  

 
Case 1 Citizen involvement, co-creation and bottom-up development 
Local Agenda 21 activities are transitioning to using the SDG framework. Regions and municipalities have integrated Agenda 21 with their planning strategies, e.g. Gladsaxe Municipality involves citizens in developing environmentally sustainable solutions and has made a catalogue of ideas for reducing environmental impact available to citizens. 

 

 
Case 2 Municipalities are deciding to implement the SDGs in their strategies 
Copenhagen Municipality decided to develop an action plan by August 2017, and Sonderborg Municipality have adopted a 4-17-42 approach, with the four pillars of social, economic, cultural and environmental coupled with the 17 SDGs and 42 key features. 

 

 
Case 3 Education for sustainable development 
10 municipalities are involved in the Green Generation project, which involves public awareness initiatives, developing \0xEC'green' curricula, and increased cooperation between different municipal departments, mainly the departments of environment and education. 

 
 	 
 
Case 4 Health 
The regions are working on several initiatives relating to SDG 3.  
 
Cancer: In Denmark, improving cancer treatment has high priority in the healthcare system. The cancer mortality rate has declined in the last couple of years due to theby introduction ofing cancer pathways, the improvement of treatment methods and the national screening programmes.  Chronic disease: Bringing care closer to the patientis everyday life is a priority. Out-of-hospital services, including telemedicine and treatment delivered by hospital staff at the patientiis home, are some of the methods used to improve quality of life for people with chronic diseases. 
Elderly: In Denmark, continuity of care and quality of treatment for elderly patients is important. A national action plan for the elderly medical patients together with regional initiatives focuses on preventing unnecessary hospitaliszations and increasing coherence across the health care sector. 

 

 
Case 5 Climate efforts and actions 
Public purchasing power affects the climate. 
Regional and local authorities are large enterprises, and their purchase of products and services impact the environment and climate. The running of hospitals, schools and other institutions are energy- intensive.  
 
The North Denmark Region is the first Climate Region in Denmark. The regional council is committedhas obliged itself to reducinge CO2 emissions by 2 pctper cent. each year until 2025. Each year the North Denmark Region produces a climate accountsing to show the amount of CO2 emissions produced by the regionsii services and activities. Through constructingBy building energy-efficient friendly buildings, using energy-efficient friendly vehicles and purchasing environmentally friendly products, the region is aiming toat reduceing its carbonenvironmental footprint as muchfar as possible. 

 

 
Case 6 International capacity building 
Along with a handful of municipalities, KL is part of a sStrategic sSector cCollaboration aiming toed at improve enhancing waste management in Turkey with a focus on pPublic aAwareness and collaboration between different levels of authority. 

 

 
Case 7 Circular economy and sustainable procurement 
KL has presented a guide for municipalities on the issues, and both regions and municipalities are already working successfully with them. For example, the Rethink Business project in the Central Denmark Region, which focuses on enhancing efficient use and reuse throughout the entire value chain and for new business models based on take-back schemes, repair and service, e.g. for work clothing. 

 
Strengths 
\0xEF Municipalities and regions have much of the data needed to monitor implementation of SDGs. 
\0xEF Many regions and municipalities have a lot of experience with facilitating and working in partnerships. 
\0xEF Networks and platforms for implementing SDGs are currently popping up all over Denmark as well as internationally. 
Challenges 
\0xEF Lack of public and institutional awareness n amongst citizens as well as local/regional politicians and municipal/regional employees. 
\0xEF Political support - Municipalities decide individually, in a political process, whether they wish to work with SDGs; support from the top is essential. 
\0xEF Clear roles - It is important that the roles and responsibilities of municipalities, the national government and KL respectively are clear. 
\0xEF Clear task n Municipalities may find concretizing and localising SDGs a challenge. 
\0xEF Financing n No funding has been provided for municipal and regional SDG-activities. 
This may prove a challenge. 
Roles of regions and municipalities in relation to SDGs 
As mentioned earlier, all the SDGs are directly or indirectly, related to the daily activities of the municipalities and regions and authorities on both levels play various key roles with regard to implementing SDGs. 
\0xEF Implementer (locally, regionally, internationally). 
\0xEF Facilitator/partner (gathering the team of relevant stakeholders, catalyst for change, linking global, national and local levels, involving citizens in driving change from the bottom up). 
\0xEF Communicator/awareness raiser (citizens, across regional and municipal departments, businesses etc.). 
\0xEF Policy maker n Aiming to create an enabling environment for implementing SDGs, eradicating legal, economic and organisational barriers. 
Future activities 
Several municipalities are already, or are on the verge of, working within the SDG framework, while others are unsure about whether and how to tackle the agenda. 
The regional authorities are all implementing plans encompassing several of the SDGs. Danish Regions has recently published its vision for sustainable healthcare, focusing on health for all and health for life. 
KL has a key role in helping municipalities to start on the SDG agenda by raising awareness and providing information about the SDGs, developing methods for implementation, ensuring knowledge sharing, and facilitating and financing cross-sectoral partnerships that can deliver innovative solutions. For this purpose, KL will establish an internal initiative across relevant KL departments to ensure proactive implementation of the SDGs, and securing funding for KL and municipal activities, as well as an SDG portal providing knowledge and resources to municipalities. The initiative aims to deliver the following: 
\0xEF To raise awareness among municipalities, and support the development of awarenessraising materials for municipalities to use. 
\0xEF Map existing experiences and translate them into SDG-terms in order to show how much experience there is to draw on. 
\0xEF Translate SDGs into a municipal context to make global goals relevant at the local level. 
\0xEF Identifying which SDGs are most relevant for (individual) municipalities, thus promoting the challenge-based approach to identifying opportunities. 
\0xEF Identify possible sources of funding, including developing new forms of private-public collaboration. 
\0xEF Support and share development of methods with emphasis on partnerships and cocreation. 
\0xEF Provide knowledge and consultancy services. 
\0xEF Enter into international development projects and partnerships together with municipalities. 
\0xEF Establish a framework for monitoring municipalities' contribution to SDGs, including development of indicators. 
Even though new activities are not necessarily initiated with the SDGs in mind, they are certainly aligned with the UN intentions and goals. The consequences of climate change reveals the need for action and to view challenges as possibilities. The scope of activities depends on funding. 
 
 
 

 	 
 
 



 The Danish  Youth Council n DUF 
Nyt kapitel 
 
Contribution to the achievement of the SDGs  
In light of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, young people represent a huge resource and a key stakeholder. In the new strategy for Denmarkis development cooperation and humanitarian action, the following is stated: \0xECYoung people must be given the opportunity to enhance their participation and influence in society as involved, committed and equal players with the ability and opportunity to take development into their own hands. The very success of the agenda hinges on promoting an enabling environment for all young people to get involved and take part on all levels in shaping a more peaceful, just and sustainable world. 
Young people in Danish civil society 
Civil society constitute a critical pillar in Danish society and democracy in which young people are actively involved. Danish youth organisations enjoy an enabling space and good structural conditions, as well as a long tradition of civil involvement and political influence. The sector promotes democratic communities based on core values such as participation, dialogue, volunteerism, inclusion and influence. Furthermore, the youth sector has long proven its effectiveness in including and empowering both vulnerable and marginalised young people, promoting a more inclusive and equal society related to the key principle of \0xECleaving no one behind. 
 
The mental health and well-being of young people is an alarming issue. During the last five years, polls conducted by the Nordea Foundation and the Happiness Research Institute shows that loneliness, stress and lack of psychological resilience are the most common issues faced by Danish youth. In response to another issue, minority youth living in marginalised and socially vulnerable areas in Denmark are increasingly striving to be included meaningfully in democratic processes via new or traditional Danish youth organisations and municipal youth councils. However, unequal inclusion, lack of diversity and rootedness remains a great challenge with which both municipalities and the youth sector continue to actively deal.  
  
Regarding political engagement, polls conducted by Gallup and Epinion for DUF show that Danish young people aged 16n25 are generally democratically minded and confident in democracy from an international perspective. There are, however, some worrying trends. 
 
Since 2013, the number of young voters who trust politicians has declined by 12 per cent, and 18 per cent are not sure that they have faith in democracy. It is of even greater concern that in 2017 only 46 per cent of Danish young people considered themselves \0xECpolitically interested, since this number was 81 per cent in 2010. Moreover, the data shows that particular challenges exist in terms of young voter participation, with data showing that young people aged 18n29 generally have a voter participation rate of around 80 per cent, which is 5n10 per cent lower than other age groups. This is a particular problem in relation to the descendants of immigrants, who maintain a voter participation as low as 53.4 per cent according to data from the latest parliamentary election in 2015. Worryingly, this is in fact lower than the voter participation rate of first-generation immigrants. 
SDG awareness and implementation 
According to a poll carried out by Wilke for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 16 per cent of young people aged 18n34 are aware of the SDGs. Among other things, this seems to indicate that a growing number of youth organisations and NGOs in the development sector have been promoting the goals and the agenda through a number of campaigns, debates and activities throughout the country and online.   
  
Within the youth sector, several organisations are increasingly addressing and adapting the SDGs in their strategies and activities, leading to further strategic interest and dialogue across the sector and among its volunteer members. Still, this commitment is primarily to be found in the youth organisations engaged in development cooperation with partners in the Global South. Focus on domestic implementation across the sector is growing, but needs to be further promoted, accompanied by a comprehensive coordination mechanism. 
  
A number of youth organisations are raising awareness and increasing commitment internally in terms of integrating all three dimensions of sustainable development in their work. Aspects of environmental awareness are steadily being promoted, addressing and challenging the sectoris own carbon footprint and commitment to delivering results. A shared political interest in engaging with representatives and official youth delegates at the UNFCCC meetings indicates further interest and commitment across the sector.  
  
The state of awareness and promising development illustrate an opportunity for Danish youth organisations to take concrete action and accelerate the needed operationalisation of a transformative and coherent agenda which most are already supporting, directly or indirectly. 
  
Moreover, the 2030 Agenda has been integrated into the curricula at a number of high schools and higher educational institutions. Since 2015, the Danish version of Worldis Largest Lesson, \0xECVerdenstimen, has spread to primary and secondary school with a growing interest among school teachers and students. Other NGOs such as Save the Children, Oxfam Ibis and Concito have long been involved in school campaigns and curricula, and are now also addressing the SDGs in classrooms throughout the country. Finally, the 35 UNESCO ASPnet schools have adopted the agenda into their thematic areas. However, there is a need for a strategic framework for the educational activities, ensuring that all young people are introduced to the SDGs as part of the curriculum at all levels of the Danish educational system as reflected in SDG 4.7.  
SDG-based actions and initiatives launched 
Building the momentum of youth action, a number of events and initiatives are showing the way forward, resulting in increased awareness of, commitment to and ownership of the agenda among youth organisations and young people. 
Since 2015, a collaboration between Worldis Best News and the Danish Youth Council has led to cross-political dialogue on the role of young people in terms of the 2030 Agenda. At the political festival \0xECFolkem\0xAFdet, leaders of the major political youth wings now meet annually to debate the SDGs, drawing a crowd of young people and members of their parties. Moreover, the SDGs are debated and promoted among all kinds of stakeholders throughout the festival. A number of youth organisations have paved the way alongside the NGOs.  
In 2016, the Danish Christian organisation for children and youth, FDF, held its major national camp. At the camp, DanChurchAid Youth arranged daily games and activities related to the SDGs, inviting hundreds of young participants to actively explore the goals and the visions behind them. Leaders of FDF were invited to consider how FDF might play a part within the framework in the coming years; two months later, 1,300 young FDF leaders participated in a leadership seminar addressing the SDGs and how to involve children and young people in future activities. 
This summer, 20,000 Danish and international scouts and guides will gather at the Jamboree Denmark 2017 outside the city of S\0xAFnderborg. Across the camp, 17 colorful SDG towers will invite children and young people to take part in activities related to the different goals, turning the fields into a place of games, dialogue and scientific laboratories on how to take concrete action for the different goals.  
International partnerships and engagement 
Danish youth organisations have long been engaged in international networks and development cooperation together with local youth partners across the globe, supported by the MFA via funds from CISU and the Danish Youth Council. Practicing youth-led development in equal partnerships, the corporations have proven to be highly effective and socially sustainable in line with a large number of goals and targets.  
  
The Danish UN Youth delegate programme was relaunched in 2015 in collaboration between the MFA and the Danish Youth Council, which meant that there was one official youth delegate at the UNGA (and at HLPF in 2017). Giving Danish youth organisations a voice at the UN, the youth delegate programme could be further strengthened by both extra seats and fora, allowing the Danish youth sector to fully contribute and take part with all its experience and aims in both discussions and negotiations at a UN level.  
  
In new development strategy \0xECThe World 2030, the MFA has highlighted young people as one of the cross-cutting themes. This has been followed by a review of the MFAis work with young people. There is a need to make sure that the recommendations will be implemented and that young people, in Denmark and abroad, are continually heard as an active part of the 2030 Agenda both in terms of implementing and monitoring the SDGs. Denmark and the MFA have an important role to play on this, actively working for young people as an equal key stakeholder.  
 
Gaps and Steps to be taken 
A monitoring mechanism for national progress related to young people: There is a need for a mechanism to monitor specific domestic youth issues in regards to the SDGs. Goals such as 3, 4, 5, 8 and 16 will, by their nature, have differing perspectives for young people as a group compared to the rest of society. As such, there is a need for specific youth indicators as well as a monitoring body, which should have substantial, democratic youth representation. This means that young people must be involved in developing and defining these indicators. 
A coordination mechanism for youth initiatives within the 2030 Agenda framework: To enable the acceleration of youth action and commitment to the agenda, there is a need for greater coordination for initiatives taken by both governmental and non-governmental stakeholders within the field of youth. A forum for coordinating these efforts would allow knowledge-sharing, transparency and utilisation of synergies between different initiatives. Moreover, there is a lack of capacity and insufficient counselling within the youth sector on how to best work with the agenda. A coordination mechanism should thus encompass advisory services on working with the agenda, develop best-practice tool kits and find ways to incorporate underrepresented and unorganised young people in its work. Finally, financial resources must be mobilised in order to ensure the required operation. 
Maintaining strong youth involvement in development work: Internationally, the monitoring and evaluation of the operationalisation of Denmarkis youth focus in its development strategy must be carried out with real and adequate representation of young people, especially through youth civil society organisations involved in the field. 
Raising the bar n Danish Youth as credible and ambitious partners for development: To advance the SDGs nationally, young people must be thought of and worked with as a resource and key stakeholder. In all fields, there must be a greater willingness to include young people not only in an advisory capacity but also to ensure sustainable funding and spaces for youth-led activities related to the SDGs. Moreover, youth organisations are the best available partner for raising awareness of the SDGs among the next generation and ensuring democratic legitimacy and interest in the 2030 Agenda framework.  
The Danish Youth Council (DUF) 
The Danish Youth Council (DUF) is an umbrella organisation consisting of 72 diverse childrenis and youth organisations. DUF promotes democracy as a way of life, actively engaging young people in organisations and society locally, nationally and internationally. Working cross-politically, DUF highlights and safeguards the interests of its member organisations in relation to politicians and public authorities, ensuring the framework for voluntary youth organisations on a political level.  
 
DUF works via a number of projects to contribute to the implementation of the SDGs and strengthening democracy as a whole. A main project in this regards is the \0xECSchool Election, which is facilitated by DUF in cooperation with the Parliament and Ministry of Education and is a simulated election with more than 60,000 participating students. The elections have run on a test basis for two years, and by making this mandatory and recurring, young voter partic-
66 	Voluntary National Review \0x2211 June 2017 
ipation could be strengthened. Moreover, DUF is working to lower the voting age to 16 to ensure a greater degree of youth involvement and influence. Furthermore, DUF is working through the project \0xECday of democracy, which visits vocational schools and production schools, to ensure that even young voters from disadvantaged backgrounds are included and motivated to vote, as well as informed about the opinions of the different parties and clear on their own opinions. Moreover, DUF works through public discourse and organisational work to ensure adequate funding and resources for youth civil society, thus working towards ensuring strong partnerships as outlined in SDG 17.  
 
DUF also works to ensure that Danish society lives up to the principle of \0xECleaving no one behind. In terms of integration of immigrants, this poses a particular challenge, as schools lack prayer rooms, making it difficult for religious minorities to receive the quality education outlined in SDG 4 without compromising their religious liberty, and much public and civil life is not geared towards being inclusive to immigrants and descendants of immigrants. To this end, DUF is working to make society more inclusive.  
  
Internationally, DUF contributes to the 2030 Agenda through a number of youth-led projects and partnerships. With funding from the MFA, DUF supports equal partnerships between Danish youth organisations and youth organisations in the MENA region and developing countries, strengthening the organisations and their influence as well as promoting democracy as a way of life among young people. As of 2017, approximately 60 different projects have been administered and implemented by the organisations involved and their members, the projects entailing a wide variety of issues and approaches. Regarding the 2030 Agenda, the guidelines for the international projects ensure that all DUF-funded projects address SDG 5.1, 5.5, 10.2, 10.3, 16.7 and 17.17. In addition, most projects address other goals and targets. A single example will be outlined.  
 
In Tunisia, the Danish YMCA Scouts and Les Scouts Tunisiens have succeeded in developing democratic structures within the Tunisian scout movement, educating young leaders and promoting democratic citizenship, as well as strengthening young peopleis rights to participate in decision-making processes in their local communities. Most recently, a project on entrepreneurship has helped young Tunisian entrepreneurs to create business plans in order to create their own jobs (SDG 8.3, 8.5, 8.6). 



 Academic institutions 
Contribution to the achievement of the SDGs  
Introduction 
This text is based on input from researchers at all Danish universities and other research institutions. It does not cover all SDG-relevant research at these institutions or express representative views of the involved institutions. It does, however, highlight five issues of particular importance to SDG implementation. 
 
1. Stakeholders need to go beyond silo thinking 
Although we all have been fascinated by the pictures of the Earth from space that have been available since the 1960s, we have really only recently begun to focus on the ramifications of the feature most obvious in these pictures, i.e. the fact that the Earth is self-contained and not attached or linked to any other body in space. The inescapable conclusion of this fact is that the natural resources upon which the development of our society is based are not infinite. It also means that when we dispose of \0xECwaste produced by our activities, it will remain n somewhere n in Earthis ecosystem. Despite this unequivocal conclusion, the adoption of the SDGs in 2015 represents the first global intergovernmental acknowledgement of resource limitation. Acknowledging that resources are limited leads to a discussion of how they should be shared by humans across the globe. The SDGs represent a vision for a fair division of resources among the global population and, thus, a new milestone for our understanding of sustainable development. Achieving this vision requires the full integration of the social, environmental and economic components of sustainability.  
Historical examples of how \0xECsilo or \0xECsector thinking has created unsustainable trajectories elsewhere in society abound. Focus on production and profit within the agricultural sector has, for example, contributed to decreased food insecurity (SDG 2), and, thereby, better health for many (SDG 3) as well as economic growth (SDG 8). However, it has also resulted in a reduction in the quality of life on land (SDG 15) and in the ocean (SDG 14) as well as negatively impacting climate stability (SDG 13) and, in some regions, access to water (SDG 6). Every human activity will of course interact with any number of SDGs, and achieving any individual goal will be dependent on and have implications for other goals n in some cases positively and, in others, negatively. The challenge in implementing the SDGs is to achieve a balance considering the complexity and need for integration between goals in the action plans. To do so requires a transition from sector to system thinking in all our activities. History gives us good examples of great progress being made within, for example, the health sector, when clear goals (i.e. eradicating polio) are adopted. We also see astounding progress of renewable technologies in the energy sector n again, thanks to a clear vision of how the energy sector should support societal goals. All decisions made in Denmark n and all other countries n regarding energy and all other infrastructure as well as the development of the health, food, water, environment, education and other systems should be made with the visions presented in the 2030 Agenda. An urgent task for research is to concretise what the SDGs actually mean for each of these systems. Knowledge gaps are particularly evident at the interface between related goals and for solutions benefiting the fulfilment of goals in an integrated way. 
2. Technology will be a driver and enabler for reaching the SDGs 
It is recommended that the governmentis operationalisation of the Action Plan put more emphasis on technology as a driver and enabler for reaching  the SDGs than is the case in the Action Plan document. Denmark has remarkable academic and industrial competences in sectors that are essential for meeting many of the goals (renewable energies, food processing and food and feed ingredients sector, the health sector, environmental engineering, ecosystem services and water technologies, etc.). For all these sectors science-based, highlevel technology applications are a fundamental part of explaining the globally high-profile position. Most of such technologies have inherent potential not just for central major investment uses but also for investment uses at local and decentralised levels. 
Furthermore, digitalisation should be considered a technology phenomenon that influences all sectors, and will constitute a continuously increasing challenge and opportunity for efficiently transforming societies from being fossil-based to renewable-based. It is involved in all phases: research, product development and regulatory frameworks. Similar open societal use of big data can improve how we work towards meeting the goals and how we monitor progression in relation to the SDGs. 
It is recommended that we work systematically to translate technological positions of strength into technology export schemes, drawing on Denmarkis wealth of experience in the field of green technology exports. The potential is great n e.g. with green technologies as the case: for creating jobs, and achieving improved resource efficiency and a faster development towards substituting fossil-based products and hereby contributing directly to feeding and fuelling a growing population also under climate change challenged agriculture and an acute need for decreasing emissions. 
The national SDG Action Plan naturally has a national scope, but it could be more ambitious in terms of international outlook n as a nation we have a major opportunity to use our expertise to contribute to reaching the SDGs while at the same creating demand for Danish solutions. 
The national SDG Action Planis section on \0xEBProsperityi, goal 4, puts focus on strengthened research leading to market-oriented solutions, and goal 7 highlights private sector involvement and financing. Basic research should be prioritised together with emphasis on mechanisms that support local development and collaborative applied research, including between academia and the private sector. 
It is recommended that the government involve academia in SDG implementation. One of the strengths of the SDG framework is its strong communicative qualities which can mobilise 
diverse stakeholders in support of the goals. However, the ability to reach each goal and their targets in 2030 will depend on scientific knowledge on the interconnectedness of the SDGs. 
3. The government has a central role to play in enabling the  private sector to contribute strongly to the SDGs 
Current research addresses the role of the private sector in economic growth and development, including job creation and innovation (SDGs 8+9) and focuses in particular on value-chain initiatives intended to enhance competition in target markets, stimulate labour market growth and promote good practices (also in terms of Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability). Another salient topic is the analysis of forms of entrepreneurship and innovation, including R&D of new products and services ranging from green technologies to new forms of collaboration and management (intra-firm, networks, value chains and publicprivate partnerships) and expansion of market access through distribution channels and logistics. Work is also being undertaken to investigate development and growth of capabilities and resources in firms, in headquarter-subsidiary relations and in supplier relations (intended to strengthen/achieve SDGs). 
In that context, certain issues constitute challenges in Denmark and abroad. A practical issue is that research and collaborative efforts between academia and the private sector rely on elements sometimes being difficult to maintain over time. Such elements include a) sufficient open access to data where confidentiality clauses may restrict academic space, b) continuity in collaboration as signed agreements and/or relations may be terminated/cease with a change of management among private sector representatives, and c) the non-existence of a \0xECbusiness case as the activities might not always entail a win-win situation for the involved parties. 
Another issue concerns how productive the SDGs will be as guidelines for the development of more sustainable business practices, although the goals seem to have increasingly broad support from the business community. While some of the goals evidently point to the private sector as a main driver of development (e.g. goal 7 on renewable energy, goal 8 on jobs and growth, goal 9 on innovation and infrastructure, and goal 13 on climate action), others place government in the driveris seat. Government certainly has a crucial role to play in making the SDGs accessible to businesses large and small, providing guidance and communicating expectations. Danish government policy on CSR and sustainable development increasingly relies on international principles such as the UN Global Compact, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. With this in mind, the government should play an active role as mediator and translator of the SDGs for the business community, to raise awareness and build capacity. For example, the SDGs can be used to promote government prerogatives regarding innovation in the area of circular economy (in support of several of the goals) and, more broadly, to provide a road map and best practices for how companies can select and prioritise the areas in which they can make the greatest impact. What is to be preferred: a broad or narrower business engagement with the SDGs? Is it better for companies to commit to progress in relation to a wide selection of goals, or to focus their efforts on one or a few goals that are well aligned with their core competencies? How can the SDGs, individually or in conjunction, serve as templates for sustainability reporting (vis-\0x2021-vis section 99a of the Financial Statements Act)? How can companies deal with potential tension and contradictions between different goals? 
 
Obviously, there is no \0xECone size fits all answer, but the government should enable and empower private companies to work seriously with the SDGs. 
4. Consequences of welfare reforms on SDG10 should be  considered 
Inequality has been increasing in Denmark within the past 25 years, but primarily since the beginning of the millennium. The Gini coefficient increased from 0.24 to 0.29 in 2003n2015. This is not solely due to economic or welfare reforms, but also due to changing demography, the increase of top incomes (rising capital incomes etc.) and increasing inequality in  wage incomes, but some reforms have also contributed to the trend towards inequality. The general lack of a coherent or systematic policy effort to counter forces behind inequality is also noteworthy in itself. 
Reforms in the past ten years have included lowered progressivity of the tax system as well as both lower levels and decreased indexation of benefits, shortened benefit duration and stricter eligibility criteria. Accordingly, major themes in Danish research with relevance for the Sustainable Development Goals include: 
\0xEF Reforms have contributed to an increasing incidence of poverty at the bottom of the income scale, and poverty and lowered benefit levels are, even in Denmark, associated with various forms of \0xEBdeprivationi, i.e. inability to attain certain basic standards of living or goods (food, clothing, ability to pay bills, etc.).  
\0xEF Reforms have increased the incidence of child poverty, and as elsewhere, research in Denmark has established that child poverty affects both educational attainment or different forms of well-being later in life.  
\0xEF While overall educational attainment has increased for all groups, the gap in educational mobility has persisted. General socio-economic mobility has declined somewhat.  
\0xEF Inequality in life expectancy has increased. 
\0xEF Inequalities in perceived economic security have increased following the recession and reforms, and perceived insecurity has become increasingly associated with political mistrust. 
\0xEF Increasing centralisation of public services has been a trend in the new millennium. This has fueled widespread popular dissatisfaction with regional inequality, particularly outside metropolitan or urban areas (one policy initiative is notable here: in late 2015, the government announced its decision to move some government agencies away from the Copenhagen area). 
\0xEF Inequality is negatively associated with various aspects of \0xEBsocial cohesioni (such as for instance social trust), although the exact causal mechanisms between (in)equality and social cohesion is still subject to discussion. 
These issues will require close monitoring in future reform initiatives. 
 	 
5. Identify weak SDG implementation through country  comparisons 
The SDGs represent a peak of efforts to establish global norms for the direction in which societies should develop. The Goals cover many and diverse issues, and they are to different degrees ambitious and specific. This prompts the question: how likely are they to be taken seriously in national policies around the world? The diffusion of global norms is an issue that has been studied thoroughly in social science. Some research suggests that global norms tend to spread to all countries relatively unchanged once they are supported by a significant number of states. Other research indicates that norms change when stakeholders engage with them in specific contexts. Accordingly, the contents of policies referring to global norms may differ significantly from country to country. 
The Nordic countries share many characteristics as rich societies with welfare states, wellestablished democracies and a common set of values corresponding very well with the SDGs, including gender equality, environmental concern, egalitarianism and accountable institutions. As relatively small countries with open economies, they also share an interest in achieving the SDGs at a global level because this will be the best insurance for their own endeavours to maintain stable welfare societies. For these reasons, one would expect the Nordic countries to invest heavily in the SDGs at home and abroad in a similar manner. 
Although the Nordic countries all address the SDGs as unavoidable global norms, they do so rather differently. They allocate significantly different proportions of GNI for official development assistance (in 2016, Norway: 1.11 per cent, Sweden: 0.94 per cent, Denmark: 0.75 per cent, Finland: 0.44 per cent and Iceland: 0.25 per cent) and they address the national implementation of the SDGs with different strength. While Norway has given the responsibility of achieving each of the 17 Goals and their associated targets to a ministry which has to report on the follow-up activities during the annual elaboration of the state budget, Finland organises an annual conference for all stakeholders to discuss its progress, and Denmark has an action plan where government policies are related to the SDGs, but not to the targets and with few deadlines. Carrying out a gap analysis to identify weaknesses in achieving the SDG targets would also strengthen the national implementation of the goals. 
Contingent factors in terms of political opportunities, stakeholder alliances, economic constraints, social disturbances, etc. significantly influence how stakeholders engage with global norms. Given the clear interest that the Nordic countries have in the realisation of the SDGs as well as the normative \0xECmatch between the SDGs and the Nordic societies, research on how and why contingent factors limit the engagement of some of these countries may help strengthen SDG implementation. 



Statistical follow-up on the 2030 Agenda  Denmark 
Data on selected indicators showing the development from 2005-2015 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
The 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2015. The Agenda politically commits UN Member States to sustainable development in five dimensions (\0xEB5Psi): People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, and Partnership. Those dimensions include pledges to eliminate poverty and hunger, to work on sustainable consumption and production, and to promote gender equality. 
 
At the present stage of work with the 2030 Agenda, each Member State needs to map its current situation in order to identify areas where progress is needed. A number of studies have been conducted with a view to assess the current standing of Member States. The global picture that appears from these studies shows Denmark as having a relatively good starting position. There are many areas where we are well on track; nevertheless there are also areas where there is room for improvement.  
 
This report is the first of its kind and presents a statistical snapshot of the situation in Denmark with respect to the SDGs that can serve as a starting point for public debate. Given the relatively limited time for its production, we have mainly concentrated on data already available in Statistics Demark. Going forward, our aim is to develop and strengthen statistical underpinning of the 2030 Agenda follow-up with the final goal of creating a full statistical picture of Denmark in relation to the SDGs. 
 
 
 
 
Statistics Denmark, July 2017 
 
J\0xAFrgen Elmeskov, National Statistician 
 
 
 
 	 
 
1. Introduction 
This statistical summary is the first attempt to gain an overall SDG picture for Denmark. There are three major purposes behind it: (1) to provide statistical information for the Danish Voluntary National Review during the High Level Political Forum in July 2017; (2) to illustrate the development of the selected indicators during a ten-year period (2005-2015); and (3) to provide a starting point for a broad public debate as well as information on statistical initiatives to be taken in order to ensure a report on a full set of indicators in the following years.  
 
It is our plan that this report will be one of the building blocks in a further process where a more elaborate investigation of the data as well as wide consultations with other governmental agencies and data providers will take place. This next step will improve our basis for providing a fuller picture of Denmark with respect to the SDGs as well as extensive data coverage for the global reporting of the indicators. 
	1.1 	Short on some basic structures of Danish Society 
Denmark is a small country with a well-educated and ageing population of 5.7 million inhabitants (25 per cent of the population is 60 years or more). The labour market activity rate is high n 79 per cent (first quarter of 2017) n and nearly as high for women (76 per cent) as for men (81 per cent). Two-thirds of the labour force works in the private sector and one-third in the public sector. The Danish welfare state is universal and comprehensive. It gives free access to health care and education to the highest level, social services and care for families with children and the elderly as well as social benefits for the unemployed, the disabled, and the elderly including a universal state old age pension for all citizens. The welfare system is governed by the state and run by 98 municipalities (health care is run by five regional bodies). Municipalities are under state regulation also responsible for the provision of water, electricity and sanitation as well as for the environment and physical planning. All water provision comes from ground water and major parts of the production of electricity are sustainable, based on electricity from windmills. Furthermore, parts of the heating come from biomass.  
 
These basic structures are important in relation to the description of the SDGs in a Danish context. The fact that the majority of Danes work, that there is a universal state old age pension and benefits for unemployed and disabled persons is important in economic terms. The fact that all Danes have free access to health care, education, and social services for families with children and for the elderly and that all households have access to water, electricity, heat and sanitation plays an important role for a variety of the sustainable development goals. 	 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2. 	Our approach  
The selection of indicators for this report is based on two main criteria. Data should be immediately available as part of the statistical production system at Statistics Denmark either as part of the programme of statistics published by Statistics Denmark or as data supporting the statistical programme. Also, data should be available in ways that make it possible to create a ten-year time-series to show the development from 2005 and up to 2015. 
 
A third principle, though not really a selection criterion, is to make an international comparison whenever possible between the development in Denmark and the development either within the European Union (EU) or with the development in OECD countries. This is only possible in relation to 20 of the 62 indicators in this report; and in some cases the comparison is only possible for the last year in the time series or only between Denmark and the other Scandinavian countries.  
3. 	International comparison of SDG maturity 
Studies conducted by OECD and Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) have compared countriesi starting positions as regards compliance with the SDGs. 
 
The general conclusion from the studies is that Denmark, together with the other Nordic countries, has a good starting position with respect to the SDGs. This means that, from a global perspective, they are relatively close to achieving the SDG targets. However, even the Nordic countries are quite far away from the targets for a number of indicators.  
3.1 	OECD study 
According to the OECD study \0xEBMeasuring distance to the SDGs targetsi, July 2016, Denmark has a good and well-balanced overall starting position on the SDGs compared with other OECD countries. In the study, based on 127 available indicators allowing coverage of 94 of the 169 SDG targets, Denmark has currently achieved 26 of the 
2030 targets1. The remaining distances to achieving the targets are small in most areas, but some challenges remain. 
 
The figure below shows how far Denmark has already progressed towards each available target. The longer the bars the shorter the distance is to be travelled by 2030, i.e. to reaching a specific target. Targets are clustered by goals, and goals are clustered by the \0xEB5Psi of the Agenda: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, and Partnership.  
 
Figure: Denmarkis current distance from achieving SDGis 2030 targets 
 
 
 
OECD: The OECD study on measuring distance to the SDG targets\0xD6, May 2017 
 
 
The OECD results rely on comparative indicators currently available in various OECD and UN databases, in line with the UN global indicator framework. However, there are a number of important gaps to be addressed to enable a more complete assessment. In the study, health and education are the only ones of the 17 UN goals for Denmark with data for at least one indicator for each target under the goal, while sustainable production, oceans and cities have less than 30 per cent of their targets covered.  
 
Taking into account the \0xEB5Psi of the 2030 Agenda: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, and Partnership, the OECD study concludes that Denmark is closest to reaching all goals in the \0xEBPlaneti category and have good outcomes in most of the Prosperity and Partnership goals. With the currently available Danish figures, it is challenging to corroborate this result given the limited coverage of the figures.  
 
Relative to the OECD average, Denmark is doing well on most goals such as poverty, energy and implementation (goals 1, 7 and 17), and is around the OECD average distance on gender equality, sustainable production and cities.  
3.2 	Sustainable Development Solutions Network report  
The SDSN report determines for 149 countries the efforts required to achieve the SDG targets. In the report the four Nordic countries (Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Finland) top the SDG Index. This means that, at the moment, they are closest to achieving the SDG endpoints envisaged for 2030. Still, they score significantly below the maximum score of 100. The SDG index is an unofficial, preliminary SDSN instrument and uses only published data as of 2015. The dataset constitutes only a subset of the data that will eventually be used to monitor progress towards achieving the SDGs at country level under the official monitoring framework.2  
 
Table: The SDG Index (Global) 
Rank 
Country 
Score
1 
Sweden 
84,5
2 
Denmark 
83,9
3 
Norway 
82,3
4 
Finland 
81,0
Note: The indicator scores in the table show the average distance to the best possible outcome across the 17 SDGs.  
Source: Bertelsmann Stiftung, SDSN: SDG Index & Dashboards 
 
According to the SDSN study, the countries topping the SDG Index still have work to do in order to comply with the SDG goals. For example, these countries need to shift their energy systems from highcarbon to low-carbon primary energy in order to fulfil SDGs 7 and 13.  
 
The figure below shows the SDG Dashboard for Denmark compiled by the SDSN. The Goals are highlighted in green, yellow and red, with the latter emphasizing a countryis most acute challenges. Green signifies that, for this goal, the country is on a good path towards reaching it or has (in some cases) already achieved the threshold consistent with SDG achievement. It is important to mention that a \0xEBredi score does not mean that a country has a low score for every aspect or indicator under that particular SDG. The SDG Dashboard for Denmark is similar to other OECD countries for which an average of more than one third of the goals are red, meaning that at least one of the underlying indicators for those SDGs is red.  
Figure: SDG Dashboard for Denmark 
 
Source: Bertelsmann Stiftung, SDSN: SDG Index & Dashboards 
4. 	Short on challenges 
A complete statistical coverage of all the indicators supporting the SDGs is an extensive and long-term task. There are many factors influencing this situation, both at the international and national levels. Internationally, many of the indicators still lack a clear definition and many others call for further clarity on the exact way of measuring them. Furthermore, a crucial problem that is currently being worked on is the model for data flows between the national and global level.  
 
Nationally, the sheer number of indicators necessitates a substantial effort in order to provide a satisfactory coverage, address the existing data gaps, and a far-reaching coordinative work among governmental agencies and other data providers.  
 
There are also indicators that are difficult to classify as statistical indicators in a strict sense. These are indicators regarding assessment of legislation or policies, and the answer to those can be \0xEByesi or \0xEBnoi. Here, unless the question regards some factual matters, it is not up to Statistics Denmark to assess whether Denmark is compliant with these types of indicators. 
 
 
5. 	Way forward 
The first step taken in order to ensure statistical follow-up on the 2030 Agenda in Denmark was a SDG data-mapping exercise, conducted in 2016. Even though the mapping was comprehensive, it was still was of a preliminary nature. The next concrete step will be finalising the SDG data-mapping exercise. In parallel, Statistics Denmark will analyse the data currently available and evaluate what data is best suited for an accurate follow-up on the indicators. In this process, further data and new data sources will be examined. An important aspect of this process will be an evaluation of data not coming from official data providers. Here a dialogue will be established in order to ensure, how Statistics Denmark and other data providers can jointly ensure the best contribution to the statistical aspects of the 2030 Agenda.  
 
Besides a dialogue on data, a dialogue ensuring a clear national workflow and transparent data flows will be established with relevant ministries and other data providers. 
 
Dissemination of data is another aspect to be looked into. This includes the possibility of a national reporting platform, contacts with the UN and other data producing organisations regarding the data flows, and the general follow-up on the Danish progress towards the goals of the 2030 Agenda. 
 
Regarding the specific model for international data flows, this aspect is presently being looked upon by the Inter-agency Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDG). The recommendations of the group will influence our future work on international data reporting.  
6. 	Statistics  
6.1 	General comments 
In 2016, the UN Statistical Commission endorsed a preliminary set of 241 indicators based on the work of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on SDG indicators. During the subsequent work, the number of indicators increased to 244. The endorsed indicators are grouped into three categories: 
\0xEF Tier I - indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and standards are available, and data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per cent of countries and of the population in every region where the indicator is relevant. 
\0xEF Tier II - indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and standards are available, but data is not regularly produced by countries. 
\0xEF Tier III - no internationally established methodology or standards are yet available for the indicator, but methodology/standards are being (or will be) developed or tested. 
 
Statistics Denmark has conducted a mapping of data availability for the global indicators for Denmark, using the same tier categories. In the course of this work, it became evident that it is necessary to add some additional categories in order to reflect the Danish situation. 
Three categories were added: 
\0xEF Not clarified n clarifying the Tier category for the indicator would require further investigation and coordination between governmental agencies; 
\0xEF Non statistical n indicators for which follow-up is not within the domain of Statistics Denmark; 
\0xEF Not relevant for Denmark n indicators that do not apply to Denmark. 
 
In the course of the further work on the statistical follow-up on the SDGs, the \0xEBnot clarifiedi category will be addressed and coordination work regarding the \0xEBnon statisticali indicators will be carried out. The result of the mapping exercise for Denmark is shown in the table below.  
 
It can be observed that the number of Tier I indicators counted during the mapping of data availability does not correspond to the number of indicators presented in this report. This can be partly explained by the fact that due to the relatively limited time for producing this report, we focused on the indicators available in Statistics Denmark. 

86   -   Statistical follow-up on the 2030 Agenda - Denmark 
	Table:  	Data availability for the SDG follow-up in Denmark 
 	Sustainable Development Goals 
Number of global indicators 
Tier I 
Tier II 
Tier III 	Not clarified 
Non 
statistical 
Of which Not rele in this vant for publi- Denmark cation3 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. No poverty 
14 
1 
4 
3 
5 
1 
2 
0
2. Zero hunger 
13 
6 
4 
0 
1 
2 
2 

3. Good health and well-being 
27 
19 
1 
6 
1 
0 
5 
0
4. Quality education 
11 
2 
3 
4 
2 
0 
2 
0
5. Gender equality 
14 
2 
3 
2 
4 
3 
5 
0
6. Clean water and sanitation 
11 
3 
5 
2 
1 
0 
7 
0
7. Affordable and clean energy 
6 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4 
0
8. Decent work and economic growth 
17 
7 
4 
1 
3 
2 
9 
0
9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure 
12 
7 
1 
0 
3 
0 
7 
1
10. Reduced inequalities 
11 
3 
1 
1 
3 
2 
2 
1
11. Sustainable cities and communities 
15 
2 
1 
2 
9 
1 
4 
0
12. Responsible production and consumption 
13 
4 
1 
3 
3 
2 
3 
0
13. Climate action 
8 
0 
0 
0 
2 
5 
0 
1
14. Life below water 
10 
4 
0 
3 
2 
0 
1 
1
15. Life on land 
14 
2 
1 
1 
4 
3 
1 
3
16. Peace, justice and strong institutions 
23 
5 
0 
7 
8 
2 
2 
1
17. Partnerships for the goals 
25 
6 
3 
1 
4 
10 
6 
1
 
Total 
244 
77 
32 
36 
56 
34 
62 
9
 
Pct. 
100 
32 
13 
15 
23 
14 
25 
4
Statistical follow-up on the 2030 Agenda - Denmark   -   87 
	6.2 	On data from administrative sources 
Statistics Denmark produces most social statistics, a lot of business statistics and major inputs to economic statistics based on data from administrative sources. 
 
At the core of the statistical production system are: The Civil Registration System, the Danish Buildings and Homes Register and the Central Business Register n based on unique identifiers for the population in Denmark, all buildings for housing and commercial use, and all businesses in Denmark. 
 
The core registers can be supplemented by a huge variety of information on e.g. the populationis education, labour market participation, and use of public services like health care and social services as well as enterprisesi recruitment of staff. All based on the use of the unique identifier attached to all entities in the statistical production system n this constitutes an agile and flexible production system for statistics.  
 
All in all, the administrative data are disaggregated in their nature and facilitate disaggregation of statistics in general and particularly in order to follow up on the important pledge of \0xEBleaving no one behindi. The detailed and disaggregated data from administrative sources can also be used to produce statistical time series and to follow developments year by year. 
 
The majority of the indicators presented in this report are based on data from administrative sources with detailed data in any given year and consistent time series illustrating a development over a ten-year period (2005-2015). 
	6.3 	The indicators 
This last section of the report presents the current statistical follow-up on the SDGs in Denmark.  
 
Selection of indicators for this report is based on data availability at Statistics Denmark at the time of writing this report. Data from other national data providers were, with few exceptions, not used due to the relatively limited time for compilation. In cases where data from other data providers than Statistics Denmark is used, this is indicated with source references. The indicators are presented goal by goal and, due to the reasons above, they do not provide an exhaustive picture for all the targets. 
 
In order to make the report as readable as possible, it was decided to present the data as figures, where possible. Many of the figures match the requested UN definition for the indicators. However, for some indicators, this is not the case. In those situations, proxy indicators have been used, i.e. indicators that can partly explain the issues to be shown by an indicator. In such cases, an explanatory text to the figures specifies that it is a proxy indicator.  
 
Some of the indicators are only presented in a descriptive way. This regards predominantly indicators/targets that can be perceived as accomplished from a Danish perspective.  
 
For indicators requiring some introduction to the Danish system, a short description of it is provided.   
 
Some of the data or comments cover more than one indicator. In such cases, a figure or a text section is provided below a group of relevant indicators.  
 
Finally, for easy navigation in the text, the prevailing colour in the figures corresponds to the colour associated with the described goals.  
 	 

 
Statistical follow-up on the 2030 Agenda - Denmark   -   89
Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
Target 1.2  
   By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women  and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions 
1.2.1 Proportion of population living below the national poverty line, by sex and age 
1.2.2 Proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions 
 
The UN calls for a calculation of the share of the population below a national poverty threshold. In the absence of an official Danish poverty threshold, the indicator At-risk-of-poverty (Less than 50 per cent of the median equivalised disposable income) is applied. The chosen indicator measures relative poverty and is an expression of financial inequality. 
 
There is a general consensus not to include students when monitoring poverty in Denmark. Accordingly, the statistics do not include families in which the primary breadwinner is a student. These families are removed from the data after the calculation of the median income. 
 
Since 2002, the share of the population at risk of poverty has risen from 4.0 per cent to 5.2 per cent in 2015. The rise in relative poverty is most notable among the 20-29 year olds, where the rate is now up to 16 per cent in 2015. Notably, risk of poverty rates have in the same period been reduced for the elderly. 
 
Figure: Risk of poverty by age groups (excluding students) 

 
In calculating equivalised disposable income it is assumed that there is complete redistribution of income within the family.  This results in the same level of Risk of Poverty for men and women when observing couples, which make up a large part of the population. Thus the differences in poverty between the two genders can mainly be attributed to differences between single men and single women.  
 
The proportion of single men is highest among the young, while women make up a majority among singles in the group of elderly. This is partly what is reflected in the higher relative poverty rates for men. 
 
Figure: Risk of poverty by sex 

 
The rise in relative poverty can in part be explained by increases in the median income.  Poverty can also be measured in absolute terms. The figure below shows poverty in both relative and absolute terms for the entire population excluding students. Absolute poverty is, in this case, measured by applying the Risk of Poverty threshold from 2015. The threshold has been adjusted for inflation. This indicates a decrease in absolute poverty from 6.0 per cent in 2004 to 5.2 per cent in 2015. 
 
Figure: Risk of poverty and absolute poverty 

 	 

Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
Target 2.3  
 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of  small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment 
2.3.1 Volume of production per labour unit by classes of farming/pastoral/forestry enterprise size 
The indicator shown in the figure shows the development of output from agriculture and forestry over the labour input- in constant prices. The indicator, which follows the definition for the indicator 2.3.1., shows a significant increase in labour productivity in the agricultural production, driven by new technology and by increasing yields. 
 
Figure: Development of output from agriculture and forestry over the labour input (constant prices) 

80	
60	
	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	 
Target 2.4  
By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progresssively improve land and soil quality 
2.4.1 Proportion of agricultural area under productive and sustainable agriculture 
The figure shows a slight increase in the share of agricultural land grown by organic methods, i.e. without using pesticides and artificial fertilizers. Whether this type of farming should be the only type regarded as productive and sustainable agriculture, as phrased in for indicator 2.4, has to be further discussed. The total agricultural area has been almost stable since 2005, even though some land has been needed for urbanization and development of infrastructure. For EU Member States, the shares are between 1 and 13 per cent.  
 
Figure: Area under organic farming, as percentage of total farming area 

 	 

Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for 
all at all ages 
Target 3.5  
 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse,  including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol 
3.5.1 Coverage of treatment interventions (pharmacological, psychosocial and rehabilitation and aftercare services) for substance use disorders 
The coverage of treatment interventions for substance use disorders was 99.5 per cent in Denmark for the years 1981-2015. 
Target 3.7 and 3.8 
By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes 
3.7.1 Proportion of women of reproductive age (aged 15-49 years) who have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods 
3.8.1 Coverage of essential health services (defined as the average coverage of essential services based on tracer interventions that include reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases and service capacity and access, among the general and the most disadvantaged population) 
3.8.2 Number of people covered by health insurance or a public health system per 1,000 population 
In the case of the three above-mentioned indicators, the goal is accomplished. For targets 3.7.1 and 3.8.1 the proportion of population covered is almost 100 per cent. For the target 3.8.2, 1000 out of 1000 persons are covered by a public health system which, in Denmark, offers coverage to every citizen. 
Target 3.b  
Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and non?communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for 
all 
3.b.1 Proportion of the population with access to affordable medicines and vaccines on a sustainable basis 
This is assumed to be close to 100 per cent as the Danish state provides general coverage on health and vaccines. 
 	 

Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and quality education for all and promote lifelong learning 
Target 4.1  
 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes 
4.1.1 Proportion of children and young people: (a) in grades 2/3; (b) at the end of primary; and (c) at the end of lower secondary achieving at least a minimum proficiency level in (i) reading and (ii) mathematics, by sex. 
All children have access to primary school in Denmark and the education is free. It is mandatory to receive education, but it is not mandatory to attend school, as the parents can choose to establish a home school. More than 99 percent of the Danish children are enrolled in a public or private school or another type of school e.g. boarding schools, special schools for children with challenges or schools for maladjusted children. 
 
The school statistics cover all pupils enrolled in a school including children. The proportion of children in primary education is 100 per cent for the children below age of 9 and 99 per cent for the children aged 10-15. 
 
In Denmark, primary school consists of a 10-year programme from grade 0 to grade 9, which is mandatory, and then 10th grade, which is optional. Danish primary school is regarded as primary and lower secondary level when compared internationally.  
 
At the end of primary school, the pupils are expected to attend a number of examinations. The level of the grades will determine where the pupils can continue their secondary education. The grades are reported to the Ministry of Education and used for statistics.  
 
The Danish grading system is a 7-point grading scale. A pass/fail assessment may also be used. The grade for pupils who have passed the examinations has to be normally distributed over time around the grade 7.   
 	 
Grade  
Description 
ECTS 
Distribution 
12 
For an excellent performance displaying a high level of command of all aspects of the relevant material, with no or only a few minor 
weaknesses 
A 
10 pct. 
10 
For a very good performance displaying a high level of command of most aspects of the relevant material, with only minor weaknesses 
B 
25 pct. 
7 
For a good performance displaying good command of the relevant material but also some weaknesses 
C 
30 pct. 
4 
For a fair performance displaying some command of the relevant material but also some weaknesses 
D 
25 pct. 
2 
For a performance meeting only the minimum requirements for acceptance 
E 
10 pct. 
0 
For a performance which does not meet the minimum requirements for acceptance 
Fx 
Not included 
-3 
For a performance which is unacceptable in all respects 
F 
Not included 
 
 
Figure: Performance of students in the final grade grouped into: (a) performance not meeting the minimum standards (b) performance meeting the standards, and (c) very good performance 


 
 
Target 4.4  
By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship 
4.4.1 Proportion of youth and adults with information and communications technology (ICT) skills, by type of skill 
According to a survey in 2015, the skills in the population related to information and communication technology are generally good, in particular among the young, as shown in the figure below. More than 75 per cent in all age groups below the age of 75 find that they have some level of skills. In the groups below the age of 35, in fact more than 70 per cent answer that they have above basic overall digital skills, while less than 20 per cent of persons aged 65 to 74 find themselves in this category. The results follow the definition for the indicator. Comparable results are not available for previous years. The level of digital skill in Denmark is well above the average in the EU. For persons aged 16-24, the proportion in Denmark with above basic skills is 74 per cent, while the EU-average shows 52 per cent. For 55 to 64-year-olds, the figures are 26 and 14 per cent, respectively. 
 
Figure: Digital skills n Denmark and EU 
Above basic digital skills - DK
  	 
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
Target 5.2  
 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploittation 
5.2.1 Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual or psychological violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months, by form of violence and by age. 
 
Table: Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual or psychological violence 

 
16-24 y/o 
25-39 y/o 
39 +  y/o 
Total
 	 

 per cent of population 
 

Proportion 
0,52 
0,25 
0,14 
0,23
Lower confidence interval 
0,35 
0,16 
0,10 
0,18
Upper confidence interval 
0,69 
0,34 
0,18 
0,27
Note: Women aged 16-74 years at the time the interview took place. It is not necessarily the same age as when the offence was committed which can be up to 12 months earlier. Proportion of all women irrespectively whether they have ever been partnered or not. Only women who have been subjected to physical violence or forced intercourse. Psychological violence not included. Only data regarding 2008-2015 is available. Due to a very small number of incidents it is not possible to break down by year. 
5.2.2 Proportion of women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to sexual violence by persons other than an intimate partner in the previous 12 months, by age and place of occurrence. 
 
Table: Proportion of women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to sexual violence by persons other than an intimate partner 

 
16-24 y/o 
25-39 	39 + y/o y/o 
Total
 	 

 per cent of population  

Proportion 
0,67 
0,15 
0,04 
0,16
Lower confidence interval 
0,48 
0,08 
0,02 
0,13
Upper confidence interval 
0,87 
0,22 
0,07 
0,20
Note: Women aged 16-74 years at the time the interview took place. It is not necessarily the same age as when the offence was committed which can be up to 12 months earlier. Proportion of all women irrespectively whether they have ever been partnered or not. Only women who have been subjected to forced intercourse. Only data regarding 2008-2015 is available. Due to a very small number of incidents it is not possible to break down by year. 
Target 5.5  
Ensure womenis full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life 
5.5.1 Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments and local governments 
At the latest election for parliament in Denmark in 2015, the womenis share of elected was 37.1 per cent. Womenis share of elected members has been 37-38 per cent since the election in 1998. Womenis eligibility and suffrage were introduced with the new constitution in 1915. However, it took fifty years until more than one tenth of the elected members were women. After seventy years of womenis eligibility, one out of four elected for parliament were women. The share of women in parliament increased steadily until 2001 after which the share seems to have stagnated. 
 
Figure: Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments n Denmark and EU 

 

Figure: Proportion of seats held by women in local governments n Denmark and EU 

	20	
	15	
	10	
	2005	2009	2013	2005	2009	2013	 
Target 5.a  
Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws 
5.a.2 Proportion of countries where the legal framework (including customary law) guarantees womenis equal rights to land ownership and/or control 
Danish legislation guarantees womenis equal rights to land ownership and/or control. 
Target 5.b  
Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women 
5.b.1 Proportion of individuals who own a mobile telephone, by sex 
This is a proxy indicator, as data disaggregated by sex is not easily available. In Denmark, a clear majority of the population can afford a mobile phone. 
 
Table: Number of telecommunication subscriptions  
 
2005 
2010 
2015
Number of telecommunications subscriptions  (incl. land lines), 1,000 
 
5 449 
 
7 772 
8 481
Inhabitants, 1,000 
5 411 
5 534 
5 659
Number of telecommunications subscriptions  as percentage of population 
 
101 
 
140 
150
 	 
Goal 6: Ensure access to water and sanitation for all 
Target 6.1  
   By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and  affordable drinking water for all 
6.1.1 Proportion of population using safely managed drinking water services 
The majority of the Danish population relies on the public water supply. In Denmark, untreated drinkable ground water accounts for 99 percent of the water supplied by the water supply industry to the households as well as the industries. The water supply industry delivered 11 per cent less ground water in 2015 compared to 2005. 
 
Figure: Water supply in Denmark 

Target 6.2  
By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations 
6.2.1 Proportion of population using safely managed sanitation services, including a hand-washing facility with soap and water 
In Denmark, 97 per cent of the population has access to a WC in the dwelling they live in, whereas 97 per cent has access to their own bathing facilities and 98 per cent has access to their own kitchen in the dwelling they live in. When looking at the shares broken down by sex, the share for women is slightly higher than the share for men. 
 
Figure: Proportion of population using safely managed sanitation services 

Target 6.3  
By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally 
6.3.1 Proportion of wastewater safely treated 
In Denmark all waste water is being treated before being led back to the nature. The treatment takes place at the public waste water treatment plants to which almost all dwellings are connected. In terms of waste water, the dwellings not connected to the sewerage system accounted for less than one percent. The treatment can also take place at the companies' own waste water treatment facilities. 
Target 6.4  
By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity 
6.4.1 Change in water-use efficiency over time 
In recent years, there have been large fluctuations in the water efficiency - measured as the use of water compared to value added - in the construction and agriculture, forestry and fisheries industries and thus also for industries in total. For agriculture, etc., the large fluctuations can be explained by fluctuating irrigation needs due to climatic conditions and crop selection. For the other industry groups shown, there has been a slight increase in the water use efficiency. 
 
Figure: Change in water-use efficiency over time 

6.4.2 Level of water stress: freshwater withdrawal as a proportion of available freshwater resources 
An earlier study estimates the Danish total renewable ground water resource to be approximately one billion cubic meters. The utilization rate of the available groundwater resource has varied between 60 and 80 per cent in the period from 2010 to 2015. Please notice that the surface water is not included in the calculation of the indicator. A utilization rate below 100 per cent entails a sustainable consumption of the ground water resource. The high utilization rate in 2013 and 2014 was due to a higher need for irrigation in agriculture. 
 
Figure: Ground water withdrawal as a proportion of renewable groundwater resource 

 
 	 
Target 6.6  
By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including 
mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes 
 
6.6.1 Change in the extent of water-related ecosystems over time In 2016, water-related ecosystems like forests and wetlands etc. represent a larger proportion of the total area compared with 2011. 
 
Figure: Change in the extent of water-related ecosystems over time 

Target 6.b  
Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and sanitation management 
6.b.1 Proportion of local administrative units with established and operational policies and procedures for participation of local communities in water and sanitation management 
 
In Denmark, the majority of the consumers is connected to the public water supply and the common public wastewater system. 
 
There are about 2,500 water supply companies in Denmark. About 87 of them are owned by the municipalities, while the rest is private and often owned by consumers. The municipal water supply companies account for approximately two thirds of the total production of drinking water. 
 
In addition to the common water supply companies, there are approx. 50,000 small water supplies, each supplying less than 10 properties. They only consist of a single well and most of them only supply water to a single household. 
 
The number of wastewater treatment plants is just over 1,000. About 800 are owned by the municipalities, while approximately 200 are private. The municipal wastewater treatment plants treat by far the largest amount of waste water. The municipal wastewater treatment plants are operated by wastewater companies. 
 
The large number of water companies is due to the fact that, in rural areas, there has been a tradition of establishing local communities in the form of consumer-owned waterworks. 
 
 	 

Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
Target 7.1  
 By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services 
7.1.1 Proportion of population with access to electricity 
The Danish electricity grid is highly developed and close to 100 per cent of the dwellings are connected to the grid and thus close to 100 per cent of the population has access to electricity. The Danish electricity grid was completed in 1977, where the last village was connected to it. 
7.1.2 Proportion of population with primary reliance on clean fuels and technology 
This information is not being measured directly. However, it is expected to be close to 100 per cent. Electricity is the main type of energy used for cooking. Gas is also used for cooking, but only to a very limited extent. In 2017, 64 per cent of all dwellings are heated with district heating, whereas dwellings heated with central heating with oil, natural gas or other account for 28 per cent. 
 
Figure: Proportion of population using different forms for heating 

Target 7.2  
By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix 
7.2.1 Renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption  
For this indicator, we use the renewable energy share of the total primary energy consumption as a proxy. The share has almost doubled since 2005, so that renewables in 2015, account for 28.5 per cent of the total primary energy consumption. In the Danish case, the change towards a greener energy system accelerated in 2009. Based on our observations, the difference between renewable energy's share of total primary energy consumption and total final energy consumption is that the latter share is 1-2 per cent higher. 
 
Figure: Renewable energyis share of total primary energy consumption n Denmark and EU 

Target 7.3  
By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency 
7.3.1 Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP 
The Danish economy is characterized by having a large shipping industry, which accounts for one third of the total use of primary energy used for Danish economic activities. In the below figure, the energy intensity measured as primary energy in relation to GDP is shown for both the total Danish economic activities as well as the total Danish economic activities exclusive of the fuel that Danish-operated ships, aircraft and lorries bunker abroad. Compared to 2005, the energy intensity has improved with 14 per cent or with 17 per cent if the bunkering abroad is disregarded. The development has been driven by both a decrease in the use of primary energy as well as economic growth. 
 
Figure: Energy intensity in Denmark 

 
 
Figure: Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP. Year on year change 

 
Figure: Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy, excl. bunkering, and GDP 

Target 7.b  
By 2030, expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern and sustainable energy services for all in developing countries, in particular least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing countries, in accordance with their respective programmes of support 
7.b.1 Investments in energy efficiency as a percentage of GDP and the amount of foreign direct investment in financial transfer for infrastructure and technology to sustainable development services 
For this indicator, a proxy indicator based on the Environmental Goods and Services Sector statistics was used. We use the turnover minus the exports of equipment for production of energy from renewable resources as well as equipment for energy saving and management as a proxy for the investment in energy efficiency. Compared to GDP, the share has been increasing over the past few years. 
 
Figure: Investments in energy efficiency as a percentage of GDP 

 
 	 

Goal 8: Promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth, employment and decent work for all 
Target 8.1  
 Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national  circumstances and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries 
8.1.1 Annual growth rate of real GDP per capita 
During the years 2005 and 2006, the most recent high economic growth in Denmark could be observed. Those two years were followed by a significant drop in the economy due to the financial crisis. Since then, following the financial crisis, the annual economic growth per capita has been limited. 
 
Figure: Annual growth rate of real GDP per capita n Denmark and EU 

Target 8.2  
Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-intensive sectors 
8.2.1 Annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person 
With 2010 being the exception, the annual economic growth per employed person has been limited in the years following the financial crisis. 
 
Figure: Annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person n Denmark and EU  

Target 8.4  
Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10?Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production, with developed countries taking the lead 
8.4.2 Domestic material consumption, domestic material consumption per capita, and domestic material consumption per GDP 
After an increase from 2010 to 2011, we have seen a general decline in the indicators for the domestic material consumption in the period 2011-2014, which generally indicates a declining material consumption, both in absolute terms and in relation to economic activity and the population. It should be noted that all three domestic material consumption indicators are highly influenced by the business cycles and economic activities related to construction, which is immediately reflected in domestic material consumption. 
 
Figure: Domestic material consumption, domestic material consumption per capita and domestic material consumption per GDP n Denmark and EU 

Target 8.5  
By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value 
8.5.1 Average hourly earnings of female and male employees, by occupation, age and persons with disabilities 
 
Figure: Average hourly earnings of female and male employees 

 
 
Figure: Gender pay gap  

8.5.2 Unemployment rate, by sex, age and persons with disabilities 
Looking at data for 2015, we see that for both men and women Denmark has a significantly lower unemployment rate as compared to the EU-average. The unemployment is lower in Germany but when comparing Denmark to Sweden, the Netherlands and Finland, Denmark has a lower rate of unemployment. It is noticeable that the rate of unemployment is most unevenly distributed between the countries in the group aged 15-25 compared with the older age groups. 
 
For men, we see that, in 2015, men aged 15-24 in Denmark had an unemployment rate of 11.6 per cent compared to the EU-average of 21.0 per cent. 
 
Figure: Unemployment by age n Men, 2015 

 
For women, in 2015, the same tendency is on display as Danish women aged 15-24 has an unemployment rate of 10.1 per cent while the EU-average is 19.5 per cent. 
 
Figure: Unemployment by age n Women, 2015 

Target 8.6  
By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training 
8.6.1 Proportion of youth (aged 15-24 years) not in education, employment or training 
The not in education, employment or training (NEET) group is significantly lower in Denmark when compared to the EU-average. It is also lower than is the case in both Finland and Sweden. It is noticeable that NEET has risen slightly in Denmark from 2005 till 2015 from 4.3 to 6.2 per cent whereas it has fallen slightly on average in the EU from 12.7 to 12.0 per cent. 
 
 
 
Figure: Percentage of persons not in education, employment or training (aged 15-24 years) by country  

Target 8.9  
By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products 
8.9.1 Tourism direct GDP as a proportion of total GDP and in growth rate 
Due to the change in methodology and in order to ensure data comparability, at the present stage, only data for 2013 and 2014 can be used for this indicator. Tourismis proportion of total GDP was 1.7 per cent for both 2013 and 2014. 
8.9.2 Number of jobs in tourism industries as a proportion of total jobs and growth rate of jobs, by sex 
As with the indicator 8.9.1, due to the change in methodology and in order to ensure data comparability, only information for 2013 and 2014 can be used. The number of jobs in tourism industries was almost unchanged during 2013 and 2014 amounting to 71,000 and 73,000 tourist jobs respectively. The total share of the tourist jobs out of the total amount of man-years in Denmark was 2.5 and 2.7 per cent for 2013 and 2014 respectively. 
Target 8.b  
By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization 
8.b.1 Total government spending in social protection and employment programmes as a proportion of the national budgets and GDP 
Over the years 2005-2016, social protection as a proportion of national budgets has been stable around 42 to 44 per cent, whereas the government spending for unemployment protection as a proportion of national budgets has decreased from 7 per cent in 2005 to 5 per cent in 2016. 
 
Figure: Social and unemployment protection as a proportion of national budgets 

 	 

Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
Target 9.1  
 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure,  including regional and trans-border infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all 
9.1.2 Passenger and freight volumes, by mode of transport 
 
Table: Passengers, by mode of transport, mill. passenger km 
 
2005 
2010 
2015
Road 
7 577 
7 222 
7 244
Rail 
6 136 
6 577 
6 808
Maritime 
226 
184 
272
Air 
316 
470 
357
Total 
14 255 
14 453 
14 681
 
Table: Freight by mode of transp
ort, mill. tons 


 
2005 
2010 
2015
Road 
221 803 
183 301 
196 127
Rail 
7 706 
8 121 
8 652
Maritime 
86 172 
76 527 
88 260
Air 
106 
151 
212
Pipeline 
23 091 
17 121 
11 584
Total 
338 878 
285 221 
304 835

Note: Road transport is collected for Danish vehicles without geographical limits. Other modes are all nationalities operating in Denmark. To make the series comparable, the road data is adjusted removing Danish vehicle activity not related to Danish territory and including foreign (defined as European Statistical System countries) vehicles activity on Danish territory. 
Target 9.2  
Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries 
9.2.1 Manufacturing value added as a proportion of GDP and per capita  
As shown in the figure below, the value added in manufacturing has increased slightly during the last 10 years, from about 13 per cent of GDP to about 14 per cent of GDP. At the same time, the number of employed persons - in full time equivalent - has decreased from almost 14 per cent of total labour input to about 11 per cent. Stated per capita, the value added from manufacturing is about DKK 40,000 per capita in constant prices. 
 
Figure: Manufacturing value added as a proportion of GDP 

9.2.2 Manufacturing employment as a proportion of total employment 
 
Figure: Manufacturing as a proportion of total employment 

Target 9.3  
Increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets 
9.3.1 Proportion of small-scale industries in total industry value added 
The figure shows the share of employed persons - in full time equivalent - who works in small scale companies, including owners. The increase from 2008 to 2010 is partly caused by companies lowering their employment after the financial crisis. The indicator shown is a proxy for the definition for indicator 9.3.1 and needs to be further considered in relation to the definition of small-scale industries and also to access to credit (indicator 9.3.2.). 
 
Figure: Share of employed persons in small-scale enterprises, Denmark and EU 

Target 9.4  
By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities 
9.4.1 CO2 emission per unit of value added  
The figure shows how CO2 emissions exclusive of emissions from biomass compared to value added have developed for all the industries as a whole as well as for selected industries. For the industries as a whole and for most of the industry groups shown, CO2 emissions have decreased compared to value added in the period 2005-2015. The main driver behind the development is improved energy efficiency and also, as already indicated, the general shift towards a greener economy with more reliance on renewable energy including biomass, which is considered to be CO2 neutral. 
 
Figure: CO2 emission per unit of value added 

 
 
Figure: CO2 emission per unit of value added, total - Denmark and EU 

Target 9.5  
Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developping countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending 
9.5.1 Research and development expenditure as a proportion of GDP 
The figure shows that expenditures for research and development have increased to about three per cent of the GDP. The expenditures are mainly paid by companies, while a bit more than one third is from the public budget. The three per cent is a common target for members of the European Union. Regarding EU comparison, the average of R&D expenditures in Denmark is higher that the EU average of about 2 per cent for the latest year. 
 
Figure: Research and development expenditures as a proportion of GDP 

 
9.5.2 Researchers (in full-time equivalent) per million inhabitants 
The number of researchers per inhabitant has in recent years been about twice as high in Denmark as the EU average and there has been a slight increase in the number of researchers since 2005, both for Denmark and the EU. 
 
Figure: Researchers per million inhabitants n Denmark and EU 

 
 	 
Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries 
Target 10.1  
   By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the  bottom 40 per cent of the population at a rate higher than the national average 
10.1.1 Growth rates of household expenditure or income per capita among the bottom 40 per cent of the population and the total population 
From 2004 to 2015, the bottom 40 per cent of people sorted by income has seen income go up by 5.9 per cent. In the same period, income grew by 15.4 per cent for the population as a whole. In 2004, the bottom 40 per cent had 24.6 per cent of the total income. Due to rising inequality, this has been reduced to 22.5 per cent by 2015 despite the 5.9 per cent increase in absolute terms. 
  
The growth rate of income is measured using equivalised disposable income and is adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index. The equivalised disposable income has been bottom-coded, disallowing negative incomes, in order to make it more comparable with similar indicators based on household expenditure. 
 
Figure: Growth rates of income 

Target 10.2  
By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status 
10.2.1 Proportion of people living below 50 per cent of median income, by age, sex and persons with disabilities 
The proportion of the total population living below 50 per cent of the median income has risen from 5.7 to 7.8 per cent since 2005. The increase in relative poverty is most notable among 20-29 year olds. 
This is partly caused by a substantial increase in the proportion of young people studying, but also an increase in young people who are neither studying nor working. Comparatively, Denmark has a relatively high risk of poverty among the young partly due to Danish youth moving out on their own at an early age. 
 
In the same period, Risk of Poverty rates have been reduced among the elderly. This development can be attributed to increased social benefits for the poorest among the elderly and increases in private pension savings. 
 
The proportion of people living below 50 percent of the median income is measured using equivalised disposable income. The indicator is measured on the full population. 
 
Figure: Proportion of people living below 50 per cent of median income, by age 

 
Figure: Proportion of people living below 50 per cent of median income, by sex and total for Denmark. 

  	 
Goal 11: Make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
Target 11.3  
 	By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and  	capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries 
11.3.1 Ratio of land consumption rate to population growth rate 
Whereas Denmark has seen a population growth of 2.6 per cent from 2011 to 2016, the consumption of the area for infrastructure, buildings and the like has only increased by 0.4 percent. Thus, in the Danish situation, we do not consume area at the same rate as the population grows. 
 
Figure: Land used for infrastructure, built-up areas etc. compared to population 

Target 11.4  
Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the worldis cultural and natural heritage 
11.4.1 Total expenditure (public and private) per capita spent on the preservation, protection and conservation of all cultural and natural heritage, by type of heritage (cultural, natural, mixed and World Heritage Centre designation), level of government (national, regional and local/municipal), type of expenditure (operating expenditure/investment) and type of private funding (donations in kind, private non-profit sector and sponsorship)  
From 2005 to 2013 there was an increase in public spending on biodiversity and landscape per capita of 20 per cent, while expenditure fell by 12 per cent from 2013 to 2015. Total environmental protection costs per capita increased by 41 per cent in the period 2005-2013, whereas from 2013 to 2015, total environmental protecttion costs fell by 9 per cent. Please notice that the costs here are calculated in current prices and that the price development has not been taken into account. 
 
Figure: Expenditure towards protection of biodiversity and environmental protection 

Target 11.6  
By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management 
11.6.1 Proportion of urban solid waste regularly collected and with adequate final discharge out of total urban solid waste generated, by cities 
The waste treatment sector is highly regulated in Denmark. It is the local municipality that decides how and how often waste is collected from the private households or the companies. The legislation is based on European and national laws. Based on those laws, each municipality decides how to implement the local waste treatment scheme. Given that, a very high share of the total urban solid waste is regularly collected and treated according to the legislation and other national targets. 
11.6.2 Annual mean levels of fine particulate matter (e.g. PM2.5 and PM10) in cities (population weighted) 
From 2005 to 2013 there was an increase in public spending on biodiversity and landscape per capita of 20 per cent, while expenditure fell by 12 per cent from 2013 to 2015. Total environmental protection costs per capita increased by 41 per cent in the period 2005-2013, whereas from 2013 to 2015, total environmental protecttion costs fell by 9 per cent. Please notice that the costs here are calculated in current prices and that the price development has not been taken into account. 
 
Figure: Annual levels of fine particulate matter 

 	 

Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 
Target 12.2  
 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use  of natural resources 
12.2.2 Domestic material consumption, domestic material consumption per capita, and domestic material consumption per GDP 
After an increase from 2010 to 2011, there has generally been a decline in the indicators for the domestic material consumption in the period of 2011-2014, which generally indicates a declining material consumption, both in absolute terms and in relation to economic activity and the population. It should be noted that all three domestic material consumption indicators are highly influenced by the business cycles and economic activities related to construction, which is immediately reflected in domestic material consumption. 
 
Figure: Domestic material consumption, domestic material consumption per capita and domestic material consumption per GDP n Denmark and EU 

Target 12.4  
By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment 
12.4.2 Hazardous waste generated per capita and proportion of hazardous waste treated, by type of treatment 
The amount of hazardous waste per inhabitant in Denmark has ranged between 82 and 106 kg in the period of 2011 to 2014. A large part is recycled. Thus, it is less than half of the hazardous waste that is being deposited or undergoes special treatment. 
Figure: Amount of hazardous waste per inhabitant 

Target 12.5  
By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse 
12.5.1 National recycling rate, tons of material recycled 
In Denmark, 67 per cent of the waste was collected for recycling in 2014. Thus, there has been an increase since 2011 where 62 per cent was collected for recycling. Also, in terms of quantities, there has been an increasing trend, from 6.9 million tons in 2011 to 7.9 million tons in 2014. 
 
Figure: Materials recovery and national recycling rate 

	2011	2012	2013	2014	 
 	 
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
 
 	No data is available at the present stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources 
Target 14.4  
 
 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics 
14.4.1 Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels 
In principle, the regulation of the Danish fishing industry secures that the majority of the Danish fish stocks are within biologically sustainable levels. This is due to the fact that Danish fishing is largely determined by the European Union through the resource and conservation policy, which dates back to 1983, where a total allowable catch and quota system was introduced. In this policy, the quantities of each species that can be caught are decided annually. The permitted quantities are laid down in a total allowable catch/quota regulation.  
 
Proposals for the total allowable catch/quota regulation are submitted by the European Commission following advice from various organisations. The final approval of the regulation takes place in the Council of Ministers. Once the total allowable catch/quota regulation has been approved, each European Union Member State must ensure that fishing is carried out within the permitted quantities. 
 	 
Goal 15: Sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation, halt biodiversity loss 
 	Target 15.1  
 
By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements 
15.1.1 Forest area as a proportion of total land area 
There has been a slight increase in the forest area in Denmark over the last 10 years. However, the average proportion of forests out of total land is much below the EU average of about 37 per cent. 
 
Figure: Forest area as a proportion of total land area 

 
 	 
Goal 16: Promote just, peaceful and inclusive societies 
Target 16.1  
   Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates  	everywhere 
 
16.1.1 Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 population, by sex and age 
 
Figure: Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 population 

	0,0	
	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015 
Source: UNODC 
Target 16.3  
Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for all 
16.3.2 Unsentenced detainees as a proportion of overall prison population 
 
Table: Unsentenced detainees as a proportion of overall prison population 
 	Daily average  of total inmates 
Arrested 
Remand custody 
     Un- Per cent Deprived sentenced un- their liberty  in total sentenced according to
 as a part of Act of Alien a total number of inmates 
2012 	3 983.7 
25.5 
1 033.7 
1 059.2 
26.6 
127.2
2013 	4 007.8 
27.2 
1 002.5 
1029.7 
25.7 
153.4
2014 	3 784.4 
23.8 
1 005.2 
1 029.0 
27.2 
129.6
2015 	3 421.6 
23.5 
857.8 
881.3 
25.8 
105.6
2016 	3 420.5 
20.5 
846.0 
866.5 
25.3 
125.9
Note: Persons 'Deprived their liberty according to Act of Alien' are included in the 'Daily average of inmates', but not in 'Unsentenced in total'. Source: Danish Prison and Probation Service. 
 	 
Goal 17: Revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 
Target 17.1  
 Strengthen domestic resource mobilization, including through international support to developing countries, to improve domestic capacity for tax and other revenue collection 
17.1.1 Total government revenue as a proportion of GDP, by source 
Over the years from 2005-2016 the tax revenue as a proportion GDP has been stable around 45 to 50 per cent, whereas the non-tax revenue as a proportion of GDP has varied between 6 and 9 per cent in the same time period. 
 
Figure: Tax and non-tax revenue as a proportion of GDP 

	0,3	

17.1.2 Proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes 
In Denmark, more than 80 percent of the domestic budget is funded by domestic taxes. 
 
Figure: Proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes 

	70	
	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016 
 
Target 17.3  
Mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources 
17.3.1 Foreign direct investments (FDI), official development assistance and South-South Cooperation as a proportion of total domestic budget 
In Denmark, foreign direct investments account for approximately 60 per cent of the domestic budget. 
 
Figure: Foreign direct investments as a proportion of total domestic budget 
 Foreign direct investments (FDI) as a proportion of total domestic budget
17.3.2 Volume of remittances (in United States dollars) as a proportion of total GDP 
The inflow of personal remittances is assumed to be zero in the Danish case. 
Target 17.6  
Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and international cooperation on and access to science, technology and innovation and enhance knowledge-sharing on mutually agreed terms, including through improved coordination among existing mechanisms, in particular at the United Nations level, and through a global technology facilitation mechanism 
17.6.2 Fixed Internet broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, by speed 
The availability of access to high capacity broadband has increased during several years. While availability of 2 MB has been 98 per cent since 2009, the availability of 100 MB has increased from 25 per cent in 2010 to 84 per cent in 2015. The data shows availability, not necessarily the actual subscriptions as expected in the definition. 
 
Figure: Proportion of enterprises and households with access to broadband 

17.8.1 Proportion of individuals using the Internet 
The internet use among individuals has increased to a very high level since 2005 and only 3 per cent did not use the internet in 2015. The non-users are mainly found among the elderly. Compared to the EUaverage, the proportion of users is very high in Denmark, 97 per cent in 2015 compared to the EU-average of 81 per cent. 
 
Figure: Proportion of individuals using the internet, by age n Denmark and EU 
