
1. Opening Statement

The Government of Egypt is committed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This commitment is reflected in its understanding of the intertwined nature of sustainable development and is embodied in the framework of Egyptis national strategy, \0xECSustainable Development Strategy: Egypt Vision 2030 (SDS). The strategy reflects the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. The plan is a national framework that guides and sets policies and programs in order to achieve the SDGs, as well as other national objectives. The SDS is not only a strategy for the Government, but also a plan for all stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society and international organizations. 
Given the importance of creating an enabling environment for sustainable development, the Government of Egypt has embarked on a homegrown economic reform program that is supported by the international financial institutions. The program includes long overdue economic measures to ensure macroeconomic stability, increase social protection and place Egypt on a high-growth trajectory that is inclusive of all classes. These reforms included liberalizing the exchange rate regime, consolidating government finances and improving the investment environment. While necessary, some of these measures have had an adverse impact on Egyptian households, which in turn has required an expansion in the size and scope of social protection programs. In order not to leave anyone behind, the Government has also redirected 
Opening Statement
its fiscal resources from programs of direct price subsidies, especially in energy, towards better-targeted cash transfer programs, both conditional and unconditional. These cash transfer programs have witnessed a substantial increase in the number of beneficiaries and the amount of financial support they distribute since the reforms began in 2016. 
Government programs in infrastructure, particularly those in housing, energy and water, are ensuring that Egypt makes considerable progress towards achieving the SDGs, particularly in the long term. Egyptis housing sector is rapidly expanding in order to accommodate the needs of an increasing population and to diffuse the extremely high population densities of major cities. Multiple housing projects are targeting different income groups, especially low-income groups, through a large social housing program. The Government also plans to develop 15 new cities, guided by principles of sustainability. In addition, Egypt has increased its capacity to produce electricity by at least 15 gigawatts, using advanced and efficient technologies. The Government has taken major steps to reform the regulatory framework of its electricity sector, allowing increased private sector participation and an effective regulatory role for the state. For the first time, the private sector is producing renewable energy and can compete with the Government to provide power for industrial and residential usage.
The scarcity of water, and the associated regional challenges, is a major driver for the Government to actively implement projects that ensure efficient use of water resources, increased availability of fresh water resources, and improved quality of water. Moreover, the Government, in collaboration with international organizations, has expanded its program of monitoring water pollution along the Nile.
The economic reform program has, thus far, achieved its objective of macroeconomic stabilization. It also aims to enhance competitiveness in international markets, and to continue to improve the well-being of Egyptian citizens. This program will enable Egypt to advance rapidly in the implementation of the SDS, its national strategy, and of the 2030 Agenda, with full engagement from stakeholders. The role of both the private sector and civil society is key in the realization of these goals. The inclusivity and transformability aspects of the 2030 Agenda and its national counterpart necessitate active contributions from both the private sector and civil society, and given this, the Government of Egypt is working to capitalize on the positive synergies between the combined efforts of the Government, the private sector and civil society to achieve this ambitious agenda.  

2. Policy-Enabling Environment

2.1  Governing Framework
Out of Egyptis commitment to achieving sustainable development, the Government of Egypt launched its first-ever sustainable development strategy, Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt Vision 2030 (SDS), in February 2016. The strategy is aligned with the 17 SDGs, as well as the African Agenda 2063, and acts as the governing framework for all development programs and projects that will be implemented until 2030. The SDS is the first long-term strategy that has been developed in Egypt following a participatory, open and transparent approach involving all relevant stakeholders. 
The launch of the strategy was followed by the establishment of a national committee, the National Committee for Monitoring the Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, as the result of a prime ministerial decree. The committee falls under the remit of the prime ministeris office and is composed of representatives of 17 ministries and state entities.1 The committee is mandated to act collaboratively to ensure that Egypt is moving in the right direction towards achieving sustainable development. The committee also ensures the alignment of the SDGs with the national strategy, whereby the national strategy acts as the national version of the SDGs. 
The localization of the SDGs through the SDS was adopted by a number of ministries and entities that have developed their own medium- and long-term strategies: the National Strategy for Science and Technology  for Sustainable Development 2030 (the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research); the Industry and Trade Development Strategy 2020 (the Ministry of Trade and Industry); Egyptis Education Transformation Program 2030 (the Ministry of Education and Technical Education); Integrated Energy Strategy 2035 
(the Ministry of Electricity and Renewable 
Energy); and the Agricultural Sustainable Development Strategy (the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation). 
In an unprecedented move towards translating the concept of inclusive sustainable development into action, the National Council for Women (NCW) has also launched its National Strategy for Women Empowerment 2030. The strategy focuses on empowering women to accelerate the achievement of sustainable development, as well as promoting gender equality in all fields of life. Likewise, the National Council for Childhood and Motherhood launched its strategy in April 2018, which aims at promoting the well-being of mothers and children.   
The governing policy framework outlined above was further reinforced by the establishment of sustainable development units and working groups in different ministries and entities assigned to act as the focal points for developing and implementing sustainable development plans and strategies within their own entities. The units and working groups also facilitate the coordination and monitoring process, led by the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.
Furthermore, two years since the launch of the 
SDS, the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform is leading an update and review process of the strategy. This review process is necessary in order to account for the major structural changes that Egypt has witnessed in the past two years. The changes were needed to reflect the introduction of the structural adjustment program in 2016, and the outcome of the 2017 national census, which revealed increased rates of population growth amounting to 2.56 percent, and the impact this growth has on the already-strained state budget, on infrastructure, and on social services. The high priority the country attaches to achieving food, water, and energy security also had to be clearly reflected in the strategy. This is in addition to the countryis current 
Box 1: Youth Engagement
geopolitical situation, and the desire to ensure a secure and stable economic and business environment conducive to investment and development. As such, the review process was initiated based on the following principles:
??Reinforcing the multidimensional aspect of sustainable development and its interconnected nature.
??Highlighting the benefits of sustainable development, i.e. adoption of a \0xECgreen economy as a tool to achieve sustainable development. 
The Youth Sustainable Development Initiative
A representative group of students from different universities from all regions of the country was formed, with the objective of raising awareness of the concept of sustainable development and of the SDS. The initiative aims at increasing youth engagement in the review process, as well as opening a channel of communication between the youth and the Government. Building the capacities of young people as future leaders is also a core function of the initiative. The group is actively participating in the national strategy review process by generating innovative ideas and proposing new projects that will contribute to achieving sustainable development.
Outcome:
??Around 4,000 project ideas tackling 27 different topics were proposed. Applicable and feasible ideas were selected and submitted for inclusion in the strategy document.
??An action plan is currently being developed to outline the mechanism by which the youth can actively participate in the sustainable development planning and monitoring process, as well as creating a generation of sustainable development ambassadors across Egypt.
???Stakeholder engagement to create ownership; the process involved extensive stakeholder consultations and participation to provide input and contributions to the sustainable development strategy. Stakeholders involved included parliamentarians, trade unions, women, youth (Box 1), NGOs, and the private sector. Over 60 workshops were organized and convened for the designated teams from the different ministries as well as representatives of relevant stakeholders.
2.2 Leaving No One Behind as an Overarching Principle
Additionally, in an effort to increase stakeholdersi engagement, a mobile application, \0xECSharek (\0xECParticipate), was launched by the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform as a digital platform to allow citizens and particularly the youth to actively participate in the review process. The application also aims at raising awareness of sustainable development in general and of the goals of the SDS in particular. 

Leaving no one behind entails prioritizing human dignity and rights and ensuring that that no goal is considered met unless met for all. The principle is emphasized in the SDGs because, despite the progress made in reducing poverty and injustice worldwide, the most impoverished, the excluded, the disadvantaged, and those at risk of violence and discrimination still face inequalities when it comes to accessing resources and securing their rights. 
The eradication of extreme poverty, promotion of gender equality, empowerment of women, youth and people with disabilities, and the achievement of balanced regional development are the core principles of Egyptis national sustainable development strategy, and these priorities are in compliance with the principle of leaving no one behind. Accordingly, the Government is committed to improving the effectiveness of social programs and on expanding them to cover more citizens in need. The Government is also working on the protection, rehabilitation, and empowerment of people with disabilities, as reflected by President Abdel-Fattah Al-Sisiis declaration of 2018 as the Year for People with Disabilities. This is in addition to launching programs designed to empower women, young people and the poor. 
Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: Takaful and Karama
There has been a substantial transformation in the design, method of delivery and scope of social programs in recent years. The Government has sought to improve the allocation of its social programs by revisiting the targeting and the means of social protection they provide. As a result, the allocation structure of these programs has been changed (Figure 1). There is less reliance on direct price subsidy, especially for fossil fuels, and an increased reliance on delivering cash transfers, whether conditional on school enrolment, antenatal care, or childcare for children in the age bracket of 0-6 years old; or unconditional, such as the social security pension. 
	Figure  1: Spending on Subsidies and Social Programs 	
The allocation of funding to the two key cash transfer programs, Takaful and Karama, has increased during recent years, as part of the Governmentis strategy of redirecting its social spending programs to better target the most vulnerable in society. 
Takaful (\0xECSolidarity) is a monthly conditional cash transfer for households with children, aiming at promoting capital accumulation by providing family income support while incentivizing poor households to invest in their childrenis health, education and nutrition by imposing conditions such as enrolment of children in schools (with a minimum of 80 percent attendance) and getting the necessary health check-ups, including child immunization and growth monitoring for children aged 0-5 years old, and antenatal care for pregnant mothers. Approximately 2,268,000 families are enrolled in the program at present, more than triple the number (707,000) enrolled in the fiscal year 2015/16.2Karama (\0xECDignity), on the other hand, is a monthly unconditional cash transfer program aimed at promoting social inclusion through integration of the most vulnerable, namely the elderly (those over 65 years old), people with disabilities, and, in a recent addition, orphaned children. Total enrolment currently stands at 306,000 households.
The programsi reach is countrywide, including 27 Governorates, 345 districts and 5,630 villages and hamlets. An overall 5.4 million households applied for the program and were registered on a modern database, totalling 23 million individuals. Out of those who were registered, 2.3 million households were accepted and enrolled into the two programs, with a total number of 9.5 million individuals. This sophisticated database is the first in Egypt to include poor and nearpoor households, and is currently being used to develop a unified database registry for all individuals through their identity card number. This registry is expected to be completed by the Administrative Control Authority before the end of 2018.
The Takaful and Karama programs have expanded nationwide through four consecutive 
phases. Substantial human and financial investments have been made, as well as the necessary administrative processes to set up the programs and to allow targeting of eligible poor households, based on both geographical targeting and proxy means testing. In addition, an elaborate system of external validation of data of registered beneficiaries and the disbursement mechanism for the entitled cash transfers through post offices across Egypt has been put in place. To support program implementation, an electronicallybased management information system was rolled out and has been continuously updated for the processes of registration, validation, payment, and grievance redress and retrieval, and currently work is underway for the design of applications for case management and conditionality, to be added to the management information system.
Decent Housing for Poor and Vulnerable Households: Sakan Karim
Sakan Karim (\0xECDecent Housing) is a government program that aims to provide 
Box 2: Sakan Karim
Sakan Karim: A Protection Policy and a Roof   
Key Figures:
Project target: 67,000 households in poor rural areas.
Households completed: 22,158
Investments: EGP 550 million 
Target Governorates: Minya, Assiut, Sohag, Qena and Luxor (first phase)
Cost per house: Min. of EGP 3,000 to a max. of EGP 40,000
Partners: Ministry of Health, Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform, NGOsi Support Fund, 8 NGOs, and the private sector
The Ministry of Social Solidarity is enhancing interventions aimed at raising the efficiency and quality of housing via the Sakan Karim program, especially in the villages that do not have public sewage and sanitation networks, where it is difficult to build water connections to avoid the risk of accumulating groundwater. Partnerships will be strengthened with the Central Agency for Reconstruction under the Ministry of Housing, to increase the latteris 
housing for low-income households. Protocols were signed by the Ministry of Social Solidarity with the Holding Company for Water and Waste Water and with eight NGOs in December 2017 to implement the first phase of the program, the objective of which is to contribute to providing decent housing services to 67,000 households in 27 villages in 17 administrative centers in the poorest five Governorates, namely Minya, Assiut, Sohag, Qena and Luxor. The ministry has also signed a protocol with the Holding Company for Water and Waste Water and its subsidiaries to oversee all extension and installation works in public drinking water networks and public sewage systems, targeting villages from among the poorest, based on their deficiency in basic services. The Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform are also contributing to expanding the project by increasing the coverage of households in more impoverished villages (Box 2). 
financing of the program, where the Ministry of Housing will bear 50% of the total cost of improving the efficiency of houses, and the Ministry of Social Solidarity and its partner NGOs will bear the other 50%.
Criteria for eligibility of houses that will be provided with Sakan Karim services are as follows: a. Most vulnerable, low-income families who are eligible for cash transfers. 
b. The area to be rehabilitated shall not exceed 60 square meters.
c. Priority goes to families benefiting from Takaful and Karama programs.
d. The house must be an owned property. 
e. The beneficiary must be a resident of the house.
Protection, Rehabilitation and Empowerment of People with Disabilities
One of the flagship accomplishments of the Government of Egypt in protecting the most vulnerable, and one of the main outcomes of announcing 2018 as the Year for People with Disabilities, was law No. 10 for 2018 on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which was issued in February this year after being approved by the parliament. The new law, which was worked on by the Ministry of Social Solidarity in partnership with the National Council for Disability and several NGOs, is the first Egyptian law that specifically addresses the rights of people with disabilities, and it provides an array of new beneficial measures. It provides the disabled with tax cuts and requires the Government and the private sector to allocate five percent of vacant jobs to people with disabilities, based on their qualifications and capacities. It will require transport service providers to dedicate space for disabled commuters. Under the billis mandate, the disabled will also receive free medical treatment at state-run hospitals.
In addition, the Ministry of Social Solidarity is collaborating with more than 12 ministries and 50 NGOs that specialize in disability issues to create an annual plan on disability that will help respond to the package of rights and services that the new law entails. This plan will start in July 2018 and is expected to be a regular mechanism for monitoring performance and results on disability issues in Egypt. The Government of Egypt is shifting from deploying an institutional and medical approach to managing disabilities to a societal and functional approach. Under this new approach, it is promoting the idea that people with disabilities are \0xECdifferently abled people, and that society bears the responsibility to integrate them, secure their rights and utilize their capacities, both for their own sake and for the sake of social and economic development at large. Currently more than 1.055 million people with disabilities benefit from different cash transfer programs (801,000 from the Daman social pension program, and 254,000 from the Karama program), at a total annual government expenditure of EGP 5 billion.
In addition to supporting the establishment of the legal framework for integrating people with disabilities and financing the cash transfer programs, the Government also supports other programs that aim at including this group in the economy and providing them with social and medical services. Many of these programs are either run by NGOs or done in collaboration with the private sector. Some of these programs include: 
??A recruitment unit established at the 
Ministry of Social Solidarity to assist people with disabilities who have the capacity to work to find relevant job opportunities; more than 1,045 people have been employed as a result of these efforts, in partnership with 20 private companies.
??Collaboration and coordination with 50 NGOs and foundations to develop a database of their most important activities and divide them according to the four types of disabilities, and facilitate joint initiatives.
??Provision of scholarships for students with visual disabilities in 18 public universities, with total funds of EGP 900,000 per year.
Economic Development of LowIncome Families and Rural Women
Efforts to foster the economic empowerment of those experiencing poverty and of rural women take different forms, to accommodate the needs and lifestyles of the targeted groups. The following are the various interventions adopted by the Ministry of Social Solidarity in that area, targeting young people and women between 21 and 55 years old.
??Training women on vocational, technical and financial aspects of starting and managing income-generating and small/ micro projects.
??Providing asset transfers to poor women with minimal interest.
??Providing loans and microfinance to start income-generating projects.
??Providing non-financial services and technical support and follow-up.
In 2017, the Ministry of Social Solidarity, in collaboration with NGOs, carried out vocational and business development training for 31,425 women. Over the last three years it has released EGP 193 million to fund 69,000 projects targeting low-income, poor and vulnerable households, with more than 90 percent of the money targeting rural women.
In addition, Nasser Social Bank is leading a huge microfinance project, funded by state charitable fund Tahya Masr (\0xECLong Live Egypt) with a total amount of EGP 250 million, to increase income generation opportunities for women and break the cycle of poverty. In 2017 it provided 6,483 women with loans worth approximately EGP 97.4 million.
Other Programs
The Government of Egypt is also working to protect the vulnerable by increasing safe employment opportunities by allowing access to markets and building capacities. It has launched an innovative life insurance program, the Aman (\0xECSecurity) certificate, for informal workers. This certificate is both an insurance mechanism that offers protection against economic shocks that could severely affect these workers and their households, and a savings mechanism to allow these workers to get a return on their savings. 
Women survivors of violence and their children are provided protection through provision of a comprehensive set of services such as shelter, legal aid, economic empowerment, social and psychological support, and there are efforts to raise awareness about genderbased violence. These services are provided in centers that cover eight Governorates: Cairo, Giza, Qaliubiya, Alexandria, Minya, Daqahliya, Fayoum and Beni Suef. 
2.3  Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Further to the planning framework presented above, and to Egyptis adoption of the principle of leaving no one behind, the Government of Egypt is committed to incorporating the concept of sustainable development into each and every project that is being implemented. As such, public investment allocation decisions are based on the prioritization of projects that achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions. The integrated electronic system for planning and monitoring is the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reformis tool to ensure the projectsi compliance with the criteria of sustainability. The electronic system links all projects submitted by public entities to the goals and key performance indicators of the SDS. This link enhances the process of monitoring and evaluation, whereby the projectsi progress and performance are evaluated based on their contribution to the nationis goals and achievement of balanced regional development. 
Additionally, the transformation from a lineitem budget to performance-based budgeting is gradually being implemented in Egyptis state budget. The transformation reinforces the concept of matching expenses and investments to goals and key performance indicators. Ministries undergoing the budget transformation in pilot form receive intensive workshops and consultations from both the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform and the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the alignment process is properly implemented. Performance-based budgeting paves the way for the effective and efficient utilization of public resources, making it one of the financial tools that aid in realizing the goals of sustainable development. 
Concurrently, the Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS), a member of the Inter-agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs), plays a pivotal role in the monitoring process of the sustainable development goals and the SDS through its sustainable development unit. The unit focuses on the classification, identification and measurement of indicators used in both the SDGs and in the national sustainable development strategy. The unit also works on mapping the different indicators used in the SDGs and in the national strategy to maximize the number of relevant indicators that are being utilized. Additionally, one of the unitis most important mandates is the production of the periodical national statistics report on the SDGs. The first national statistical report on the SDG indicators was launched in May 2018; it outlines the classification of SDG indicators into the three tiers prescribed by the global indicator framework on the basis of their level of methodological development and the availability of data (Table 1). In tandem, the Egypt SDG Observatory was launched in collaboration with UNICEF. The observatory3 provides a digital platform for tracking progress towards the SDGs in Egypt. Annex 1 provides a summary of the number of indicators available, not available and not applicable for each goal.
Table 1:  Egyptis Indicators - Tier 
Classification
Classification
Percentage
Tier 1
35.7%
Tier 2
29.1%
Tier 3
32.4%
Not applicable
2.9%
Total
100% 
In line with the unitis main areas of work, the Tafael (\0xECActivation) project to measure indicators at the Governorate level was launched. The project stems from the 
Governmentis recognition of the inadequacy of indicators at the Governorate level, which was regarded as one of the major obstacles to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Measurements at the national level do not reflect regional development disparities, disparities which must be tackled to ensure sustainable development goals are met. The project aims at collecting data at the level of municipalities by actively engaging them in the process. This not only improves the quality of data collection, but also ensures the sustainability of data production.

Box 3:  Non-Governmental Monitoring and Evaluation Efforts
The launch of the SDGs in 2015 has generated challenges for developing countries that have limited data on development issues. While classic methods of data collection are often expensive and time-consuming, new technologies for collecting data for monitoring and evaluation purposes could offer cheap, real-time data and potentially increase the participation and engagement of citizens in the decision-making process.
In Egypt, many governmental authorities have developed systems to receive citizensi complaints. Analyzing the frequency, types and locations of complaints can provide maps that point out bottlenecks and allow the Government to improve services.
The private sector has also developed some new technological tools that utilize crowdsourcing and big data techniques to provide useful services. The Egyptian Center for Public Opinion Research (Baseera) has developed a set of mobile applications that use crowdsourcing to provide data related to development issues. The most important applications are Nes2alak and NazahaMap. 
Nes2alak (\0xECWe Ask You) is a mobile polling application that measures public sentiment on development issues (including gender, environment, reproductive health, and migration) via crowdsourcing and big data. Application subscribers can ask questions or answer questions that other subscribers have asked, and the results of answer to each question are displayed in a graph format. 
NazahaMap (\0xECIntegrity Map) is a mobile application that allows citizens to report any corruption incidents they experience in their daily life. The application presents the reported corruption cases on a map of Egypt and displays statistics about each type of corruption.
3. Review Methodology

The process of preparing this report benefited from the governing framework detailed under the section above on the policy-enabling environment. Members of the national committee and the focal points (sustainable development units or working groups) in the different ministries and governmental entities all contributed. The process was led by the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform in its capacity as the rapporteur of the national committee and the main entity responsible for coordinating and monitoring efforts towards the achievement of the SDS.
This review presents Egyptis progress towards the achievement of the SDGs. As such, all 17 goals are reported on; however, the goals outlined by the 2018 High-Level Political Forum (HLPF), namely SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12 and 15, received a more thorough analysis. 
An integral part of the review process is the quantitative analysis of the progress towards achieving the SDGs. This analysis relies mostly on data compiled by the different governmental stakeholders and the sustainable development unit residing in the Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics. Subsequently, data compiled will be used to report on the different indicators set to monitor progress towards the SDGs and the national strategy. Despite the availability of only 43 percent of indicators, quantitative reporting is adopted to highlight the challenges faced in data collection across the different government sectors, and to identify the missing data needed for effective monitoring. 
The participatory approach followed in the preparation and the update of the SDS as well as in Egyptis 2016 voluntary national review was maintained in preparing this report. Consultations with governmental entities were facilitated through the national committee and focal points as stated above. The highly valuable and active contribution of NGOs in the review process of the national strategy was also instrumental in the drafting of the report. Several NGOs prepared a strategy document that outlines their role in working to achieve sustainable development, as well as initiatives to implement this proposed strategy. Examples of these numerous initiatives were presented and integrated into the report to highlight NGOsi efforts in this regard. 
Regarding the engagement of the private sector, consultation with the United Nations Global Compact Network Egypt (GCNE) office was carried out towards this aim. The consultation involved a situation analysis of activities carried out by the private sector towards the implementation of the SDGs, and key case studies and examples were provided by GCNE in support of this report.4 
The preparation of the report also benefited from a large pool of experts who are actively involved in the national strategyis review process. Experts provided critical analysis of specific areas of sustainable development, detailing challenges, current efforts and policy recommendations. These efforts were integrated into this report.

4. Bold Reforms in the Face of Challenges
4.1  Egyptis Economic Reform Program

While the world was battling the woes of the global financial crisis, which compromised global macroeconomic conditions, Egypt witnessed the January 2011 uprising. The three-year period after the uprising was characterized by turmoil, political instability and security challenges which destabilized the economy. The political instability and conflicts that subsequently engulfed the Middle East and North Africa created waves of uncertainty and risk and disrupted economic activity, especially investment. Despite these unfavorable conditions, the Egyptian economy continued to register positive, but very modest, economic growth, driven mainly by resilient private consumption and buoyant government expenditure. To keep the economy afloat, the Government continued to boost its expenditure, despite suffering from declining revenue, raising the government deficit to alarming levels.  
After the election of President AbdelFattah Al-Sisi and the appointment of a new Government in 2014, efforts were focused on restoring security and reducing uncertainty and risk, the necessary prerequisites for any effective development program.  Following the election of President Al-Sisi, however, Egypt experienced a wave of terrorist attacks concentrated in the Governorate of North Sinai. Despite these terrorist attacks, the Government of Egypt succeeded in re-establishing security and containing uncertainty and risk. In fact, as a result of the tremendous efforts to restore security, Egypt has been ranked as 16th out of 135 countries in terms of safety, making it the safest country in Africa, according to a recent Gallup poll as reported by the BBC. On the economic front, despite the adoption of bold reform policies such as reducing fuel and electricity subsidies and enacting policies to improve the investment climate, a consensus started to emerge within the Government and among experts that Egypt is in dire need of a comprehensive economic stabilization and reform program to place it on solid ground to achieve its ambitious development goals.  
In November 2016, Egypt embarked on an ambitious and challenging home-grown economic reform program supported by a three-year Extended Fund Facility (EFF) from the International Monetary Fund worth US$12 billion. The objectives of the reform program are to address key imbalances in the economy, primarily the external imbalances and the unstainable fiscal deficit, while achieving the macroeconomic stability that is necessary for sustainable and inclusive economic growth.  
Prior to the approval of the program by the IMFis Board of Directors in November 2016, the Government of Egypt and the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) undertook very bold economic measures, including a substantial reduction in fuel subsidies and the liberalization of the exchange rate regime.
On the fiscal side, the Governmentis reforms include several policies targeting a reduction in the deficit. The reforms commenced with the substitution of a sales tax system with a comprehensive value-added tax system, with a negative list approach towards specific products and services, contrary to the previously implemented sales tax. This was coupled with an increase in the value-added tax rates. More significant was the reduction of direct price subsidies for fuel products, electricity and utilities, which is also a target in Egyptis national sustainable development strategy. In parallel, the Government also reformed the food subsidy system to better target beneficiaries and expanded its tax administration reforms to increase revenues and reduce tax evasion.  The Government also passed a new civil service law to restructure 
Figure  2: Egyptis Budget Deficit
wages and control wage growth, linking performance to compensation. 
These measures succeeded in reducing the overall budget deficit from almost 13 percent of GDP in 2012/13 to almost 10.9 percent in 2016/2017 (Figure 2). Notably, this significant drop in the overall budget deficit occurred without negatively affecting public investment, which has historically been the main consequence of any attempt to curb the budget deficit. In fact, from 2014, public investment increased from 2.1 percent of GDP in 2011/12 to an expected 3.1 percent in 2016/17.  

of the reform program was the introduction of a flexible exchange rate system which liberalized the foreign exchange market and increased foreign exchange availability. This occurred following the restoration of confidence in the central bankis independence (CBE) has, since then, relaxed all restrictions on foreign exchange transactions such as deposits, withdrawals and transfers. This policy was complemented by others to facilitate the functioning of the foreign exchange market and to contain inflation expectations, including capping government borrowing from the central bank, using more open market operations and raising the policy interest rates on the domestic currency to curb dollarization. The bank has announced that it will target an inflation band of 13 percent +/- 3 percent by the fourth quarter of 2018, which is consistent with the bankis primary legal mandate of price stability. To achieve this target, the central bank adopted a contractionary monetary policy throughout 2016 and 2017, hiking interest rates by 8.5 percent.
The depreciation of the exchange rate by almost 100 percent since the onset of the reform, as well as the significant increase in energy prices as a result of the partial phasing out of energy subsidies, created substantial inflationary pressures, which pushed inflation to 33 percent in July 2017, up from 
Figure 3: Net Official Reserves
9 percent in May 2016. Inflation has since declined, reaching 11.4 percent in May 2018.
Recent macroeconomic indicators suggest that, despite the challenging stabilization measures adopted, the Egyptian economy is recovering from the repeated wave of shocks it has faced since 2011. Inflation and the budget deficit are declining as indicated above. The external sector has also witnessed a major improvement, where the balance of payments recorded a surplus in 2016/17 of $13.7 billion compared to a deficit of $0.8 billion in 2015/16. This improvement in the external sector has positively affected net international reserves, which rose to $44.3 billion, covering nine months of imports, in May 2018, up from a low of $15 billion, covering a mere three months of imports, at the beginning of 2016 (Figure 3).

Government stabilization efforts and reform This improvement in the macroeconomic initiatives have also reflected positively on stance partially improved unemployment output growth, which is estimated to reach 5.3 figures, which declined from a high of 13.4 percent in 2017/18 compared to 1.8 percent in percent in 2013/14 to 10.6 percent in 2018 
2010/11 (Figure 4).  	(Figure 5).




Source: Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.
Figure  4: Egyptis Real GDP Growth Rate (%)
Figure  5: Unemployment Rates Post Economic Reform (%)

The future prospects of the Egyptian economy are now much more promising, especially given the political determination to sustain and deepen the reform agenda, coupled with systemic and proactive efforts to further improve the security stance through uprooting terrorism from the Sinai Peninsula. 
Regionally, reconstruction efforts are expected to resume in Arab countries currently in conflict, once those situations are stabilized. Given the proximity and the historical ties between Egypt and the Arab region, Egypt could play an important role in these efforts, creating lucrative business and job opportunities for many Egyptian firms and workers. As Egyptian economic reform efforts continue to materialize, unlocking the countryis numerous investment opportunities, more funds and investments should be directed towards Egypt, adding to its growth and development prospects.     
4.2  Mega-Projects to Foster Growth 
Globally, the recent acceleration in economic growth, which is expected to continue in the near future, should have positive repercussions on the Egyptian economy through trade, tourism and Suez Canal revenues. Additionally, the revival of the Silk Road by China could represent an excellent opportunity for Egypt to regain its historical prominence as a major trading and logistical hub linking the East with the West and the North with the South.  

In parallel with its ambitious economic reform program, the Government of Egypt is making progress in implementing a number of megaprojects across the country. One common denominator among these projects is their goal of upgrading the countryis infrastructure, either through correcting existing deficiencies or through expanding scope and coverage. The other common denominator is that the spectrum of these projects goes beyond the countryis major cities and the densely populated Nile Valley, with the aim of changing the map of Egypt and creating new sustainable communities that are integrated into the countryis economy. These two common denominators are directly tied to the overarching principle of leaving no one behind.
The one and a half million feddans5 project is one of these national projects; it aims at increasing the countryis arable land by nearly 18.75 percent while also increasing food production, in order to close Egyptis food gap and increase agricultural exports. Nearly two-thirds of the new arable land will be in Upper Egypt, which will foster economic development in this neglected region, creating much-needed jobs and expanding the areais production capability. 
Another key project with substantial economic, social and environmental implications is the national project for highways. The projectis objective is to link communities that have been deprived of economic opportunities because of poor transportation infrastructure. It also aims at easing congestion in major cities. Over the past four years (2014-2018), 865 km of roads have been added to the Egyptian road network and around 2,000 km of existing roads have been subject to maintenance or development. The direct and indirect benefits of this project are immense; improving the coverage and the quality of the road network in Egypt will reduce the costs of transportation, and hence the cost of transactions. A reduction in the cost of transactions would encourage 
investment, improve the overall business climate and spread the benefits of growth and development more widely, to reach even the remote parts of the country. 
An additional national mega-project that is underway is the Suez Canal Economic Zone, a transformative plan for the Suez Canal region. It seeks to create a range of interlinking economic activities that benefit and support marine transportation activity in this important region of Egypt, and to increase the economic linkages between Egyptis mainland and the Sinai Peninsula. The project includes the construction and development of several ports and the construction of four tunnels that will run under the Suez Canal. The successful implementation of the project will position Egypt as a major global logistics hub.  
Another project that seeks to foster development away from the Nile Valley is the Golden Triangle project. Located between the cities of Qusayr, Safaga, and Qena in Upper Egypt, the so-called Golden Triangle area covers approximately 9,000 km2. The region is extremely rich in terms of mineral resources such as limestone, phosphate rocks, zinc, glass sand, shale rocks, and gold. The project will tap into the strategic location of Upper Egypt to build sustainable, affluent new communities that can utilize this mineral wealth and contribute to global supply chains. The project will see the building of three seaports and three airports in the area, as well as new connections with existing road and railway infrastructure. 
Lastly, the Government of Egypt has made a particularly ambitious mega-project among its top priorities: the new administrative capital, located to the east of Cairo. When complete, the new city will host governmental agencies, foreign embassies, and several international universities. The implementation phase started in May 2016, and the development will follow sustainability guidelines on issues such as green space, usage of renewable energy and environmentally friendly public transportation. The new capital city is only one of a total of 15 cities that the Government plans to establish in the coming years in different geographical locations around Egypt. 

5. Progress Towards Goals and Targets

This section of the report lays out Egyptis progress made towards achieving all 17 SDGs. A set of indicators are provided at the beginning for each goal, based on the availability of data. The indicators are presented in a table that highlights the following information:
??Indicator: The name of the indicator and its unit of measurement.
??SDG target: The number of the target to which the indicator is relevant, i.e. measures progress towards achievement of the target.
??Type: This field is included due to the fact that not all SDG indicators are available and measurable in Egypt. As such, other indicators, whether from the SDS or other relevant general indicators, are used to reflect the progress in goals. Thus, this field takes one of four values; 0 for general indicators (neither SDG nor national strategy indicator), 1 for SDG indicators, 2 for national strategy indicators and 3 for indicators that are commonly used in the SDGs and the national strategy.
??Value: The current value of the indicator and the year of measurement.
??2030 target: The target provided in the SDGs or the national strategy. In the case of the unavailability of a specified target in both references, N/A (not applicable) is printed.
??Change: Provides a colored representation of the change that has occurred to the value of the indicator:
    Green  positive change; 
    Red  negative change; 
    Grey  no change;
  Yellow  positive change but data is not available yet (reference provided in Annex 2).
The sources and change reference values and years are provided in the annex at the end of this report (Annex 2). The indicator table provides a quick overview of Egyptis progress towards the relevant goal, emphasizes the importance of producing measurable indicators for each goal (i.e. fulfilling indicator measurement requirements) to increase the percentage of Tier 1 indicators, and highlights common indicators between the national strategy and the SDGs.  
The indicator tables are followed by a description of Egyptis current efforts and success stories that are contributing to achieving the relevant goals. Current efforts are linked to the challenges that Egypt faces regarding each SDG, as well as the change reflected in the indicators. 
Indicators
 SDG target
Type 
Value
2030 
        Change Target
Proportion of population below the international poverty line (%) 
1.1
1
1.3	2015
	0	
Proportion of population living below the national poverty line (%) 
1.1
3
27.8	2015
Reduce by half
SDG 1: No Poverty 
Table 2: SDG 1 Indicators
Despite previous improvements in the proportion of the population living below the international poverty line, the episode of instability and economic downturn that characterized the period after the 2011 uprising has led to a deterioration in the situation. The percentage of the population falling below the national poverty line rose from 26.3 percent in 2012/2013 to 27.8 percent in 2015. Recognizing this critical social problem, and as indicated in Section 2.2, the Government of Egypt has taken serious measures to reduce the impact of poverty on the quality of life of the poor through the Takaful and Karama social protection programs. With the prevalence of inflation during the 2017-2018 period, a presidential decree increased the nominal pension amount of these two programs.  
The Government of Egypt recognizes that poverty is not only related to income. In fact, it is a multidimensional phenomenon related to deprivations in health, education, and living conditions. In this vein, the Ministry of Social Solidarity in collaboration with the Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) and UNICEF Egypt has launched a report entitled \0xECUnderstanding Multidimensional Child Poverty to better address poverty in all its forms and to design suitable policies to eradicate it. 
Social Housing Projects
To address the living condition dimension of poverty, Egypt has adopted a social housing project for low-income groups that provides suitable housing for those with low incomes, with payment conditions that are appropriate to their financial resources. The Government has completed construction of 190,000 housing units of 90 m2, each including interior finishings. These units are offered for sale according to the following conditions: for families, annual household income must not exceed EGP 42,000; for individuals, annual income should not exceed EGP 30,000; applicants for social housing must be aged between 21 to 50 years old and must not have previously benefited from any governmentsupported public housing. In order to facilitate the process for beneficiaries, the Government (represented by the Mortgage Finance Subsidy and Guarantee Fund) in coordination with the Central Bank of Egypt has launched the Mortgage Finance Initiative to finance the purchase of housing for low-income earners.
ENID: The Active Role of Egyptian Civil Society 
Civil society in Egypt is quite active in attending to social problems. Many NGOs work on poverty alleviation, and one of the most important in this field is Egypt Network for Integrated Development (ENID/El Nidaa). ENID was established in April 2012 to alleviate poverty in Upper Egypt by developing viable and sustainable employment opportunities and providing basic services. ENID works through four programs; namely micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and entrepreneurship; agricultural and off-farm development; upgrading basic services; and a knowledge and dissemination hub. ENID works mainly in the Governorate of Qena, the countryis second-poorest with a poverty rate of 58 percent. Under the four programs, ENID provides various services including medical check-ups, literacy classes, vocational training, awareness-sessions, and support for MSMEs in the industrial and agricultural sectors. Most of ENIDis activities are directed at women in Qena. Recently, ENID has started an industrial zone in Mana village in the Governorate and selected young female candidates to be trained in handicrafts and employed there. ENID helps the producers to market their work inside and outside Egypt through national and international exhibitions and events. 
The private sector in Egypt is also active in the domain of poverty alleviation through its corporate social responsibility activities. \0xECEbda3 men Masr (\0xECInnovation from Egypt) is an initiative that evolved as one of the main CSR platforms launched by the Bank of Alexandria in early 2016. Based on the concept of \0xECcreating shared value, the Bank of Alexandria has become a partner of citizens and the community, blending the creation of social value with the growth of the economy. This is achieved through several collaborations and partnerships aiming at empowering traditional communities, as well as increasing entrepreneurial opportunities, with the ultimate goal of promoting the preservation of crafts and heritage. So far, the program has reached approximately 1,400 craftsmen and artisan groups across 10 regions. Crafted products and goods are displayed on the initiatives website for purchase from international and local vendors. Products are further marketed in the bankis annual giveaways and events that showcase the merchandise. 
Indicators
 SDG target
Type 
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Stunting prevalence (% children <5 years of age)
2.2.1
2
21.4	2014
10

Total volume of agricultural production (thousand tons)
2.4
0
319	2015
N/A

SDG 2: Zero Hunger
Table 3: SDG 2 Indicators
The Government of Egypt is aware of the necessity to provide appropriate support to vulnerable segments of the population while carrying out necessary economic reforms, and accordingly initiated several programs and upgraded other programs to overcome the short-term impact of the economic reforms. Hunger is not only a critical social problem; it also has severe long-lasting repercussions on cognitive abilities, especially for children. There are several initiatives to effectively address this problem on the part of both the Government and civil society, which have reflected positively on the indicators related to SDG 2 depicted in the above table.  
School Meals Program
The Government of Egypt initiated a new school meals program that is implemented under the National Strategy of School Meals. The program covers all the students in state preschool and primary education. President Abdel-Fattah Al-Sisi has highlighted the importance of school meals and assured that the strategy is a priority for the Government. The meals include a number of items aimed at meeting the pupilsi nutritional needs. The distribution of school meals is also expected to decrease the dropout rate and increase pupilsi engagement at school.  
Commodity Subsidies
Egypt has implemented nationwide a new subsidy system based on a points system. This system includes the replacement of the main supply commodities (oil, sugar, rice) with foodstuffs or non-food items from up to 50 different items. The citizen has the freedom to choose the commodities they purchase according to their needs. The new subsidy system covers 67.8 million people.6 In addition, the Government has implemented a new bread subsidy system, whereby each citizen can get five loaves per day. Those who need less bread can exchange the extra loaves for points that can be used to purchase other goods. The Egyptian Food Bank
The Egyptian Food Bank is an NGO that provides vulnerable citizens with food on a monthly basis, and on special occasions such as during Ramadan and on religious holidays. Its monthly feeding program covers 250,000 households,7 and it has started a new initiative to collect waste food from hotels and social gatherings, to provide healthy meals for poor people. The organization works with the Tahya Masr fund and Misr El-Kheir charity to deliver food to the poor all over the country.
SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
3.1
3
33
2016
<70

Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
3.2
3
27
2014
18

Neonatal mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
3.2
3
14
2014
8

Tuberculosis incidence 
(per 100,000 people)
3.3
1
13,000
2016
N/A

Suicide mortality rate
3.4
3
52
2015
N/A

Death rate due to road traffic injuries 
(per 100,000 population)
3.6
3
13.2
2016
8


	Table 4: SDG 3 Indicators
Egyptis 2014 constitution affirms the universal right to healthcare, stipulating that each citizen has the right to enjoy a healthy life and to receive comprehensive healthcare with quality standards. It also specifies that the state shall allocate at least 3 percent of the Gross National Product (GNP) to the health sector on an annual basis. In alignment with this, the SDS prioritizes the development of the health sector as an integral aspect to achieving sustainable development, based on the notion of investing in human capital. One of the main aims of the strategy is developing the health insurance system to increase the percentage of citizens covered from 58 percent8 to 100 percent by 2030.
The Government of Egypt works persistently on improving the health services provided to its citizens, despite being constrained by the availability of financial resources, a growing population, and the need for better governance. The progress made in the era of the Millennium Development Goals with respect to maternal and child mortality rates reflects the efforts being exerted in that regard. Additionally, Egyptis experience in treating hepatitis C has become a renowned success story and a model for other countries. The participation of different stakeholders in providing health care in Egypt especially to low- and middle-income citizens is also remarkable. All these efforts, as outlined below in more detail, indicate that Egypt is making huge progress in achieving the national and international health goals, while acknowledging the need to compound these efforts to reach its targets. 
Significant Decrease in Maternal and Child Mortality Rates
The decrease in the maternal mortality ratio from 174 per 100,000 live births in 1992/93 to 33 in 2016 reflects a significant improvement in health outcomes in the country. This improvement can be partially attributed to the increase in the percentage of women who received antenatal health services, and the percentage of births attended by a health care provider. 
Similarly, the under-five mortality rate was reduced from 81 deaths per thousand live births in 1995 to 27 deaths per thousand in 2014, a decrease of 66 percent. The infant mortality rate also dropped from 60 deaths per thousand live births in 1995 to 22 deaths per thousand in 2014.
Hepatitis C: A Challenge Turned into a Success Story
Egypt formerly had one of the worldis highest prevalence rates of hepatitis C. However, in 2015, the country began a battle to eradicate the disease over the next five years, and since then, more than 1 million patients have been cured, and 15 million people will be surveyed and treated every year over a period of three years. Egypt will therefore be free of the virus by the end of 2020. The success of the eradication plan relies on producing the required medication locally, and the price of hepatitis C treatment for each person dropped from $900 in 2014 to less than $200 in 
20169. In addition, at the end of 2016 the \0xECIbda Binafsak (\0xECStart with Yourself) initiative was launched, which aims to detect patients with hepatitis C in public organizations.
CSR Allocated to Provide Health Services
The role of the private sector in providing aid for vulnerable groups in Egypt through their corporate social responsibility (CSR) programs has grown over the past decade. Corporate social responsibility activities cover a wide range of groups, including poor people, people with disabilities, people living in informal settlements and deprived areas, orphaned children, and children living or working on the street. Several hospitals that serve thousands of patients every year depend on both CSR and citizensi donations to provide the resources for quality health care to vulnerable groups. The Magdi Yacoub Foundation and the Childrenis Cancer Hospital (57357) are notable examples.    
The Childrenis Cancer Hospital (57357) works to prevent cancer through research and education, and provides quality healthcare free to children with cancer. The hospital, which offers its services on an equal opportunity basis, depends on charity and donations.   
The Magdi Yacoub Foundation has established an international medical center of excellence offering free state-of-the-art services for children with heart problems. Through its medical complex located in Aswan, less-privileged children receive the highest international standards of medical care. 
SDG 4: Quality Education


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Illiteracy rate (%) 
(10 years and older)
4.1
2
25.8
2017
710

Class density 
(number of students/ class)
4.1
2
43.7
17/18
30

Quality of primary education11  (score)
4.2
0
2.4
17/18
N/A

Primary education enrolment rate (net %)
4.1
0
98
2017
N/A

Internet access in schools12  (score)
4.a.1
0
3.2
2017
N/A


	Table 5: SDG 4 Indicators
At the core of the 2030 Agenda lies human capital. As in the case of health, education has been receiving increasing attention of late since having a quality education has so many virtuous spillovers on employment, poverty and demographic transition. Egyptis 2014 constitution states that education is compulsory until the completion of secondary stage or its equivalent. It also specifies that the state shall allocate at least 4 percent of the Gross National Product (GNP) to school education, in addition to 2 percent of GNP to university education, with these percentages to be increased annually to reach global public spending levels. The SDS meanwhile lays out the necessary reforms required to improve the education system in Egypt. The strategyis education pillar is divided into three levels; general education (primary and secondary), technical education, and higher education (university and postgraduate education). Dedicating a whole part of the education pillar to the development of technical education is intended to communicate its importance in fulfilling the needs of the Egyptian labor market and tackling its inefficiencies, as evidenced by the high unemployment rates among graduates of higher education. 
Egypt has the largest education system in the Middle East and North Africa, with 20 million students in pre-tertiary education. Relatively high enrolment rates for primary and secondary education may reflect the adequacy of the education system; yet the high and increasing (from 42.7 in 2016/2017 to 43.7 in 2017/2018) average number of students per class raises concerns about the quality of the education being provided. High class densities have an adverse impact on comprehension and knowledge transfer. Thus, Egypt recognizes that the real challenge is to improve the quality of the education system. 
Revamping the School Education System
In May 2018, the Ministry of Education and Technical Education launched its strategy for transforming education in Egypt. In alignment with the goals of the SDS, the strategy aims to provide access to education for all, to create a relevant and quality educational system in accordance with international standards, and to develop passionate and enthusiastic pupils and teachers who learn, think and innovate. The strategy will restructure the teacher payment scheme to better match teachersi qualifications and to improve their living conditions. Skill-development training programs will also be provided to teachers to raise their teaching capacities. Education technologies will be deployed to help teachers become more effective and make classroom learning more relevant. The system will be transformed gradually from relying on textbooks to digital learning materials which will be accessible to students, teachers and parents. These new materials will be adopted from the kindergarten stage. 
In tandem, a new generation of schools, the \0xECNile schools and the \0xECEgyptian-Japanese schools, are being offered for students at the primary, preparatory and secondary stages. The Egyptian-Japanese schools will adopt the Japanese education system and inculcate the values of respect, discipline and cleanliness. These schools also aim at improving the parenting skills of the studentsi parents, as well as ensuring that no private tutoring is needed. Since the start of the academic year 2017/2018, 28 Egyptian-Japanese schools have been opened across Egypt. The Nile schools aim at providing internationally renowned education certificates, developed in partnership with the international Cambridge Assessment agency. 
The World Bank has accordingly invested $500 million to support the education reform strategy with the aim of increasing access to quality kindergarten education, improving the quality of learning, and adopting technology. The project will expand access to quality kindergartens for around 500,000 children, train 500,000 teachers and education officials, and provide 1.5 million students and teachers with digital learning resources over a period of five years (2018-2022). 
Partnering with the Private Sector to Improve Technical Education 
Under the supervision of the Ministry of Education and Technical Education, ElSewedy Development established STA, a technical academy that provides a three-year secondary level program offering customized technical education for the major electrical industries, in accordance with international standards. The training programs reflect a dual approach, taken from German technical training, which combines both the learning and training tracks, and takes place at schools and within factories. The STA curriculum is competency-based and combines learning with on-the-job training to empower students with the necessary knowledge, skills and attitude. The academy offers scholarships and incorporates the use of tablets, online simulations, interactive smart boards and a digital library as resources for all.   
SDG 5: Gender Equality


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Proportion of girls and women aged 1549 years who have undergone female genital mutilation/ cutting (%) 
5.3
3
87
2015
50

Proportion of seats held by women in 
national parliament 
(%)
5.5
3
14.9
2017
35

Global Gender Gap 
Index (rank)
5.1
2
134
2017
60

Proportion of women in ministerial positions (%)
5.5
3
25
2018
30

Proportion of women who have bank accounts (%)
5.a
0
27
2017
1813


	Table 6: SDG 5 Indicators
Egypt has made remarkable strides in all aspects related to gender equality which have translated into significant improvements in all the gender equality indicators as depicted in the above table.  These efforts are led by the National Council for Women with the support of active civil society in different areas related to gender equality. 
The National Strategy for Women Empowerment
The National Council for Women developed the National Strategy for Women Empowerment to focus on the SDGs and gender issues in the ten pillars of the national strategy. The process of formulating the strategy included consultations with governmental authorities, NGOs, the private sector and experts in varying fields. It also conducted several surveys, qualitative studies and secondary analysis to assess and address womenis empowerment in a comprehensive way.
The strategy has four pillars:
??political empowerment and leadership
??economic empowerment
??social empowerment
??protection
The strategy specified a number of targets under each pillar and the indicators that will be used to monitor the progress in the implementation phase. A quantitative target was set for each indicator to be achieved by 2030. President Al-Sisi launched the strategy in March 2017 and all government authorities are committed to abide by its objectives.
With the commencement of the strategyis implementation, the council established the Egypt National Observatory for Women (ENOW),14 to be used in monitoring the implementation of the strategy on the national and local levels. The observatory provides decision makers, experts, researchers and the general public with information that supports the formation of evidence-based policies and dialogues, as well as data for the indicators of the strategyis four pillars and the SDGs.
Additionally, the National Council for Women has advocated for the restructuring of the Equal Opportunity Units that were established in 2010. As a result, units at the ministries of agriculture and land reclamation, health and population, and local development were reformulated with the aim of enhancing their role in ensuring constitutional equality between men and women in the workplace (regarding Articles 9 and 11 particularly), as well as addressing any employment practices that are discriminatory against women, and providing legal awareness programs to support the rights of working women and help them get the necessary training and promotion opportunities.
Womenis Economic Empowerment
The percentage of women who have bank accounts was 9 percent in 2015, and Egypt had targeted an increase to 18 percent by 2030. Accordingly, the Egyptian financial inclusion program was established to increase the proportion of Egyptians who access financial services from banks, and as a result, the percentage of women who have bank accounts has reached 27 percent, reflecting an early achievement of the target.
Moreover, the Government of Egypt is committed to empowering women entrepreneurs by providing them with credit facilities. In this context, the percentage of microcredit facilities provided to women stood at 44 percent in 2015. In addition, awarenessraising campaigns and training programs have been offered to women across Egypt to equip them with the necessary knowledge and skills to develop their own businesses. 
Private sector companies and NGOs are also working to empower women. Among these efforts is the Social Innovation Hub, developed as part of Microsoftis \0xECAspire Woman initiative. The project aims at empowering young women leaders of the future by building their technology, business and soft skills. The project was launched in 2014 and has since reached almost 60,000 Egyptian young people and provided economic opportunities for over 2,000 women through freelance work, micro-entrepreneurship and job placement opportunities.
Womenis Political Empowerment
The current Egyptian Cabinet includes, for the first time, eight female members out of 33 total ministers. In addition, the beginning of 2017 marked the appointment of the firstever female governor in Egyptis history. Also in 2017, a woman was appointed for the first time as deputy governor of the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE). Also notable is the percentage of women voting in the 2014 presidential election, which stood at 44 percent.
SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation


Indicators
 SDG target
Type 
Value
2030 
Change
Target 
Ratio of nontraditional water resources to total water resources usage (%)
6.6
2
26	2017
40	
Percentage of loss in water treatment plants (%)
6.4
2
30.2	2017
<10	
Amount of treated water (mn m3) 
6.3
0
9297	2016
N/A	

	Table 7: SDG 6 Indicators
Water, as one of the key natural resources addressed by the environment pillar in the national strategy, takes a priority in the set of objectives set for 2030. Egypt is reliant on the River Nile for its water resources, with a dependency ratio estimated at 97 percent. A fixed 55.5 billion m3/year passes through the High Aswan Dam-Egyptis share according to the 1959 treaty with Sudan. The total water resources currently available for utilization in Egypt are 59.25 billion m3/year, while water uses are 100 billion m3/year. The gap between the current needs and availability of water is filled by sea water desalinization, reuse of drainage water, shallow ground water, and treated wastewater. Given this, the Government of Egypt is exerting major efforts to address the increasing water demands of a steadily growing population, estimated at 96 million in 2017, through the efficient management of its water resources. 
Monitoring water pollution on the Nile is one of the areas where the Government has made significant achievements. There has been a transformation in the type of monitoring, from traditional techniques to the most advanced technological solutions. Twenty-one stations have been installed to monitor both the quality of the Nile River and the quality of direct industrial wastewater released into the river, and the number of monitoring stations is expected to reach 95 by 2030. Additionally, there has been a substantial decrease in the number of facilities, mainly sugar and paper production facilities, that discharge their wastewater into the Nile River, from 27 to only 9 facilities.
Sustainable use of water resources is also being promoted through a number of awareness campaigns conducted by state bodies. In addition, there are efforts underway to transform the irrigation system in Egypt into a drip system. These efforts are matched on the private sector side, where companies like Sekem, an Egyptian organization that has pioneered organic farming, are fostering sustainable irrigation methods and the processing of wastewater. Although organic cultivation already requires up to 40 percent less water than conventional farming methods, Sekem uses sprinkler and drip irrigation methods, which utilize water resources much more efficiently. Moreover, 100 percent of the wastewater produced by 
Sekem is reused after treatment. In addition, Sekem contracts farmers from all over Egypt, and provides them with support on sustainable irrigation systems from the Egyptian BioDynamic Association (EBDA). 
Provision of safe drinking water to all citizens is another area required for the achievement of SDG 6. The percentage of households with access to safe drinking water stands at 98 percent in urban areas and 95 percent in rural areas. However, in order to increase that to 100 percent by 2030, the Government is expanding drinking water projects; it is currently implementing 236 projects, while a further 155 projects are under development, to cover 498 villages. 
Regarding sanitation services, despite the increase in the overall percentage of coverage, a conspicuous discrepancy between urban and rural coverage remains, whereby 92.2 percent of urban households have access to sanitation services compared to only 47 percent in rural areas. Over a period of four years, however, 80 sanitation projects have been completed, covering 414 villages, at a cost of EGP 9 billion. The provision of sanitation services is targeted to reach 100 percent in all villages by 2030 through the implementation of a sanitation projects plan in the remaining under-serviced villages (2,800 villages, or 58 percent of the total) at an estimated total cost of EGP 200 billion.

Box 4:  Adverse Impact of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) 
Egypt is exerting efforts to address the growing water demands of a steadily growing population, estimated at 96 million people for the year 2017. At the current growth rate, the population could exceed the 130 million mark in 2030.
Egyptis territory is 98% desert. About 45-50 million Egyptians live in the Nile Delta, a low-lying region fanning out from Cairo roughly 160 kilometers to the Mediterranean Sea. The rest live in the Nile Valley itself, representing another 1% of the nationis total land area. The delta and the river together have always been the source of Egyptis wealth and greatness, yet today they face numerous risks.
One imminent challenge is the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD), a massive dam on the headwaters of the Blue Nile, which supplies a significant portion of Egyptis water. Despite not being involved in the process of planning or launching the dam, Egypt agreed to cooperate with Ethiopia and Sudan on commissioning an international consultancy firm to conduct technical studies to assess the GERDis design and its impact on the two downstream countries. These studies have yet to be concluded due to differences regarding the initial report. Further progress on the construction and filling of the GERD must be based on consensus among the three countries on the damis design, its impact on Sudan and Egypt, the filling of the reservoir, and its operating rules. Reaching an agreement on this issue is important for Egyptis efforts to achieve the SDGs, including ensuring the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation (SDG 6).
The first filling of the GERD will seriously affect Egyptis water availability and decrease the countryis water share per capita, and thus impact various economic activities, particularly in the case of \0xECnon-cooperative filling by Ethiopia. If the filling process is conducted in five years, as planned by Ethiopia, the accumulated water shortage at the High Aswan Dam will increase by 92 billion m3, distributed over a number of years. Water levels in Lake Nasser will rapidly fall to 147m where no release of water is possible. 
The hydropower production of the High Aswan Dam will also be negatively affected by the GERDis filling and operation. For example, if the GERD filling process takes five years, the cost associated with the reduction in the hydropower of the Aswan dam ten years after filling will be around $4.16 billion. Hence, Egyptis ability to ensure access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy for all (SDG 7) will be hampered.
The expected water shortage in Egypt as a result of uncoordinated GERD filling will also impact Egyptis agricultural production and affect local farming communities, which again will impact the Egyptian economy as a whole. The macro-level impacts include land left fallow, trade imbalance, an effect on food security (SDG 2), a rise in the budget deficit, and increased unemployment (SDG 8). The assessment of the impact of water shortage on the rural poor at the micro-level varies between Governorates; within Governorates, it varies between land-owners and laborers. 
The following table summarizes the conclusions of national studies regarding the GERDis impact on the Egyptian agricultural sector. It indicates that the impact of water shortage at Aswan will be substantial. For example, the loss of 10 billion m3 of water at Aswan from Egyptis water share (55.5 billion m3) will lead to an annual agricultural production loss of $3.9 billion (26.8 n 22.9 = 3.9 billion), 2,450,000 feddans will be taken out of production, 2.5 million Egyptians will lose their (in some cases part-time) income, and agricultural imports will be increased by 27%.



Water availability billion m3/ year

Indicator
Unit
55.5
50
45
40
35
30
Agricultural product value
$ billion
26.8
24.8
22.9
21.3
20.3
17.4
Agricultural product value
$ per feddan
3,041
2,806
2,594
2,407
2,299
1,977
Cropped area Nile irrigation
Feddans (*1000)
13,481
12,047
11,030
10,001
8,505
6,975
Imports
% of GDP *
3.48 
4.03 
4.46 
4.91 
5.31 
5.96
Agricultural sector all jobs
Million
18.5
17.1
16.0
14.9
14.0
12.7
Agricultural sector full-time jobs
Million
3.8
3.52
3.3
3.1
2.9
2.7
* 2016/2017
* GDP Egypt (2016) $336 billion 

Ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation is also essential for making progress on other SDGs. The filling and operation of the GERD absent an agreement that addresses Egyptis concerns will have a significant impact on almost every sector of the local economy, including health (SDG 3) and education (SDG 4), as well as impede ongoing efforts to make Egyptian cities inclusive, resilient and sustainable (SDG 11). It will also affect the national budget as additional financial resources would then be allocated to address looming developmental challenges arising from the GERD, hence affecting the implementation of Egyptis national sustainable development strategy.  
In order to implement the national sustainable development strategy and overcome the challenges posed in this regard by the GERD, Egypt is still committed to concluding the joint impact studies with Ethiopia and Sudan and utilizing the outcome to reach a cooperative filling strategy and operating rules that can balance the interests of the two downstream countries and Ethiopia. This commitment stems from a belief in regional cooperation as a means to achieve the SDGs. Yet the development of one country should not be at the expense of the survival of another, or to the detriment of the water resources and livelihoods on which a nationis population depends. This cooperation should be based on win-win solutions, realizing mutual gains and respect for the principles of international law.


SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy
Table 8: SDG 7 Indicators


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Proportion of population with 
access to electricity 
(%)
7.1
3
99.7
2016
100

Renewable energy share in total energy production (%)
7.2
0
2.28
2016
N/A

Contribution of 
energy sector to 
GDP (%)
7.3
3
17.1
2017
25

Contribution of energy investments 
to total investment 
(%)
7.b.1
0
24.1
2017
N/A

Amount spent on oil subsidies (EGP bn)
12.c.1
2
35
2017
0



Egyptis commitment to clean and affordable energy is an integral part of the SDS, and the Government has accordingly created an energy strategy that is geared towards transforming the countryis energy sector into one that plays an important role in the economy while ensuring a reliable, efficient and eco-friendly usage of domestic resources. The Integrated Energy Strategy to 2035 outlines15 the details of how Egypt will produce, utilize and conserve energy through 2035. It provides guidance on the best energy mix, shows the technologyrelated and financial results of different \0xECenergy futures based on scenario analysis, and provides policymakers with evidencebased policy analysis to allow them to make the most effective decisions. 
Egypt, like most countries in the world, at present relies more heavily on non-renewable resources than renewables; more than 90 percent of its power supply is generated from fossil fuels. However, Egypt possesses an abundance of land, a sunny climate, and high wind speeds, making it a prime location for generating renewable energy. The Government of Egypt is determined to capitalize on these resources to achieve its target of diversifying its energy mix; it aims to generate 20 percent of its power from renewable sources by 2022, with wind providing 12 percent (7.2 GW), hydropower 5.8 percent, and solar 2.2 percent. Solar energy will generate 3.5 GW by 2027, including 2.8 GW of photovoltaic and 700 MW of concentrated solar power. The percentage of power generated from renewable sources is targeted to increase further to 37 percent by 2035.
Towards that end, Egypt has acted to provide investors with the right policy and operational environment necessary to reach these targets. On the policy side, the Government has implemented substantial reforms of energy subsidies, and a feed-in tariff regulation. On the operational side, large investments in the renewable energy sector are being implemented, in cooperation with international partners, to promote the production of less costly components. 
Energy Subsidy Reform Program 
Figure  6: Expenses as Percentage of Budget and GDP in 2013/14

Egyptis energy subsidies were among the highest in the world and had been rising rather than falling, in contrast with broader global trends. Growing energy subsidies impose a substantial opportunity cost on the economy and could be channeled to social sector programs in accordance with the Egyptis 2014 constitution. Based on 2013/2014 figures, energy subsidies far exceed other areas of social spending, outstripping social security spending by a factor of 50, the health budget by a factor of five, food subsidies by a factor of three, and the education budget by a factor of two (Figure  6). Moreover, energy subsides were not well-targeted; an estimate for 2014 showed that 36 percent of fuel subsidies went to the richest quintile of the population.

Accordingly, the Government of Egypt pledged to reform the current policies and embarked on a bold energy subsidy reform program that aims at phasing out the current energy subsidy system in five years. The first phase of the program was implemented in July 2014, followed by a second phase in June 2017 and a third in June 2018. These reform policies are designed to affect fuel and electricity tariffs for consumers and industries at varying rates. As a result, the percentage of fuel subsidies has fallen from 20 percent (70 percent of total government expenses) of the state budget in 2012/2013 to an estimated 11 percent (50 percent of total government expenses) in 2017/2018, amounting to approximately EGP 
9.8 billion. Similarly, the Government of Egypt plans to phase out subsidies on electricity over three years, starting from the 2018/2019 fiscal year. Electricity subsidies are expected to decrease by almost 50 percent during the first year of implementation. All these measures will influence production and consumption patterns towards a more sustainable path.
Feed-In Tariff
Egyptis commitment to achieving its energy security target is demonstrated by the Renewable Energy Law which was enacted in December 2014. The law provides clarity on the feed-in tariff procedures and enabling legal provisions. These regulations provide incentives for the development of 4300 MW of renewable energy power (2000 MW solar-grid connected, 300 MW decentralized roof-top solar and 2000 MW grid-connected wind power). The feed-in tariff is designed to accelerate investment in renewable energy technologies. As a result, 32 purchase agreements were signed to generate 1465 MW of electricity. Additionally, the first solar plant under the feed-in tariff program is now operating, with a power generation capacity of 
50 MW.
Solar Energy in Egypt
Benban, the worldis largest solar park, is being built in Aswan in the south of Egypt. The solar park, named after a Nile River village nearby, will house 32 power plants when complete and is set to produce between 1.6 and 2.0 GW of solar power when completed in mid-2019. The output will be sufficient to power hundreds of thousands of homes and businesses. This major project will help Egypt take advantage of its unparalleled natural resources and move towards its goal of generating clean energy. Projects on the Benban site will be connected to the Egyptian high voltage network. The full project will cost $2.8 billion.
The private sector is also benefiting from Egyptis abundance of solar power; KarmSolar is a solar technology and integration company that delivers innovative solutions to the agricultural, industrial, tourism and business sectors. Established in 2011, KarmSolar is Egyptis largest private off-grid solar energy integrator, with exceptional experience in developing award-winning, high-capacity solar pumping stations, including the regionis largest off-grid Hybrid Pumping and Irrigation System (147 kW). KarmSolar also offers MW-scale off-grid solar energy stations and grid connected utility scale installations. KarmSolaris goal is to commercialize sustainability, enabling businesses to gain from an increase in productivity while benefiting from, and protecting, the environment. 
Raising the Efficiency of Electricity Consumption
Alongside these efforts to transform Egyptis energy sector, the Government is also committed to improving efficiency in electricity consumption. In that vein, the Government has replaced 13 million lightbulbs with LED bulbs, saving approximately 1.124 billion kWh. Additionally, street lighting is being replaced through a project that targets the replacement of 3.9 million streetlights, with a total cost of EGP 2.1 billion, giving a saving of 872 million kWh of electricity. 
SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Annual growth rate of real GDP (%) 
8.1
2
5.4
2016/17 
Q3
12

Total unemployment rate (%)
8.3
2
12.5
2016
5

Unemployment rate 
(male) (%)
8.5
2
8.9
2016
N/A

Unemployment rate 
(female) (%) 
8.5
2
23.3
2016
N/A

Female labor force participation rate   
8.5
2
24.2
2016
25

Tourism direct GDP as a proportion of total GDP (%)
8.9
1
11.3
2016
N/A

Number of 
Automated Teller 
Machines (ATMs) (per 100,000 adults)
8.1
2
13446
2015
N/A

Global 
Competitiveness 
Index (rank)
8.1
2
100
2017/18
30


	Table 9: SDG 8 Indicators
Due to a relatively long period of political turmoil and security challenges that lasted for almost four years after the 2011 uprising, the Egyptian economy has been experiencing a major slowdown, with resulting effects on the main macroeconomic indicators, such as growth and unemployment. Since 2014, the Government of Egypt has been implementing effective reform measures in order to revitalize the economy (see Section 4 of this report). Consequently, there has been major improvement in countryis fundamentals, which have exceeded expectations.   
Declining Unemployment Rate 
The Egyptian economy experienced multiple 
shocks as a result of the uprising in 2011, with slower economic growth leading to a related flight of capital and human resources, and a resulting increase in the unemployment rate. However, the Governmentis economic reform strategy has helped decrease the unemployment rate over the last three years, from 12.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014 to 11.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017.16 With the rise in economic growth following implementation of major economic reforms from 2016 onwards, confidence levels have risen, economic activity has stabilized, and the economyis ability to absorb the annual additions to the labor market has increased. Foreign investments projects, the national mega-projects and the micro- and small-credit programs have also been factors in reducing the unemployment rate. However, despite this progress, unemployment rates among young people and women remain a concern which the Government is trying to address by supporting small- and medium-sized enterprises and financial inclusion.
Rising Economic Growth Rate 
Egyptis GDP reached EGP 3,470 billion during the fiscal year 2016/2017, with a real GDP growth rate of 4.2 percent, higher than the projected growth rate in the economic reform program (4 percent). This compares with a real GDP growth rate of 2.2 percent in the fiscal year 2012/2013. Economic growth has continued to rise, registering 5.4 percent in the third quarter of 2017/2018, compared to an expected 4.6 percent for the entire year. The higher growth is a result of the recovery of some activities, with the lifting of capital controls on foreign exchange, and the quick absorption by the economy of the consecutive economic measures implemented between 2016 and 2018. A majority of the economyis sectors have started to recover, registering increased, albeit gradual, growth. 

SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure 


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Manufacturing value added as a proportion of GDP (%)
9.2
2
16.7
2017
18

Manufacturing employment as a proportion of total employment (%)
9.2
1
12.5
2017
N/A

CO2 emissions per unit of value added (million tons) 
9.4
2
276
2014
N/A

Research and development expenditure as a proportion of GDP (%)
9.5
0
1
2018
N/A

Global Innovation Index (rank)
9.5
2
105
2017
60


	Table 10: SDG 9 Indicators
Egypt has made significant progress in infrastructure in many fields, including roads and bridges, ports, and electricity and renewable energy, among many others. Drinking water and wastewater projects are also being increased, to cater to the increase in population. 
New Industrial Zones
Four major industrial zones have been established, with a total of 1,020 units, as well as five zones which are currently being developed at a cost of EGP 2.5 billion. In addition, a comprehensive plan has been developed for the Golden Triangle economic area in Upper Egypt, with the aim of creating an industrial zone home to mining-based industrial projects, logistics projects, and environmentally friendly tourism projects, with the ultimate goal of creating new population clusters.  
Development of the Road Network in Egypt
There has been substantial development of the countryis road network over the last few years, with the launching of the national project for the rehabilitation of infrastructure in Egypt. This has involved the construction of 4,000 km of roads at a cost of EGP 45 billion, equivalent to 20 percent of the length of the total road network in Egypt. In addition, 1,347 km of existing roads were developed and upgraded. 
Solving the Problem of Electricity Shortages 
Four years ago, Egypt was facing significant electricity supply problems, causing repeated power outages around the country. This caused a decrease in productivity in various sectors and negatively affected citizensi quality of life. From 2014 to 2017, generated electricity increased by 50 percent (from 32 GW in 2014 to 48 GW in 2017). Recent public opinion polls show a high satisfaction rate with electricity services.17 In addition, Siemens was contracted to establish three power-generating projects, to produce a total of 14,400 MW.
The World Bank is also assisting Egypt in expanding natural gas pipelines to households both in and outside the capital, to reduce the fiscal burden of supplying highly subsidized LPG canisters to underprivileged areas. 
Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Disposable income per capita ($) 
10.1
0
3101	2015
N/A

Non-oil private sector 
PMI (out of 100) 
10.5
0
50.1	Apr. 18
N/A

Gini coefficient
10.2.1
2
31.8	2015
10

SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities  
Table 11: SDG 10 Indicators
Although Egypt had witnessed high economic growth rates before the uprising in 2011, there was widespread inequality in the enjoyment of the benefits of economic development, as shown by many indicators, including the poverty rate and the Gini coefficient. 
Economic inequity is not the only inequity the country faces; there are also gaps between men and women, between young people and older generations, between urban and rural communities, between people with disabilities and those without, and among different regions in Egypt n with Upper Egypt in particular having the highest poverty rates in the country and the lowest levels of access to and quality of services.
The fifth pillar of the SDS seeks to put the constitutional articles on social justice and equality into action. It envisages Egypt in 2030 as characterized by equal economic, social, and political rights and opportunities realizing social inclusion, where citizensi rights to participation based on efficiency and according to law are supported, and social mobility based on skills is encouraged. Egypt will also provide protection and support to marginalized and vulnerable groups.  
This pillar includes programs to achieve equal economic, social, and political rights and opportunities, through reviewing and 
developing laws that support social justice, institutionalizing the partnership between Government and civil society, developing the authorities concerned with transparency and integrity, improving and expanding social protection systems, reducing gaps among different social and economic groups, and achieving balanced geographical distribution of the population.18 
Egypt has expanded the social safety net to secure the essential needs of poor people. However, the real challenge is Egyptiansi attitudes towards women, young people and people with disabilities, as a number of surveys reveal Egyptians do not trust their capabilities.
Local Development Program for Upper Egyptian Governorates Sohag and Qena 2016-2021 
The Government of Egypt is implementing the Local Development Program in Upper Egypt for the period 2016-2021. It aims to promote sustainable local development and create productive employment opportunities to reduce poverty in the Governorates of Sohag and Qena by improving local infrastructure and improving the business environment, and thus fostering the creation of job opportunities by the private sector. The projectis total cost is estimated at $957 million, with the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development providing a loan of $500 million.19 
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Total population density (population/ km2)
11.1
0
96.6
2018
N/A

Inhabited area as percentage of total area (%)
11.1
0
6.8
2017
N/A

Percentage of households connected 
to the public water network (%)
11.1
2
96.9
2017
100

Percentage of households connected to the public sanitation network (%)
11.1
2
55.9
2017
100

Proportion of slum areas to total urban area (%) - unsafe
11.1
2
0.7
2017
0

Proportion of slum areas to total urban area (%) - unplanned
11.1
2
37.5
2017
25

Proportion of new cities with waste management systems (%)
11.6
2
60
2017
100

Per capita green landscapes in cities (m2/capita)
11.7
2
0.85
2015
3


	Table 12: SDG 11 Indicators
Egyptis high population growth rate and high population density has caused a deterioration in the quality of urban life and in the environment. Inadequate urban expansion (only 6.8 percent of the total area of the country is inhabited) coupled with unbalanced regional development across Egypt has led to the migration of citizens from rural to urban areas (especially to major cities like Cairo and Alexandria) in search of better job opportunities and better health and education services. Slums, traffic congestion, pollution, encroachment on agricultural land, and poor 
economic and social conditions of rural-tourban migrants are among the adverse results of high population density in the cities. 
Recognizing the need for integrated and sustainable urban planning practices, the SDS is based on the principle of balanced regional development. In particular, the strategyis urban development pillar matches the targets of SDG 11, with the aim of increasing inhabited areas, improving the quality of urban life and maximizing the utilization of Egyptis strategic location. In tandem, the Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities has developed the National Urban Development Plan 2052 (NUDP) to push the development of several mega-projects such as the Suez Canal axis development project and the Golden Triangle project in Upper Egypt (see SDG 9 above). Economic, social and environmental development that preserves national heritage is at the core of the NUDP, as stipulated in Articles 29, 78 and 236 of the constitution.
Development of New Cities to Reduce Urban Population Density 
New cities are being developed all over Egypt to increase the percentage of inhabited areas and reduce high population densities. The 
Box 5:  Sustainable Cities Criteria 
New Alamein city, located on the Mediterranean coast and spanning an area of 48,000 feddans, will be the catalyst for development in the region. The eco-friendly city will rely on renewable resources, including a desalinization plant and solar energy stations. The city will also incorporate touristic, residential, agricultural, and industrial elements. 
The New Administrative Capital is to be located 45 kilometers (28 miles) east of Cairo. The city is being established to reduce Cairois traffic congestion and promote urban development east of Cairo.
Main principles for new cities
Green CitiesPedestrian Cities
Per capita land exceeds 15m240% of roads for pedestrians and 
bicycles.
Sustainable CitiesConnected Cities
Solar panels for generation of Well established and connected electricity (70% of roof tops) transportation network that provides 
	and waste management systems	all means of transportation (cars, 
taxis, metro, etc.)

number of cities in Egypt increased from 218 in 2007 to 230 in 2018 (12 new cities in 10 years). Currently, fifteen new cities are being built. The geographical distribution of these cities reflects the Governmentis policy direction towards more balanced regional development. New cities are designed to be green and energy sustainable, whereby per capita green landscape is projected to increase gradually from 0.85 m2 in 2015 to 3 m2 in 2030. Also, 70 percent of roof tops are to be covered by solar panels, as a source of clean energy (Box 1: New Citiesi Sustainability Criteria). In 2017, the proportion of new cities with waste management systems reached 60 percent, the target is to raise that percentage to 100 percent by 2030.

In that vein, companies that promote the establishment of green buildings are on the rise in Egypt. ECOnsult is an award-winning architectural and environmental consultancy and has achieved the highest number of certified green buildings of any such company in Egypt; it is also responsible for the largest eco-friendly village in the country. As a young company (established in 2012) and one that is led by a woman, ECOnsult is trailblazing a new form of consultancy, creating the first 100-percent recycled building prototype and a holistic approach to creating a green strategy and road map. ECOnsult has contributed to putting Egypt on the right track for achieving sustainable development by promoting a large number of the SDGs: water-saving, sustainable cities, energy efficiency, gender empowerment and innovation and entrepreneurship.
Expansion in Social Housing Programs 
The provision of accessible and affordable housing is pivotal to Egyptis rapidly growing population, not only to help meet the growing housing gap for low- to middle-income citizens, but also to help curb the increasing number of informal settlements. The social housing program inaugurated in 2014 targeting low-income families aims to provide 600,000 housing units within four years at a total cost of EGP 103 billion. The Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities has implemented 265,000 units so far, and there are 335,000 units under construction to be finished by the end of 2018.
There is also the Sakan Karim program to provide housing for poorer citizens as part of the social housing programs by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (see section above on the policy-enabling environment).
Upgrade of Slum Areas to Secure Safe Housing for All
With a reported density of 50,259 people per square kilometer, Cairo is among the top five most dense cities in the world.  With the growth in population and the rapid urban-torural migration, Cairo has also experienced increased growth in the size and population of slums, both within the city and in the districts around it. Of the 377 residential areas around the country that are designated by the Government as \0xECunsafe, 63 (16.7 percent) are located in Cairo.
Thirty-four of these settlements are classified as areas that are dangerous in the first degree, i.e. residentsi lives are under direct threat due to building collapse, flooding, or, in hilly areas, rockfall. These areas are the highest priority of the Government, and an ambitious program is being implemented to evacuate residents and provide them with apartments in newly built housing complexes. It is estimated that 26,720 units must be constructed to relocate the inhabitants of these areas. Currently, the Ministry of Housing has completed the construction of 10,980 units and plans to finish the construction of 7,440 during 2018; by the end of the year all unsafe areas (those designated as being dangerous in the first degree) will have been evacuated.
The Government of Egypt has also established the Informal Settlements Development Fund (ISDF) to improve the living conditions of slum-dwellers. As of May 2018, 85 areas (22 percent of the total settlements) have been developed; 53 of which have been developed by the residents themselves, while 32 have been developed by the ISDF.  
House complexes like Al-Asmarat in Cairo and Al-Samakeen in Sohag have been constructed through the cooperation of the Government with the Tahya Masr state fund. Several NGOs are also working on upgrading informal settlements and providing low-income citizens with better standards of living (Box  5).
The first two phases of the Al-Asmarat project has been completed and housing units have been provided to relocated families. The housing units have all the associated infrastructure: water, sanitation, connection to the electricity grid, and paved roads. The third phase is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2018. 

Al-Asmarat 1
Al-Asmarat 2
Al-Asmarat 3
Funding source
ISDF
Tahya Masr Fund
Tahya Masr Fund
Surface area 
(feddans)
65
61
62
Number of housing units 
6258
4722
7440
Facilities
\0xEF Daycare center and elementary school
\0xEF Three health service units
\0xEF 140 commercial stores
\0xEF Two football pitches
\0xEF Two multi-purpose playgrounds
\0xEF Two daycare centers and two elementary schools
\0xEF 110 commercial stores
\0xEF Post office
\0xEF Mosque
\0xEF Police and fire stations 
\0xEF Industrial high school
\0xEF Social services building 
\0xEF Childrenis playground  
Cost (million 
EGP)
850
650
1,000 (estimate)

Box 6: Al-Asmarat	
Expansion and Upgrade of Transportation Network
Cairois underground metro is in the process of expanding; a third line is now operational, and the fourth line is under construction, to be completed in 2019. These expansions contribute in reducing traffic congestion on the roads, and also provide a faster and cheaper transportation alternative for low- and middleincome residents of the capital. Transportation to the New Administrative Capital, currently under construction, will be via electric train, to increase the connectedness of the city and to ensure an eco-friendly transportation environment.  
Old buses are gradually being replaced by new ones, providing citizens with reliable and quality means of transportation. In an attempt to attract more citizens to the public transportation system and thus reduce Cairois traffic congestion, the Egyptian state-run bus company recently provided new buses in cooperation with the privately-run bus company Mouslat Masr. The new buses are airconditioned, equipped with Wi-Fi services, and have an electronic ticketing system. Start-ups are also entering the transportation market, an area that was previously dominated by public companies, offering innovative solutions to congestion problems through bus-sharing software applications. These applications serve a wide user group of students and corporate employees who are looking for comfortable but cheap means of transportation as an alternative to taxis. 
Egypt is also witnessing a burgeoning cycling culture, with several initiatives springing up to promote the use of bicycles. In cooperation with the Embassy of Denmark, UN Habitat and Heliopolis Cultural Heritage Preservation NGO, Cairo Governorate has launched a new initiative that aims to install bicycle parking slots around the streets of Heliopolis, as an active step to encourage residents of the district to cycle more. The expansion in the use of bicycles in Cairo not only promotes a sustainable means of transportation, but also offers cultural gains; a social taboo around women riding bicycles in public streets is now being widely challenged.  
Preservation of National and World Heritage
The Government has embarked on a new project to renovate Cairois downtown district, with the aim of restoring the areais original Khedival architectural style by reconstructing buildings and facades, to turn the area into an open museum. The project also includes the development of 12,000 m2 of the surrounding pedestrian streets. About 200 buildings have been renovated so far. 

Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Global Food 
Security Index 
(score out of 100) 
12.3
0
57	2016
N/A

Amount spent on oil subsidies (EGP bn) 
12.c.1
2
35	2017
0

SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production 
Table 13: SDG 12 Indicators
 
The SDS promotes sustainable consumption and production practices in key economic sectors, including energy, agriculture, water and waste. This is to be achieved through efficient allocation and use of water and energy resources, enhancing the development of sustainable agriculture, and waste management, including prevention, reduction, recycling, reuse, and recovery. The national strategyis strategic objectives include a substantial reduction in a wide variety of pollution indicators by 2030, for example, reducing reduce pollution caused by airborne dust by 50 percent from the current level of 157 microgram/m3. It also aims at improving waste collection efficiency to 90 percent in 2030 from a current level of 20 percent.  
According to estimates from 2011, the total amount of municipal solid waste generated annually is around 20 million tons, or 250 kg per person annually.20 The Government of Egypt has accordingly launched the National Solid Waste Management Program (NSWMP), with the support of EU/German development partners, to ensure the sustainable development of the solid waste management sector in Egypt. Additionally, a prime ministerial decree established the Waste Management Regulatory Agency (WMRA) as an independent service authority, under the minister of environment. The agencyis objectives are to regulate and oversee all waste management processes, nationally and at the local level.
Egyptis energy subsidy reform program (see SDG 7 above) is a major step towards the rationalization of energy consumption (both fuel and electricity). The program not only reduces a burden on the stateis budget and allows for increased spending on health and education; it also forces both consumers and producers to reduce or rationalize their energy usage.
Sustainable production patterns are being commercialized by private companies such as Schaduf. Founded in 2011, Schaduf21 aims at empowering and sustaining Cairois lowincome communities through transforming rooftops in the capital into urban farms, where people of different backgrounds can grow clean, pesticide-free, hydroponically grown produce for their families, as well as potentially generate  revenue. Through a collaboration with the NGO Kafelet El-Kheir, Schaduf provides 500 families with their own rooftop farm for a period of three years. The farms are designed to recirculate the water supply and reduce water usage by up to 70 percent compared to traditional farming techniques, making it one of the most efficient methods of farming available. 
A unique and notable initiative is one run in Cairois Garbage City, led by the NGO the Association for the Protection of the Environment (APE). Many of the quarteris 70,000 residents work on garbage collection and recycling, and around 90 percent of the garbage taken to the district is recycled into useful products. The NGO offers support in various forms to the local garbage collectors, including running income-generating projects based on creating innovative products from recycled waste. It has trained hundreds of district residents, many of them women, to make its products, and currently employs 245 people.
Efforts geared towards raising awareness of the importance of sustainable consumption and production are crucial to the achievement of SDG 12, and NGOs play a very important role in that area. The Sustainable Development Action in Egypt initiative, which capitalizes on the energy and innovation of young people, has been established; it adopts an integrated approach towards sustainable awareness and education, with the aim of transforming Egyptis young population into sustainability ambassadors who are able to transfer their knowledge to others. Similarly, the Reduction of Plastic Bags Consumption National Initiative aims to encourage the use of biodegradable bags by raising awareness of the adverse impact of non-biodegradable plastic bags on human heath, and, when they reach water sources, on fish and coral. 

 Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000 people
13.1
2
1.41	2017
N/A

SDG 13: Climate Action 
Table 14: SDG 13 Indicators
Egypt is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. In fact, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Egyptis Nile Delta is one of the worldis top three locations with \0xECextreme climate change vulnerability. Future projections suggest that Egypt will experience a rise in sea levels, water scarcity, and an increase in both the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events like heat waves, flash foods, heavy rains, and sand and dust storms. This, in turn, could potentially damage the Nile Deltais infrastructure, coastal lines and fertile land, due to the regionis high susceptibility to erosion, salt water intrusion, and inundation. Consequently, food security, human health, and the overall environment are at grave risk; in fact, sectors projected to be particularly affected by climate change in Egypt include water resources, agriculture and fisheries, health, housing and settlements, biodiversity, telecommunications, energy, tourism, and coastal zones and coral reefs. For this reason, Egypt has sought to introduce a number of initiatives and regulations in recent decades in the hopes of minimizing the detrimental impacts of climate change and protecting future generations.
Strengthening the National Policy Framework for Climate Change
Egypt first institutionalized its efforts to fight climate change with the establishment of the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) in 1982, and later with the Ministry of State for Environmental Affairs in 1997. A National Council on Climate Change was also formed in 2015 by prime ministerial decree, as a means to centralize policymaking efforts related to climate change.
Egypt has also developed a Climate Change Policy Framework underpinned by the 2011 National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and Risk Reduction. This framework aims to improve the countryis capacity to manage risks and disasters caused by climate change and is regularly updated to integrate new scientific information and ongoing research findings.
Efforts for International Cooperation on Climate Change
Egypt was one of the first countries to join the cooperative global efforts aimed at confronting climate change threats. Not only did Egypt ratify the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994, the Kyoto Protocol in 2005 and the Paris Agreement in 2017, it is also on its way to endorsing the Doha Amendment. 
In adhering to these international agreements, Egypt submitted its first, second and third national communication reports to the UNFCCC in 1999, 2010 and 2016 respectively. 
country achieve the UNFCCCis targets. 
Gearing Towards Energy Efficiency and the Use of Renewable Energy 
According to the third national communication report published in 2016, Egyptis greenhouse gas emissions reached 247.9 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in 2005, amounting to around 0.6 percent of global emissions. Despite Egyptis evidently low contribution to global emissions, it continues to exert efforts to further reduce this number.
Since ratifying the Kyoto Protocol in 2005, Egypt has actively engaged in promoting renewable energy, energy efficiency, and waste management projects. Some initiatives include, but are not limited to:
???Putting forth a comprehensive strategy to secure a 20 percent contribution from renewable energy to the countryis total energy mix by 2020. 
???Applying the feed-in-tariff program to promote extensive use and dissemination of photovoltaic and wind power generation as well as waste management projects.
???Reducing government expenditure on energy subsidies, effectively leading to the rationalization of energy consumption and, consequently, to the reduction of emissions.
???Improving energy efficiency in the transportation sector by extending the electrified underground metro to new areas in Greater Cairo, intensifying the use of environmentally sound river transport, significantly increasing the use of natural gas in commercial vehicles, and promoting the use of vehicles utilizing fuel cells. Moreover, Egypt recently issued a decree allowing the import of electric cars.
???Adopting the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) for the electricity sector 2018-2020, in the context of the Sustainable Energy Strategy 2035. This action plan reinforces energy efficiency standards, expands energy efficiency labeling for household appliances, applies energy efficiency codes for buildings and disseminates efficient lighting.
Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels (thousand tons)
14.4
3
1519	2015
N/A

SDG 14: Life Below Water
Table 15: SDG 14 Indicators
With approximately 3,200 km of coastline across both the Mediterranean and the Red Seas, Egypt is home to a rich diversity of marine life and coastal geography that plays a pivotal role in attracting tourism. These coastlines feature a variety of subsystems and habitats, including coastal lakes, salt marshes, mudflats, sand dunes and beaches. Egyptis waters host more than 5,000 species, including 800 different species of seaweeds and seagrasses, 209 species of coral, more than 800 species of mollusks, 600 species of crustacean, and 350 species of Echinodermata. Unfortunately, years of offshore oil rigs, overfishing, habitat destruction, and lax policy-enforcement have contributed to a steady deterioration in the conditions of Egyptis marine ecosystem. 
However, in an effort to conserve these valuable natural resources, the Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) was established to protect and effectively manage Egyptis marine and coastal areas. Since its establishment, the ICZM has pioneered a number of policy initiatives to accomplish this goal, including the founding of a national committee for coastal conservation, the drafting of the Environmental Guidelines for Coastal Areas, and the development of the National Environmental Action Plan.
The ICZM has also overseen a number of different projects targeting coastal area development and conservation; these include a coastal zone management project in Alexandria funded by the World Bank, a shoreline management project for the coastal area between Hurghada and Ras Ghareb funded by the Regional Organization for the Conservation of the Environment of the Red Sea & Gulf of Aden (PERSGA), and a national marine litter-monitoring and assessment project funded by the European Unionis Horizon 2020 program. 
In order to continue its efforts at conserving coastal areas, Egypt has also taken serious steps towards developing sustainable fisheries, with production growing steadily at 1.8 million tons in 2017, up from around an average of approximately 200,000 tons in the 1990s, according to the General Authority for Fish Resources Development. More specifically, the Government of Egypt launched the Baraket Ghliyon fish farm in 2017; initially spanning 3,500 acres, it will eventually cover a total of 108,000 acres, making it the largest fish farm in the Middle East. 
Egypt is committed to pursuing sustainable practices to conserve its natural marine resources, and to put forth the necessary regulatory frameworks to accomplish this goal. As of now, only 4.3 percent of Egyptis total coastal areas are natural protectorates, while the  target in the SDS stands at 10 percent. The national strategy also contains a number of other goals targeted at enhancing the protection of the countryis coastal and marine areas.
SDG 15: Life on Land


Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Red List Index
15.5
3
163	2017
N/A


	Table 16: SDG 15 Indicators
Egypt is recognized for its unique ecological diversity, including a wide range of both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, and is committed to the protection of this natural abundance. Egypt not only supports a number of environmentally friendly national strategies, but also endorses regional and international conventions, including the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity.  Egyptis main environmental objective is to focus on developing and maintaining natural reserves in an attempt to protect its biological diversity. To date, there are 30 natural protectorates in Egypt, covering approximately 140,000 km2 (nearly 13.9 percent of the total area).
Egypt remains committed to environmental conservation, including the protection of Red Sea coastal areas, particularly the endangered coral reefs and mangroves. More broadly, the increasing threats facing marine, freshwater, coastal and terrestrial ecosystems, including harmful phenomena like overgrazing and overfishing, desertification, climate change, pollution and invasive species, have helped build consensus around this commitment, and Egypt has actively deployed efforts to ensure the sustainability of its terrestrial ecosystems, and to protect its biodiversity. Agro-biodiversity is also an active concern.
Improving the Conditions of Natural Protectorates
The Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) first implemented Egyptis Protected Areas Self-Financing Project (EPASP) as a means to develop and manage the countryis natural protectorates. The EPASP aims to weaken the persisting threats to Egyptis biodiversity, and to develop a sustainable plan to protect the countryis terrestrial and marine habitats. The EPASP has successfully implemented capacity-building programs, management-effectiveness tracking tools, and regulatory overhauls to ensure that the protectorates are operated correctly.  
Community-Based Management of Natural Resources
The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, adopted in January 2016, supports the sustainable use of natural resources, and recognizes the importance of local communitiesi active involvement in the resource-management process. Local communities are also considered a key element in the natural protectorate management system.
The Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency has accordingly adopted a number of strategies to effectively involve local communities, including the establishment of Community-Based Natural Resources Management (CBNRM), a conservation approach allowing the stakeholders closest to the resource to supervise and benefit from its management and use. 
This approach was used in Saint Katherine Protectorate; local medicinal-plant collectors, processors and traders were asked to sustainably manage and use the medicinalplant resource base in the area. There is currently another program underway in Qaroun, Wadi Al-Rayan and Wadi Al-Gemal, entrusting the local communities in those protected areas to manage all the tourismrelated activities there. In this way, CBNRM supports community empowerment, income generation, sustainable management and, of course, the conservation of natural resources. 
Mainstreaming Biodiversity into the Renewable Energy Sector
In recent years, wind power has gained increasing popularity in Egypt, proving to be renewable, clean, and cost-effective. However, despite wind farmsi value in providing green energy, they are a leading cause of bird mortality. Birds are of high value to Egyptis ecology, acting as pollinators, insect eaters and rodent predators. Furthermore, the Rift Valley/ Red Sea Flyway is the second most important flyway in the world for migratory soaring birds, with more than 1.5 million birds of 37 species, including five globally threatened species, using this corridor between their breeding grounds in Europe and West Asia and the wintering areas in Africa.
Due to its key geographical location as the land-bridge between the continents, Egypt is an important host along the flyway. Many of these areas are under development, causing a number of hazards to migratory soaring birds. In fact, the expansion of the energy sector is considered to be the highest risk to Egyptis biodiversity, closely followed by the tourism sector, waste management, hunting and the agricultural sector.
In order to address this issue, the Government of Egypt has deployed the following efforts:
??Egypt took part in the regional project entitled Mainstreaming Conservation of Migratory Soaring Birds (MSB) into Key Productive Sectors along the Rift Valley/ Red Sea Flyway. The project aims to address the impact of wind power developments on birds and to ensure that the significant populations of soaring birds migrating along the Rift Valley/Red Sea Flyway are effectively protected. Environmental impact assessment guidelines and monitoring protocols for wind energy development projects along the Rift Valley/Red Sea Flyway were developed in order to protect migratory soaring birds.
??In 	December 	2015, 	the 	Egyptian 
Environmental Affairs Agency, the New and Renewable Energy Authority, the Egyptian 
Electricity Transmission Company and the Regional Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency signed a protocol calling for the coordinated monitoring of wind energy projects in the Gulf of Suez. The protocol provides a strategic framework for environmental impact assessment, and collective bird monitoring programs designed to audit the wind energy farms in the area. The protocol also supports the development of an Active Turbine Management Program (ATMP) to operate the wind turbines in such a way that both allows optimized energy production and respects the conservation of biodiversity, particularly the migratory soaring birds. 
??A strategic environmental and social impact assessment was also developed and submitted to the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency for approval, including a completed baseline study of bird migration starting in spring 2016. Following the completion of this study, a standard monitoring program was initiated, including a basic annual monitoring of bird migration, and a program to ensure that mitigation measures are in place and functioning.
??The bird mortality mitigation system is based on radar-assisted shutdown-on-demand of wind turbines. The Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines and monitoring protocols for wind energy projects adopted by the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency in October 2013 clearly identify the criteria needed to selectively shut down the turbines. In fact, this monitoring and mitigation system is successfully operating in the wind farms located in the Gebel Al-Zeit area, under the supervision of the agency.
SDG 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions  


  Indicators
 SDG target
Type
Value
2030 
Target
Change
Corruption 
Perception Index 
(out of 100)
16.5
0
 32 	2017
N/A


	Table 17: SDG 16 Indicators
The 2011 uprising in Egypt created formidable security challenges that had adverse effects on national peace and security and undermined the countryis institutions.  However, starting in 2014, the Government of Egypt has introduced a sequence of comprehensive, well-coordinated and effective measures to stabilize the security situation. This has entailed implementing policies directed at combating terrorism and extremism, as well as other forms of transnational organized crimes, e.g. human trafficking, smuggling of firearms and money laundering.
Egypt recognizes that to enhance justice and strengthen institutions, there should be more emphasis on good governance and safeguarding human rights. Accordingly, a number of national instruments and action plans have been adopted on ensuring justice for all, promoting the rule of law and accountability, fighting corruption, enhancing social cohesion and transparency, and building just, transparent and accountable institutions, in addition to empowering women and young people, especially in regard to key decisionmaking processes. 
Promoting Good Governance and Security
In 2014, Egypt adopted the four-year National Anti-Corruption Strategy developed by the National Coordinating Committee for Combating Corruption (NCCCC). The process of developing the strategy involved more than 80 government authorities, ministries and Governorates, and since its implementation, the Administrative Control Authority, Egyptis anti-corruption watchdog, and other law enforcement agencies, have been successful in uncovering an unprecedented number of major corruption cases. 
In 2016, Egypt created a ten-year National Strategy for Combatting Illegal Migration, spearheaded by the National Coordinating Committee on Combating and Preventing Illegal Migration (NCCPIM). The committee bridges the cooperation of government and non-government stakeholders, with the aim of achieving comprehensive development to curb illegal migration through awarenessraising campaigns, by including the issue of illegal migration in educational curriculums, implementing capacity-building programs for national committee members on how to administer and evaluate relevant projects, and establishing a stronger legislative framework to combat illegal migration.  
In addition to deploying efforts to improve domestic security conditions, Egypt plays an active role in supporting its neighboring countries. More specifically, Egypt is a longstanding and committed contributor to UN peacekeeping operations. It has been actively involved in the review of the UNis peacekeeping mechanisms, with special interest in the regional dimensions of peace building. Currently, more than 2,000 military personnel are serving in nine different UN peacekeeping missions around the world.
Egypt has also begun to decentralize its election and planning systems, with the aim of empowering municipalities and local communities.  A law on local administration and a unified planning law are currently under development; the first law is expected to decentralize local councils and organize district elections, while the second will grant more power to Governorates, cities and villages, allowing the Governorates to draft their own strategic plans depending on their developmental needs. 
Indicators Suggest Progress
These measures have had tangible results for Egyptian citizens, polling shows. According to the Egyptian Center for Public Opinion Research (Baseera), public perception of the countryis security conditions improved from 76 percent in 2017 to 81 percent in 2018, and perception of the treatment of citizens by security officials improved from 67 percent in 2017 to 72 percent this year. In addition, other results show that the average general performance satisfaction index was 65 points in March 2018 out of a maximum of 100 points, compared to 55 points in September 2017.
International indicators also point to progress. As shown in the table above, Egyptis place in the Corruption Perceptions Index has shown improvement. In addition, as mentioned in section 4, a recent Gallup poll reported by the BBC suggested that Egypt is viewed as one of the safest countries in the world, ahead of the US and the UK. 
SDG 17: Strengthen Implementation and Partnerships 
Achieving the 2030 Agenda is a formidable task which requires well-coordinated efforts on the part of all principal stakeholders: the Government, the private sector, civil society and international development partners. As a middle-income country, Egypt also requires assistance from the international community, both financial and technical. In order to maximize resources, the Government of Egypt also supports a responsibility-sharing approach between all stakeholders, 
including the private sector and development partners.  
In terms of financial aid, Official Development Assistance (ODA) inflows dropped by more than half in 2017 to $3.4 billion, compared with $7 billion in 2016; this reflects a tremendous shift in the Governmentis strategy, which now focuses on boosting investments and optimizing the interventions of ODA resources. These new figures also reflect a paradigm shift in the international concept of development, from the absolute responsibility of the Government, to integrated and cooperative partnerships among the Government, international partners, civil society organizations and the public and private sectors. In terms of usage, ODA inflows were invested in enhancing infrastructure and the economy, and in the social and environmental sectors.22 
A good example of this targeted ODA is the Upper Egypt Local Development project, part of the Local Development Program-forResults Projects for Egypt aimed at enhancing local government capacity.  Examples of these enhancements include the quality of services and the infrastructure delivered in Upper Egyptian Governorates, including sanitation, drinking water, sewage and roads, and strengthening the business environment for private sector engagement. 
The Government of Egypt recognizes that Egypt can learn a lot from the experience of other countries in working towards sustainable development. Similarly, other countries, especially in the MENA region, can benefit from the Egyptian experience. Egypt can also benefit directly from technical assistance and capacity building from other countries. Egypt has been active in partnering with UN organizations, programs and regional commissions to gain their valuable support. Indeed, the voluntary national review is a good example of this partnership, as this stock-taking activity will objectively assess Egyptis progress toward the SDGs, identify the obstacles, and generate innovative ways to solve them under the umbrella of the UN.  
6. Challenges
One of the aspects highlighted by this review is that Egypt has a lot of untapped potential. Examples and success stories presented under each goal are only a limited sample of all the efforts being exerted to place Egypt on the path to sustainable development. It is clear that, with its diversified resources and young population, the country is capable of achieving the transformative goals of the 2030 Agenda. Nevertheless, consultations with all relevant stakeholders since 2014 have revealed a number of factors that hamper the pace of development. Issues pertaining to data, financing, governance are presented are all hindering factors that must be tackled to unleash Egyptis potential to make progress on the path to sustainable development.
Data
The first national statistics report on the SDGs produced by CAPMAS sheds light on the issues of data availability and accessibility, revealing that only 35.7 percent of the SDG indicators are classified under Tier 1.23 This percentage reflects the availability of these indicators on the aggregate level, but not necessarily by the required level of disaggregation (geographical location, sex, age, ethnicity or disability). Having only approximately 87 measurable and regularly updated indicators, coupled with problems of data disaggregation, somewhat constrains the SDG monitoring process. Moreover, these data problems adversely affect planning decisions and raise concerns regarding allocative justice. Not being able to precisely identify developmental gaps due to the paucity of data has proven to be misleading (as in the case of the Millennium Development Goals), and as such, a data revolution is imperative to achieving sustainable development globally.
CAPMAS, the state statistics body, plays a proactive role as a producer, collector and disseminator of data, being fully aware of all data gaps in Egypt and working extensively to bridge them. Yet, these efforts must be complemented by data users, who are mutually responsible for pressuring data producers to provide reliable, timely and disaggregated data. Boosting demand for data through the promotion of research and analysis on sustainable development would contribute significantly in accelerating the data revolution. 
Additionally, easy access to data and metadata through an integrated national database has become essential. The process of data collection in Egypt is fairly time-consuming and requires considerable effort. Unfortunately, Egypt has fallen behind in this regard, which in turn is a major impediment to its efforts to improve data accessibility, especially with the global trend towards the adoption of big data technology and continuous technological advancement.
In addition, a mechanism for integrating both existing and new sources of data into the official system is required. Sources like official registries and big data remain beyond the scope of CAPMAS, which suggests the need for a revision of the Egyptian law on statistics. Big data concerns related to privacy and confidentiality have to be tackled at the policy level, in order to produce realistic and meaningful data that can directly contribute to making better planning decisions. Official registries 

have to be digitalized and well-integrated to act as reliable and less costly (relative to surveys) sources of data and verification tools. To this end, CAPMAS is currently working on developing a comprehensive strategy for updating the national statistics system, with the aim of addressing all these issues and the requirements of the data revolution.
Finance
Shortage of capital at the global level is not the issue; it is rather the channeling of these funds that poses a challenge in implementing the 2030 Agenda. Unlocking the transformative potential of people and the private sector and incentivizing innovation in financing, as well as consumption and production patterns, to support sustainable development are key to achieving the desired goals.  
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA), which resulted from the UNis Third International Conference on Financing for Development, stipulates the global framework for financing development post-2015. The agenda calls for action on both the domestic and international level to gear investments towards sustainable development. In this agenda, Official Development Assistance (ODA) providers reaffirmed their respective ODA commitments, including the commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 percent of ODA/GNI and 0.15 to 0.20 percent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries. As mentioned in the section above on SDG 17, Egyptis ODA inflows reached $3.4 billion in 2017,24 and the Government allocated 68 percent25 to supporting the development of the countryis infrastructure and its main economic sectors. 
In Egypt, the saving-investment gap stood at 12.2 percent of GDP in 2016/2017 
(approximately EGP 422.9 billion).26 To meet the aim of reducing that gap to 6 percent by 2019/2020, Egypt needs to summon vast resources annually to finance the investment needed to fully implement the 2030 Agenda. Much of the required investment will need to be financed from government resources. As such, a major part of Egyptis economic reform program was directed to improving Egyptis business climate, including the new investment law, passed in 2017, which provides investors and entrepreneurs with various incentives. More efforts are needed, however, to revitalize public private partnerships as an effective method of finance, especially for long-term investment projects. 
Currently the aggregate size of investment is insufficient; moreover, a large share of investment and financing resources are not perfectly aligned with the objectives of sustainable development. Reorienting even a fraction of these investments domestically and internationally would accelerate sustainable development. As such, more efforts from the Government are required to achieve that alignment through better institutional, legal and regulatory policies and frameworks. Resorting to nontraditional sources of finance is also pivotal in increasing local and international private investment. These efforts must be augmented by the international communityis commitment to partnering with developing countries in achieving sustainable development; international partnerships can aid in crowding in finance from the private 
sector, especially in new sectors such as the green economy. Egypt stands ready to explore innovative sources of sustainable finance, such as green bonds. Again, partnering with international organizations would be instrumental in garnering the benefits of these new forms of finance. 
Governance
Steering the wheel towards sustainable development with its interlinked and collaborative nature requires an ambitious, comprehensive, and holistic approach. Effective, accountable and inclusive institutions, sound policies and good governance at all levels underpin this transformative process. 
Ensuring that all efforts are aligned and wellintegrated to avoid wasting resources requires the adoption of an accountable and transparent framework. Egypt, like many countries, has faced the problem of sporadic and disjointed efforts. For the first time, however, the country has a national strategy in place to act as the main governing framework for all projects through to 2030. This achievement must be supported by improved enforcement and cooperation mechanisms. Aligning the efforts of the private sector, NGOs and academia is crucial to accelerating sustainable development. Governance is a principal element in overcoming the challenges pertaining to data and finance. It is a prerequisite to fulfilling data and finance requirements. Solutions provided by technological advancements in establishing a cooperation mechanism should be exploited to achieve the level of alignment, transparency and knowledge-sharing required. 
Egyptis monitoring and evaluation system, described above in the section on the policy-enabling environment, also requires enhancements to reinforce the importance of the process at all levels of implementation, from the project level to the policy level. Strengthening the monitoring and evaluation units in all governmental entities is a must to ensure their ability to effectively deal with any deviations from plans and targets. These units must be well-equipped with all the necessary human and material resources to monitor and evaluate the progress of all programs and projects using predefined criteria and key performance indicators. Having a welldeveloped monitoring and evaluation system is essential for better utilization of limited financial resources. The system can also encourage the production of timely and sound data given its reliance on measurable outcomes and targets.  
High Population Growth 
Over the last three decades the population of Egypt has doubled, reaching nearly 100 million. The last decade in particular has witnessed increasing fertility rates, with the annual number of live births rising from 1.85 million in 2006 to 2.72 million in 2014. However, birth registrations last year showed a slight decrease, with a total of 2.55 million. The number of deaths also increased from 452,000 in 2006 to 574,000 deaths in 2015, but net growth remains high, and the increasing population size puts great pressure on governmental services and on natural resources like water, ultimately threatening Egyptis ability to achieve the national strategy and the SDGs. 
The Government is aware of the implications of this population growth, particularly the economic strain from the pressure to create enough jobs in a society that already suffers from high unemployment rates and is struggling to reduce poverty.   
7. Final Word
Egyptis strategic geographical location, at the heart of the Arab world and at the crossroads of three continents, offers an array of both opportunities and challenges. Egypt is a firm believer in the necessity of pursuing a strategic plan to achieve sustainable development that leaves no one behind. The Government of Egypt realizes that economic growth is necessary but not sufficient to achieve sustainable and inclusive development. As a result, Egypt was one of the leading countries to have embraced the 2030 Agenda through the launch of its national sustainable development strategy, which outlines the path ahead along economic, social and environmental dimensions. Egypt also volunteered to present its voluntary national review report at the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development twice in three years, to take stock of the progress it has made in implementing the SDGs and its national strategy, and to outline existing challenges.
Egypt is committed to the achievement of both the SDGs and its national strategy. This commitment goes beyond announcements and declarations and has been translated into concrete programs and action plans with well-defined targets and key performance indicators. This report attempts to give a quick review of these efforts, which show Egyptis resolute commitment to making progress towards sustainable development.  
This long-term vision of progress remains steadfast, despite the many challenges, both internal shocks and unfavorable external conditions, that the country has weathered since 2011. Even when the Government of Egypt embarked on an ambitious economic program 
Final Word
to stabilize the economy, it did not relinquish its long-term sustainable development programs. Rather, it has shown even more commitment to invest in infrastructure, social protection and science and technology.  
Egypt is well-aware that the path toward the full realization of its vision is long and hard. However, the potential benefits and opportunities for the Egyptian people are vast. which is why rallying all stakeholders around these goals is key. The private sector, civil society and the international community should join forces with the Government to march together towards sustainable development. Strategic integration between all these players should be reinforced and orchestrated to effectively utilize current resources and to enhance future ones.  
As a middle-income country that is home to around 100 million people, Egypt needs to summon vast financial resources to finance the investment needed to fully implement the 2030 Agenda. Finance for development is not a buzzword; it is an overarching financial framework to achieve and fully implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in its three dimensions, economic, social and environmental. The challenge for Egypt is therefore to focus more on nontraditional sources of finance, from blended finance to green-economy related financial instruments.  
The existence of well-designed programs supported by buoyant financial resources does not guarantee that domestic and international sustainable development goals will be achieved.  Egypt must also invest in a reliable monitoring and evaluation system that is capable, firstly, of making sure that the projects are being implemented, and secondly, that these programs are having the desired impact. The monitoring and evaluation process should pick up on any unexpected deviation from the forecasted results, allowing corrections and modifications to be made. Such a system is essential for better governance and better utilization of limited financial resources. The Government of Egypt has an ambitious plan to upgrade its monitoring and evaluation system to guarantee the efficacy of its sustainable development programs.
Lastly, in the age of globalization, global and regional factors can affect the outcomes of national programs. For Egypt, this could mean that the consequences of conflicts or  violence nearby, such as the enduring Israeli-Palestinian conflict, or the regional struggle around water resources, disrupt its efforts toward achieving its national sustainable development strategy and the SDGs. Egypt has been always a firm advocate of international law and of cooperation between all countries in the interests of mutual peace and prosperity. A predicament arises therefore around the best course of action when this belief is not shared by other countries.  

Annexes
Annex 1: Summary of SDG Indicators by Goal
SDG
Number of Targets
Total
Available Indicators
Unavailable Indicators
Inapplicable Indicators
SDG 1
7
14
6
8
0
SDG 2
8
13
5
8
0
SDG 3
13
27
16
11
0
SDG 4
10
11
4
7
0
SDG 5
9
14
11
3
0
SDG 6
8
11
4
7
0
SDG 7
5
6
4
1
1
SDG 8
12
17
13
4
0
SDG 9
8
12
10
2
0
SDG 10
10
11
1
8
2
SDG 11
10
15
3
11
1
SDG 12
11
13
2
10
1
SDG 13
5
8
2
4
2
SDG 14
10
10
3
7
0
SDG 15
12
14
2
9
3
SDG 16
12
23
8
15
0
SDG 17
19
25
12
10
3
Sum
169
244
106
125
13
Source: CAPMAS
Annex 2: SDG Indicators 
#
Goal
Indicators
Change Reference
Source
1
SDG 1
Proportion of population below the international poverty line (%) 
2.3 in 2012
World Bank, Poverty & 
Equity Data Portal
2
SDG 1
Proportion of population living below the national poverty line (%) 
26.3 in 2012
World Bank, Poverty & 
Equity Data Portal
3
SDG 2
Stunting prevalence (% children <5 years of age)
29 in 2008
DHS Survey 2008/2014 
4
SDG 2
Total volume of agricultural production (thousand tons)
267.4 in 2011
Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and 
Administrative Reform
5
SDG 3
Maternal mortality ratio 
(per 100 000 live births)
52 in 2014
CAPMAS 
6
SDG 3
Under-five mortality rate 
(per 1,000 live births)
28 in 2008
Egypt Demographic and 
Health Survey 2014
7
SDG 3
Neonatal mortality rate (per 
1,000 live births)
16 in 2008
Egypt Demographic and 
Health Survey 2014
8
SDG 3
Tuberculosis incidence (per 
100,000 people)
19,000 in 2009
World Health Organization, 
Global Tuberculosis 
9
SDG 3
Suicide mortality rate
91 in 2014
Ministry of Health Data 
2015
10
SDG 3
Death rate due to road traffic injuries (per 100,000 population)
9.2 in 2015
Ministry of Health 
Information Center Bulletin 
2014
11
SDG 4
Illiteracy rate (%) (10 years and older)
29.3 in 2006
CAPMAS
12
SDG 4
Class density (number of students/class)
42.76 in 16/17
Ministry of Education and 
Technical Education
13
SDG 4
Quality of primary education 
(score)
2.1 in 16/17
The Global Competitiveness 
Report - 4th pillar
14
SDG 4
Primary education enrolment rate (net %)
95.8 in 2014
World Development 
Indicators (WDI)
15
SDG 4
Internet access in schools 
(score)
2.6 in 16/17
The Global Competitiveness 
Report - 5th pillar
16
SDG 5
Proportion of girls and women aged 15-49 years who have undergone female genital mutilation/cutting 
92.3 in 2014
Egypt Health Survey
#
Goal
Indicators
Change Reference
Source
17
SDG 5
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%)
2 in 2010
Global Gender Gap Report
18
SDG 5
Proportion of women in ministerial positions (%)
18 in 2017
National Council for 
Women
19
SDG 5
Global Gender Gap Index
132 in 2016
Global Gender Gap Report
20
SDG 5
Proportion of women who have bank accounts (%)
9.3 in 2014
The World Bank DataBank
21
SDG 6 
Ratio of nontraditional water resources to total water resources usage (%)
20 in 2015
Ministry of Water resources and Irrigation
22
SDG 6 
Percentage of loss in water treatment plants (%)
30 in 2015
Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities
23
SDG 6 
Amount of treated water 
(mn m3) 
8,867 in 2015
CAPMAS 
24
SDG 7
Proportion of population 
with access to electricity 
(%)
99 in 2014 
CAPMAS 
25
SDG 7 
Renewable energy share in total energy production (%)
1.95 in 2015 
Egyptian Electricity Holding 
Company Annual Report 
26
SDG 7
Contribution of energy sector to GDP (%)
13.1 in 2014 
Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and 
Administrative Reform
27
SDG 7
Contribution of energy investments to total investment (%)
5.14% in 2014
Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and 
Administrative Reform
28
SDG 8 
Annual growth rate of real 
GDP (%)
5.3 in 17/18 Q2
Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and 
Administrative Reform
29
SDG 8
Total unemployment rate 
(%)
12.8 in 2015
CAPMAS
30
SDG 8
Unemployment rate (male) 
(%)
9.4 in 2015
CAPMAS
31
SDG 8
Unemployment rate 
(female) (%) 
24.2 in 2015
CAPMAS
32
SDG 8
Female participation in labor force  
23.5 in 2015
CAPMAS
33
SDG 8
Tourism direct GDP as a proportion of total GDP (%)
3.7 in 2013
CAPMAS



#
Goal
Indicators
Change Reference
Source
34
SDG 8
Number of Automated 
Teller Machines (ATMs) 
(per 100,000 adults)
10733 in 2013
Ministry of Tourism
35
SDG 8
Global Competitiveness 
Index (rank)
115 in 2016/2017
Global Competitiveness 
Index Report
36
SDG 9
Manufacturing value added as a proportion of GDP (%)
12.5 in 2014/2015
Ministry of Planning, 
Monitoring and 
Administrative Reform
37
SDG 9
Manufacturing employment as a proportion of total employment (%)
12.4 in 15/16
CAPMAS
38
SDG 9
CO2 emissions per unit of value added (million tons) 
167 in 2005 
Ministry of Environment
39
SDG 9
Research and development 
expenditure as a proportion of GDP (%)
0.71 in 2014 
Ministry of Finance 
40
SDG 9
Global Innovation Index 
(rank)
107 in 2016
Global innovation Index 
Report
41
SDG 10
Disposable income per capita ($) 
5,009 in 2015 
Business Monitor 
International/ CAPMAS
42
SDG 10
Non-oil private sector PMI 
(out of 100) 
36.3 in Nov. 2016 
Emirates NBD Egypt 
43
SDG 10
Gini coefficient
29.8 in 2012
World Development 
Indicators (WDI)
44
SDG 11
Total population density 
(population/km2)
92.4 in 2017
CAPMAS/ World Bank 
Databank
45
SDG 11
Inhabited area to total area 
(%)
no change
CAPMAS
46
SDG 11
Percentage of households connected to the public water network (%)
96.6 in 2006
CAPMAS
47
SDG 11
Percentage of households connected to the public sanitation network (%)
46.6 in 2006
CAPMAS
48
SDG 11
Proportion of slum areas to total urban area (%) - unsafe
A reference year is not available, yet positive change is expected 
based on the efforts 
being exerted in that area.
Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities
#
Goal
Indicators
Change Reference
Source
49
SDG 11
Proportion of slum areas 
to total urban area (%) - unplanned
A reference year is not available, yet positive change is expected 
based on the efforts 
being exerted in that area.
Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities
50
SDG 11
Proportion of new cities with waste management systems (%)
A reference year is not available, yet positive change is expected 
based on the efforts 
being exerted in that area.
Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities
51
SDG 11
Per capita green landscapes in cities (m2/capita)
A reference year is not available, yet positive change is expected 
based on the efforts 
being exerted in that area.
CAPMAS
52
SDG 12
Global Food Security Index 
(score out of 100) 
56/100 in 2016
EIU Food Security Index 
Report (2016)
53
SDG 12
Amount spent on oil subsidies (EGP bn) 
73.9 in 2015
Ministry of Finance 
54
SDG 13 
Number of deaths, missing persons and persons 
affected by disaster per 
100,000 people
2.3692 in 2016 
Egyptian Cabinetis 
Information and Decision 
Support Center  
55
SDG 14
Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels (thousand tons)
1,362 in 2011
CAPMAS 
56
SDG 15
Red List Index
135 in 2013
Ministry of Environment
57
SDG 16
Corruption Perception Index 
(out of 100)
34 in 2016
Transparency International