 
 
SUMMARY 
India has played an important role in shaping the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This has meant that the countryis national development goals are mirrored in the SDGs. As such, India has been effectively committed to achieving the SDGs even before they were fully crystallized. As one of the countries that has volunteered to take part in the Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) at the High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) 2017, India appreciates the focus on \0xEBEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing worldi. 
 
The memorable phrase Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas, translated as \0xECCollective Effort, Inclusive Development and enunciated by the Prime Minister, forms the cornerstone of Indiais national development agenda. To fast-track this agenda, NITI Aayog, the premier think tank of the Government of India, has recently released a draft Three-Year Action Agenda covering years 2017-18 to 2019-20. In parallel, work on a 15-Year Vision and 7-year strategy document is in advanced stages. Reflecting the countryis long-standing federal tradition, these documents are being prepared with active participation of the sub-national governments. 
 
While targeting economic growth, infrastructure development and industrialisation, the countryis war against poverty has become fundamentally focussed on social inclusion and empowerment of the poor. Even as it combats poverty, India remains committed to protecting the environment. Under its Nationally Determined Contributions, India has committed to minimising the emissions intensity of GDP as well as creating an additional carbon sink. 
 
Reinforcing Indiais commitment to the national development agenda and SDGs, the countryis Parliament has organized several forums to develop policy and action perspectives on elimination of poverty, promoting gender equality and addressing climate change. The NITI Aayog, with the Prime Minister as its chairperson, is to provide the overall coordination and leadership. The institution has carried out a detailed mapping of the 17 Goals and 169 targets to Nodal Central Ministries, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and major government initiatives. Most sub-national governments have carried out a similar mapping of the SDGs and targets to the departments and programmes in their respective states. The Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation has developed a list of draft national indicators in light of the global SDG indicators. This draft has been placed in the public domain for wider consultation. 
 
Several of the Governmentis programmes would directly contribute to advancement of the SDG agenda. A noteworthy example is the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) which is the worldis largest financial inclusion programme. By leveraging PMJDY, Aadhaar (biometric identity system) and mobile telephony, the Government has disbursed a cumulative amount of INR 1.6 trillion (USD 25 billion) to 329 million beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfers.1 This has helped to significantly enhance the efficiency of Government programmes. While the central government has sponsored schemes to provide employment, connect villages to cities through roads, build houses for the poor and offer education in the states, various sub-groups of Chief Ministers have come forward to give valuable advice to the central government on such important matters as digital payments, skill development and the Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan (Clean India Campaign). 
 
As a part of its oversight responsibility, NITI Aayog has led the process of VNR preparation. A multidisciplinary Task Force was constituted to coordinate the review and process documentation. From the subnational level, state and union territory governments reported their progress on the various programmes and initiatives. While reporting about the various facets of the SDGs, this VNR focuses on the progress made towards achieving Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17. These Goals have been agreed upon in the HLPF as focus areas for this year. The nature of SDGs, however, is such that the advancement of one global goal may lead to progress in other goals as well. 
 
Goal 1: End Poverty in All its Forms Everywhere 
There is compelling evidence that the rapid growth India has achieved following the economic reforms initiated in 1991 has led to significant reduction in poverty. Poverty has fallen across all economic, social and religious groups nationally and in all states in the post-reform era. Sustained growth (6.2% from 199394 to 2003-04 and 8.3% from 2004-05 to 2011-12) has created gainful employment and helped raise wages thereby directly empowering the poor.  It has also brought the government an increased volume of revenues enabling it to sustain a high level of social spending and, thus, doubling the direct effect of growth on poverty.  
 
Several large-scale anti-poverty programmes have been implemented. The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, for instance, has generated over 2 billion person-days of employment during 2016-17 alone, largely for the disadvantaged sections of society. Additionally, initiatives have been launched for providing pension and insurance to workers in the unorganised sector, widows and the differently abled. Over 130 million people have accessed life and accident insurance under these programmes. 
 
Further, efforts are underway to universalise access to basic services. In order to achieve the goal of housing for all by 2022, direct financial assistance is being extended to poor households. Nearly 3.21 million houses were constructed last year as part of this initiative in rural areas. Programmes are also being implemented for ensuring access to education, health and nutrition security, with a special focus on vulnerable groups such as women and children. Other priority areas are drinking water and sanitation. Currently, nearly 77.5% of rural habitations are being provided with 40 litres of drinking water per capita on a daily basis. Another 18.9% habitations have been covered partially thus far. Over 63.7% of households in rural areas had access to an improved sanitation facility in 2016-17 as compared to 29.1% in 2005-06. With respect to clean sources of cooking fuel, over 22 million families have been provided with Liquefied Petroleum Gas connections under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana. Between 2005-06 and 2015-16, households having access to clean fuel have increased from 25.5% to 43.8%. 
 
Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
Significant progress has been made in improving food and nutrition security. For instance, stunting among children less than 5 years has declined from 48% to 38.4% between 2005-06 and 2015-16. During the same period, the percentage of underweight children has declined from 42.5% to 35.7%. 
 
The absolute levels of stunted and underweight children, however, remain high. To address this, a number of schemes are being implemented. For instance, more than 800 million people are covered in India by providing the food grains at affordable prices through the Public Distribution System. The Mid-Day-Meal Programme is providing nutritious cooked meals to 100 million children in primary schools. Additionally, food distribution governance is being strengthened through the digitization of ration cards and an online grievance redressal mechanism.   
 
Further, sustainable and climate-adaptive agriculture has been boosted by, inter alia, promoting organic farming and issuing of 62 million Soil Health Cards to farmers. A comprehensive plan is also being implemented for doubling farmersi income by 2022.  
 
Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages 
India has made significant strides in improving various health indicators. The Infant Mortality Rate has declined from 57 in 2005-06 to 41 in 2015-16. Similarly, Under-5 Mortality Rate has fallen from 74 to 50 over the same period. This has been enabled, at least partially, by a significant improvement in vaccination coverage for children between 12-23 months of age. Moreover, institutional deliveries have increased from 38.7% in 2005-06 to 78.9% in 2015-16. The countryis strategy in health is focused on providing essential services to the entire population, with a special emphasis on the poor and vulnerable groups. 
 
The National Health Policy, 2017 has specified targets for universalising primary health care, achieving further reductions in infant and under-5 mortality, preventing premature deaths due to non-communicable diseases as well as increasing government expenditure on health. A composite index is being used to monitor and incentivise improvements in health services delivery across states in the country. The government is aiming to immunize all unimmunized and partially immunized children against vaccinepreventable diseases by 2020. Towards achieving universal health coverage, a health insurance cover of INR 100,000 (USD 1,563) is being extended to all poor families. 
 
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
While much more progress remains to be made, a number of indicators pertaining to the status of women in India have moved in the right direction over the years. For instance, 68.4% of women were literate in 2015-16, as compared to 55.1% in 2005-06. Additionally, 53% of women were independently using a bank or savings account in 2015-16, which is a significant improvement from 15.1% in 2005-06. 
 
Numerous measures have been put in place for promoting gender equality. For example, the Beti Bachao Beti Padao (Save the Girl Child, Educate the Girl Child) initiative focuses on a comprehensive package of interventions for the girl child including those pertaining to education and protection. The Maternity Benefit Programme protects women from wage loss during the first six months after childbirth. Further, several programmes are being implemented for enabling greater participation of women in the work force.  
 
Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
All forms of transportation - roads, railways, civil aviation and waterways - are being rapidly expanded. Road connectivity and electricity are being brought to all villages. The Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. initiative is aiming to provide high-speed broadband connectivity to all village councils in the country.  Over the last five years, there has been a consistent growth in installed electricity generation capacity. The installed capacity in non-fossil-fuel sectors has grown by 51.3% and more than doubled in the renewable energy sector (solar, wind, bio- and small hydro power). 
 
Further, India is making efforts to become an Information Technology and manufacturing hub through its \0xEBMake in Indiai campaign.  These efforts have greatly accelerated Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows and helped the country sustain an average growth of 7.5% during the last three financial years (2014-15 to 2016-17). Employment-intensive manufacturing segments are being boosted by providing easy credit to small-scale business entrepreneurs. Additionally, the \0xEBStart-up Indiai programme promotes entrepreneurship and labour-intensive economic growth.  
 
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources 
A clear agenda has been formulated for promoting the \0xEBBlue Revolutioni. For tracking the levels of marine pollution along the coastline, the country has developed the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System. Additionally, an oil spill management system has been put in place for responding to emergencies arising out of oil spills. Further, the Integrated National Fisheries Action Plan, 2016 is being implemented to promote the livelihoods of fishing communities as well as the ecological integrity of the marine environment. Giving new impetus to port-led development, the Sagarmala programme is improving port connectivity, port-linked industrialization and coastal community development.   
 
Goal 17: Revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 
While working towards revitalising the global partnership for the achievement of the SDGs, India reaffirms the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. Despite significant efforts for domestic resource mobilisation, India is unlikely to gather sufficient revenues for achieving the SDGs. Therefore, India reiterates that the developed countries have an essential obligation to provide financial assistance to the developing countries, especially for global public goods such as climate change mitigation and control of pandemics, so that they can fully achieve the SDGs. India also highlights the need for international cooperation for curbing illicit financial flows, defining aid unambiguously and establishing robust systems for monitoring commitments made by donor countries. 
 
A path-breaking tax reform agenda is being readied in the country to optimise domestic resource mobilization. This includes direct tax reforms as well as the Goods and Services Tax (GST), a uniform and simplified form of indirect taxation. An innovative tax like the Swachh Bharat Cess (Clean India Cess) has also been levied for mobilizing resources for the Clean India Mission. Additionally, implementation of the budget responsibility legislation is ensuring predictable and sustainable budgeting as well as long-term debt sustainability. Proactive policy reforms have boosted the FDI flows during the last three fiscal years to USD 156 billion including a record-breaking USD 56 billion in the latest fiscal year. 
 
To enable the implementation of development interventions by sub-national governments, the fiscal devolution to states has been increased substantially (from 32 to 42 % of the central pool of tax proceeds). Initiatives are also being undertaken to enhance development cooperation with neighbouring and other countries of the global South. For instance, the South Asia Satellite was launched in May 2017 for sharing data with neighbours. 
 
Lastly, efforts are underway at the national-level for finalizing the indicators that will enable monitoring of the progress made on the SDGs. The government is also considering setting up a high-level Committee headed by the Chief Statistician of India to oversee the monitoring framework for SDGs at the nationallevel. While national efforts are paramount, global technical support is important in various areas including developing methodologies for data collection as well as monitoring and evaluation.

INTRODUCTION 
India had played an important role in shaping the SDGs. Unsurprisingly, therefore, the countryis national development goals are mirrored in the SDGs. As such, India has been effectively committed to achieving the SDGs even before they were formally crystallized. 
 
As Prime Minister Narendra Modi has stated, \0xECThese goals reflect our evolving understanding of the social, economic and environmental linkages that define our lives. Indiais development mantra \0xECSabka Saath Sabka Vikas (Collective Effort, Inclusive Development) and the associated national programs closely track the SDGs. 
 
As one of the countries that has volunteered to take part in the VNRs at the High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) 2017, India appreciates the focus on \0xEBEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing worldi. The SDGs address the root cause of poverty and are an elaborate exercise to help nations work towards a unifying agenda for development. 
 
While targeting economic growth, infrastructure development and industrialisation, the countryis war against poverty has become fundamentally focussed on social inclusion and empowerment of the poor. Several major programmes have been implemented to address these priorities and meet the economic, social and cultural aspirations of a diverse people.  
 
This review brings out the initial steps taken to achieve Indiais development agenda and, therefore, the SDGs.  Given Indiais federal structure of governance, the focus has been on laying down the groundwork for common understanding and coordination and designing monitoring and reporting mechanisms. Responsibilities have been divided among various bodies that will lead the efforts of implementing ministries, departments and agencies at central and state levels.  The National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), with the Prime Minister as its chairperson, is to provide the overall coordination and leadership. 
 
Indiais statistical system and institutions gather data and report on defined parameters in various sectors. National SDG indicators are being currently constructed to better capture the context of India and its needs. Along with the development of the national SDG indicators, the statistical system is also geared to measure achievements at sub-national levels. 
 
While reporting about the various facets of the SDGs, this VNR focuses on the progress made towards achieving Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17. These Goals have been agreed upon in the HLPF as focus areas for this year. The nature of SDGs is such that the advancement of one global goal may lead to progress in other goal as well. Indeed, one set of SDGs effectively serves as instruments to achieve another set of SDGs.  For instance SDG 8 (\0xECdecent work and economic growth) is perhaps the most effective means to achieving SDG 1 (\0xECNo poverty). Hence, to some degree, the progress in SDGs discussed in this report also represents progress in achieving some other SDGs.  
 
 
 
 
 	Indiais Philosophy of \0xEBOne Worldi and Global Partnership for the SDGs 
 Cooperation is inherent to Indiais civilizational values. The country has been appreciated by all stakeholders for its role in shaping the global agenda on economic development. India recognizes that  the promotion of global wellbeing requires institutionalizing the concept of \0xEBone worldi through 
partnerships based on solidarity, equity and sharing. 
 
In alignment with this philosophy, Indiais Prime Minister launched the International Solar Alliance at the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris in 2015. The Alliance promotes cooperation among 121 
 
countries with the objective of reducing the price of solar energy. This is to be accomplished through 
 standardization of solar technologies and boosting research and development.  
 Additionally, India has provided platforms like the India-Africa Forum Summit and BRICS Summit for  facilitating meaningful dialogue among nations. Beyond bilateral engagements that have been strengthened, focusing on norm setting at multilateral institutions and strengthening the United Nations 
 
has also been an important priority. Finally, India continues to play a significant role in development cooperation in its immediate and extended neighborhood. 
 
Methodology and Process for Preparation of the VNR  
After the SDGs were adopted, the National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), the premier policy think tank of the Government of India, was assigned the responsibility of overseeing their implementation. As a part of its oversight responsibility, NITI Aayog has led the process of VNR preparation. A multi-disciplinary VNR Task Force was constituted to coordinate the review and process documentation. From the sub-national level, state and union territory governments reported on their perspectives and progress on the various programmes and initiatives. NITI Aayog also conducted a series of consultations at the national as well as sub-national levels in which state governments, local governments, Civil Society Organisations, technical experts, academics, international organizations and other stakeholders participated. The VNR Task Force has reviewed information collected from different sources, deliberated upon it and analysed and covered it extensively in this report. 
 
India also benefited from participating in preparatory workshops conducted by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs at the global and regional levels (Expert Group Meeting held in December 2016, Regional VNR Workshop in March 2017). These workshops threw light on experiences and initiatives of countries that presented VNRs in 2016 as well as those preparing the reports for the HLPF 2017. Indiais participation in the UNESCAP meeting on VNR, the 4th session of the Asia Pacific Forum on Sustainable Development, 73rd session of the UNESCAP and the 20th session of the UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development were also useful for generating information from various countries on institutional systems put in place, strategies and programmes implemented and emerging good practices. 
 
For this review, all available information on relevant aspects of the identified SDGs and related targets has been taken into consideration. Data used are from authenticated government sources and a significant amount of information has come from the databases of programmes under implementation by the government.  
 
 
 
 
The Indian Parliament in Action 
 
 The Parliament of India has taken exemplary initiatives to propel the SDG agenda forward. The Lower  House of the Parliament, for instance, has organized several discussions on the SDGs with  parliamentarians from both Houses as part of the Speakeris Research Initiative.  
 
A number of the initiatives have focused on the importance of gender equity in the context of the SDGs. 
 
These include the National Womenis Legislatorsi Conference as well as the second BRICS Women 
 
Parliamentarians Forum. The Forum observed that women parliamentarians can make a significant 
 
contribution towards shaping public opinion in favor of the new global development goals. The Forum 
 
brought out the \0xEBJaipur Declarationi expressing its commitment to the SDGs.  
 
 The South Asian Speakersi Summit on SDGs was another regional initiative organized in 2017. The  Summit deliberated on the theme \0xEBStrengthening Regional Cooperation and Resources for SDGsi. It  urged parliamentarians to collectively advance action among all stakeholders for mobilizing additional  resources in order to achieve the SDG targets in a timely manner. 

POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 
Reinforcing Indiais commitment to the national development agenda and SDGs, the countryis Parliament organized several forums, including the South Asian Speakers' Summit in February 2017 that focused on poverty elimination, gender equality, climate change, and resource mobilization for SDGs. The Speakersi Research Initiative was launched to provide SDG-related insights to Members of Parliament. 
 
NITI Aayog continues to uphold its commitment to achieving the SDGs in a timely manner, and is also strengthening an on-going countrywide communication process, both formally and informally. This process has generated considerable insights and inputs for the VNR. 
 
Moreover, NITI Aayog is keen on encouraging states and union territories to share inter alia any new knowledge or good practices from various fields to fast track the implementation of SDGs across the country. For instance, all states and union territories participated in a national workshop on best practices in the social sector. NITI Aayog has also published a volume of such best practices from various states in the country, which has been shared with the states and all ministries and departments of the central government.  
 
An important role is being played by Civil Society Organizations that have been working on SDG-related issues from the grassroots to the national level. Working individually and in coalitions, they have also partnered with the government to provide inputs, create awareness and offer feedback. Their initiatives span the following: 
\0xEF Preparing information education and communication materials on SDGs, conducting capacity building workshops and awareness campaigns; 
\0xEF Supporting states with integrating SDGs into the planning and implementation process; 
\0xEF Highlighting issues of sustainable energy management and climate justice for necessary policy action at the state and national levels; and 
\0xEF Conducting research and documentation on SDGs as well as their relevance to the rights and entitlements of various vulnerable sections of society. 
 
Corporate sector organisations including industry associations have held consultations and initiated actions in various areas including environmental sustainability, innovative climate action and inclusive development strategies on various themes. Apart from working with organisations within the industry and related sectors, they have also worked jointly with the government and civil society to develop innovative solutions and courses of action. 
 
NITI Aayog has carried out a detailed mapping of the 17 Goals and 169 targets to Nodal Central Ministries, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and major government initiatives. The results of the mapping exercise were circulated to the Central Ministries and placed on the NITI Aayog website to facilitate better awareness, common understanding and faster implementation of the SDGs. Most sub-national governments have carried out a similar mapping of the SDGs and targets to the departments and programmes in their respective states. Periodic consultations with the Chief Secretaries of the sub-national governments have also been held to deliberate on strategies for achieving the SDGs.  
 
The Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is on the verge of completing an initiative to evolve national indicators in light of the global SDG indicators. The Ministry held numerous discussions, followed by a national workshop, to develop a monitoring framework for SDG indicators. Based on extensive discussions, MoSPI has developed a list of draft national indicators and placed it in the public domain for wider consultation. It is heartening to note that MoSPI has received a wealth of inputs from numerous stakeholders across the country. These inputs will help finalize the set of indicators that will ultimately be used for tracking the progress. 
 
Further, the NITI Aayog recently released a draft Three-Year Action Agenda covering the years 2017-18 to 2019-20. The Action Agenda addresses the specific challenges facing the country and details measures to fast track the national development agenda. In parallel, work on a 15-Year Vision and 7-year strategy document is in advanced stages. Reflecting the countryis long-standing federal tradition, these documents are being prepared with active participation of the sub-national governments. 
 
For implementing the SDG agenda, the Government of India has launched several programmes, some of which are highlighted in this VNR. A noteworthy initiative among them is the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), which is the worldis largest financial inclusion programme. By leveraging the PMJDY, the government has been able to disburse a cumulative amount of INR 1.6 trillion (USD 25 billion at INR 64 per USD) to 329 million beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT). This is a major step towards enhancing the efficiency of government programmes. 
 
At the sub-national level, state governments are at various stages of their 15-year vision and strategy roadmaps. Most of the state governments have matched strategic insights from the national development and 2030 agendas with their own specific contexts and priorities. State Planning and Development departments are also operating as focal points for facilitating the process of SDG implementation by providing the necessary information and support. 
 
India has a tradition of strong local governments: Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in rural areas and urban local bodies (ULBs) in urban areas. After substantial financial devolution to the PRIs under the award of the 14th Finance Commission, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is supporting village-level PRIs in planning and implementing development initiatives in their respective areas. The national development agenda covering the SDG framework guides the capacity building of the PRIs as well as the actual planning process.  
State-Level Initiatives on SDGs 
Assam has set up a Centre for SDGs under the Planning and Development Department and an integrated framework for implementation has been adopted. The state has also developed its own vision for realizing the SDGs, namely, ASSAM 2030. A pilot is being undertaken in a few villages and towns for demonstrating full attainment of the SDG agenda. Further, a robust technology platform is also being set up for tracking the progress pertaining to the SDGs.  
Andhra Pradesh as part of its Vision 2029 has identified indicators for each of the 17 SDGs. It has also outlined the baseline, targets, milestones as well as key strategies for realizing the SDGs.  
Bihar is in the process of finalizing the roadmap for SDG implementation. The state government is already focusing on a number of areas that are covered under the SDGs including road connectivity and drainage, toilets, clean drinking water, electricity, higher education, skill development and gender equality.   

Haryana has prepared its Vision 2030 document following extensive consultations with a range of stakeholders. The strategies outlined in the document are based broadly on five principles -- integrated planning and decentralized implementation, equitable development, building human capital, promoting citizen centric services and green growth.  
Maharashtra is focused on balanced regional development and emphasizes sustainable livelihoods, taking initiative to improve management of water, land and forests, improve access to health and education, and developing skills for employment generation. 
Kerala has set up elaborate indicators and standards for achieving the SDG 3 on health. The state has sector specific plans for 2030 with emphasis on encouraging entrepreneurship in production sectors, developing the key bases of knowledge economy in the areas of education, S&T, etc., and ensuring environmental and social sustainability.  
Karnataka focuses on technology in 12 sectors: education, medical science and health care, food & agriculture, water, energy, environment, habitat, transportation, infrastructure, manufacturing, materials and ICT.  
Tamil Nadu focuses on infrastructure development in six major sectors: energy, transportation, industrial and commercial infrastructure, urban infrastructure and services, agriculture and human development.  
Punjab has set in motion a SDGs support process under the Planning Department. The process involves extension of technical assistance at the state level and facilitation support to different departments for improving programme implementation, and generating information and evidence for public policy analysis and delivery in the context of SDGs. 
Madhya Pradesh has also established an SDG cell. The Madhya Pradesh State Planning Commission has also established Planning and Policy Support Unit, Project Monitoring Unit, Knowledge 
Management Unit and International Division, in order to meet challenges of perspective planning and 

SDGs.   

PROGRESS TOWARDS SPECIFIC GOALS 
SDG 1: No Poverty | End Poverty in All its Forms Everywhere 
 
Past Poverty Reduction 
Rapid growth (SDG 8) is the key weapon in any countryis arsenal to combat poverty.  On the one hand, it creates well-paid jobs, which place necessary purchasing power in the hands of households to access food, clothing, housing, education and health.  On the other, it brings ever-rising revenues to the government to finance social spending.  India has continued its programme of economic reforms to achieve sustained rapid growth. The reforms have included fiscal consolidation, inflation targeting, improved governance all around, accelerated infrastructure development (SDG 9), curbing of corruption (SDG 16), Aadhaar Act (for providing unique identity), Insolvency and Bankruptcy Act, Goods and Services Tax, further liberalization of foreign direct investment and closure of sick units in the public sector.  As a result, today, India is the fastest growing major economy in the world.  It grew 7.5% during fiscal year 2014-15, 8% during 2015-16 and 7.1 % during 2016-17.  
 
Currently, the official poverty line in India is the Tendulkar line so named after Indiais foremost poverty expert, economist Suresh Tendulkar. There is now compelling evidence that rapid growth India has achieved following the economic reforms initiated in 1991 has led to significant reduction in poverty.  This is shown in the accompanying figure.  Between 1993-94 and 2003-04, India grew at the average annual rate of 6.2% and between 2004-05 and 2011-12, at the rate of 8.3%.  Both these periods saw a substantial decline in poverty but the decline was significantly sharper during the latter period characterized by faster growth.  The figure shows rural, urban and overall poverty levels at the national level.  But evidence shows that poverty fell across all economic, social and religious groups nationally and in all states in the post-reform era. 

 
 
 
Anti-Poverty Programmes 
Growth has brought with it an increased volume of revenues, which, in turn, has enabled the government to sustain a high level of social spending, thus, targeting poverty directly. 
 
An important anti-poverty program has focused on generating employment through public works that help develop agricultural infrastructure, productive assets and entrepreneurship-based livelihood opportunities. 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment 	Guarantee 	Act 
(MGNREGA) provides a legal guarantee of a minimum of 100 days of wage employment per household every year for unskilled workers in rural areas. The programme generated over 2 billion person-days of employment (SDG 8) during the last year. Women and disadvantaged groups have been the largest beneficiaries (SDG 5 and SDG 10) of the programme accounting for 
56% and 39% of person-days of work generated during last year.  
 
Another initiative relevant to this Goal is the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), which was launched in 2014 for ensuring access to the entire gamut of financial services, including banking, credit, insurance and pension. Under this programme, 280 million new accounts have been opened thus far with deposits amounting to INR 639 billion (USD 9.9 billion). By facilitating the delivering of Government benefits directly into the accounts of beneficiaries and minimising leakages, the initiative has enhanced the effectiveness of several social security schemes in the country.  
 
Further, the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana, the National Livelihoods Mission, is devoted to creating skilled employment for the poor. The Mission aims to bring one female member each from a large number of poor households in rural areas into Self-Help Groups in a phased manner. 
 
In a significant move towards addressing 	multi-dimensional poverty, 	data 	from 	the 	SocioEconomic Caste Census, 2011 is being used to identify beneficiaries for development programmes based on various deprivations suffered by households. This is aligned with the policy of ensuring that \0xEBno one is left behindi.  
 
Strengthening Social Safety Nets 
The National Social Assistance Programme provides pension to the elderly, widows and differently-abled individuals. Additionally, three initiatives have been launched to facilitate access to life insurance, personal accident insurance as well as pension for workers in the unorganised sector. The schemes focusing on insurance have collectively reached out to 130 million subscribers. 
 
Ensuring Access to Basic Services 
Enabling access to quality primary education and affordable healthcare forms an important part of the poverty elimination strategy. Under the National Health Mission, a broad spectrum of interventions focused on universalising primary healthcare is being implemented. The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) attempts to ensure that maternal and child malnutrition are addressed in a systematic manner. Further, Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) provides conditional cash transfers to promote institutional deliveries among women from remote areas. There is a special emphasis on bridging the gaps in human resources for healthcare at all levels of service delivery. Similarly, the National Education Mission is focused on providing universal access to education, bridging gender-related inequities and improving the learning outcomes of students. The Right to Education Act has established an effective legal framework entitling all children (6-14 years) to free and compulsory education based on principles of equity and nondiscrimination. 
 
Another ambitious initiative is \0xEBHousing for All by 2022.i Under this program, assistance (e.g. in the form of credit-linked interest subsidies) is provided to poor households for constructing houses. An estimated 5 
million houses will be built during the current year for the poor in rural areas. 
 
  A direct consequence of poverty is food insecurity. To address this problem, the National Food Security Act provides a basic quantity of food grains to nearly 75% of the population in rural areas and 50% of the population in urban areas at affordable prices under the Targeted Public 	Distribution 	System. 	The programme provides 5 kg wheat or rice per person per month at subsidised prices.  A related initiative provides the poorest households 35 kg of the subsidized wheat or rice every month. 
 
In order to meet the clean cooking fuel needs of the poor and thereby safeguarding the health of women and children, the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana was launched in 2016. Under the scheme, 50 million Liquefied Petroleum Gas connections will be provided to poor families over the next 3 years. Over 22 million connections have already been provided under the scheme. 
 
Further, there is an emphasis on facilitating access to adequate and safe drinking water as well as sanitation for the entire population. Under the National Rural Drinking Water Programme, more than 77.5% of habitations have been covered with 40 litres of drinking water supply per capita per day. Another 18.9% habitations have been covered partially thus far. A flagship initiative of the government is the Swachh Bharat Mission (Clean India Mission) which aims to ensure an open defecation free India by 2019. Under this Mission, over 39.5 million household toilets have been built during the previous two and half years. 
Additionally, 193,000 villages and 531 cities have been successful in ending the practice of open defecation. For spurring improvements, cities and village councils are being ranked on levels of cleanliness. 
 
For enhancing connectivity, 70% of the targeted rural habitations have been connected by all-weather roads thus far under Prime Ministeris Rural Roads Programme. It is envisaged that by March, 2019, all habitations of 500 population or larger will be connected by all-weather roads. Green technologies are increasingly being leveraged for the construction of roads in rural areas. 
 

 
Promoting Resilience against Disasters 
According to the India Disaster Knowledge Network, 85% of the countryis land is vulnerable to natural disasters, which affect the poor disproportionately. As mandated under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, there is a comprehensive National Policy on Disaster Management (2009), which articulates a proactive prevention and mitigation approach. The National Disaster Management Plan, 2016 focuses on disaster resilience and integrates the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction as well as the SDGs. 
SDG 2: Zero Hunger | End Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved Nutrition and Promote Sustainable Agriculture 
 
Significant progress has been made in improving food and nutrition security.  Nevertheless, challenges remain. For instance, a substantial reduction in stunted and underweight children has been achieved between 2005-06 and 2015-16.  But the absolute levels of stunted and underweight children remain high. 
 

 
Access to Nutritious Food 
Indiais food security programmes are among the largest in the world and cover more than 800 million people in the country by providing affordable access to grains. In recognition of empirical evidence that women pay greater attention to food security, the ration card is issued in the name of the senior most female member of the household.  
 
Food governance in terms of responsiveness, transparency and accountability has improved significantly. Nearly 232 million ration cards entitling people to food and other supplies have been digitized. Additionally, 77% of the ration cards have been linked to the unique identity number thereby enabling cash transfers for promoting dietary diversity. Nearly 20 out of the 29 states in India have automated the supply chains and Fair Price Shops (delivery outlets). An online grievance redressal system has also been operationalized across the country.  
 
Other programmes aim to address the nutrition security of specific population groups. For instance, ICDS caters to the nutritional requirements of over 83 million young children and 19 million pregnant and lactating mothers in the country. The Mid-Day Meal Programme delivers nutritious cooked meals to 100 million children in primary schools.  
 
Sustainable and Adaptive Agriculture 
India is the largest producer of milk, pulses and spices in the world. It also has the largest area under cultivation for rice and cotton. Approximately 55% of Indiais croplands are rain-fed and it has vast coastal lands under agriculture. Food production in the country is therefore vulnerable to climate change. 
 

Improved crop seeds
Agricultural Livestock insurance & 	& fish 
	Credit	cultures
Adaptive 
Agriculture
Improved 
                          Water-use farm efficiency practices
Nutrient & pest 
management
The National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), in collaboration with other Missions under the National Action Plan on Climate Change, is striving towards mitigating the impact of climate change and sustaining agricultural productivity. Under NMSA, Soil Health Cards are being issued to farmers for providing crop-wise nutrient management recommendations and enabling them improve soil fertility as well as crop productivity. More than 62 million Cards have been issued thus far. Land under organic farming has increased by over 17fold over the last decade.  
 

Village Laporiya: Innovation in Water Conservation 
Laporiya is a small village, which was facing severe water shortage thirty years ago. Most of the rainwater was not utilized appropriately and the villagers were unaware of ways of ensuring sustainable use of natural resources. As a response to this critical situation, Mr. Laxman Singh, a local belonging to the area, devised a technique called the CHOUKA SYSTEM (building small rectangular dykes with an entry and exit point) for recharging the ground water. After years of experimentation, this technique has proved to be very effective and is now being implemented widely.  
 
Efforts have also been made to revamp crop insurance support for minimizing the losses incurred by farmers and providing single-window comprehensive risk coverage for various crops. Against a target of covering 50% of the total cropped area in the country during 2016-19, 30% has already been accomplished. Further, access of farmers to new information and skills is being strengthened. For instance, 652 Agricultural Technology Management Agencies have been established across the country for disseminating the latest technologies to farmers. These Agencies collectively reached out to 1.2 million farmers during 2016-17, half of whom were women. 
 
Another important aspect of sustainable agriculture is managing seed quality and diversity. The National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, for instance, has a collection of 257,432 germplasm accessions. Several research-backed and innovative interventions are also being promoted. For example, the Central Soil Salinity Research Institute has successfully developed and deployed customized salt-tolerant varieties in major crops like rice, wheat and mustard.  
 
Agricultural Productivity and Farmersi Income 
Small and marginal farmers constitute nearly 80% of all Indian farmers. More than 90% of them are engaged in rain-fed agriculture. It is therefore crucial to raise farmersi income by adopting different strategies.  
 
Several states in India have made progress with respect to revising their land leasing Acts along the lines of a Model Act developed by NITI Aayog. The Model Act is aimed at protecting the rights of the tenant while also ensuring that the landowner does not run the risk of losing the ownership of her land to the tenant.  
 
  During 2015-17, an area of nearly 1.3 million hectares has been brought under micro-irrigation. 	The 	average productivity of fruits and vegetables has increased by 42.3% and 52.8%, respectively, on account of crop spacing, judicious use of water and other inputs. In rain-fed areas, approximately 38,000 hectares have been covered during 2016-17 under the integrated farming system. This initiative links the cropping system with activities such as horticulture, livestock farming and fishery for enhancing productivity.  It also helps protect farmersi income against the vagaries of nature.  
 
Integrated Marketing and Better Prices for Farmers in Karnataka 
Online trading in agricultural commodities has proved to be a successful model promoted in the state of Karnataka. The Unified Market Platform (UMP) has led to better price realization for farmers as compared to previous years. More than 1.4 million farmers had registered on the UMP till April, 2016 and benefitted from a rise in prices due to the introduction of online trading in 107 Agricultural Produce Marketing Committees across the state. There was a significant increase in the prices of groundnut, pigeon peas, chick peas and turmeric, among others. 
 
Nearly 250 wholesale agricultural markets across 10 states have been integrated with the electronic National Agricultural Marketing Platform. A number of other agricultural reforms are being pursued in cooperation with state governments including direct purchase of agricultural produce from the farmer, promotion of etrading and ensuring the validity of a single trading license across the state. 
 
 
 
SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being | Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well-Being for All at All Ages 
 
India has made significant strides in improving various health indicators. The countryis strategy in health is focused on providing essential services to the entire population, with a special emphasis on the poor and vulnerable groups.   
 

 
Specific Targets under the National Health Policy, 2017

Improving the health status of women and children 
India has developed a roadmap, the \0xEBIndia New-born Action Plani for achieving the targets outlined in the global \0xEBEvery New-born Action Plani by 2030, five years before the global deadline. Other flagship initiatives include ICDS, Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (a child health screening and early intervention programme) and JSY. 
 
A number of initiatives in this space are leveraging technology for improving the health indicators of women and children. For instance, ANMOL 
(Auxiliary Nurse Midwives Online) is a tablet-based application launched by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for enabling Auxiliary Nurse Midwives to electronically enter and update data for beneficiaries in their jurisdictions. Similarly, digitization of ICDS centres is facilitating real-time monitoring of service delivery across the country.   
 
Progress Made in the Areas of Family Planning, Maternal Health & Child Health 


Preventing Communicable Diseases 
Under the National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, prevention and control of six diseases has been prioritized, including Malaria, Japanese Encephalitis, Dengue, Chikungunya, Kala-Azar and Lymphatic Filariasis. Additionally, the government has launched a National Strategic Plan recently with the objective of eliminating TB by 2025. A new medication, Bedaquiline, has also been launched for tackling drug-resistant TB. Further, the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme provides early warning signals for initiating timely action in response to health challenges in the country.   
 
ASHA Soft - An Online Monitoring & Payment System  
A web-based software has been launched in the state of Rajasthan with the objective of ensuring timely and transparent payments to community health workers. Use of the software has also improved the entry of beneficiary data in the Pregnancy & Child Tracking Systems. The initiative has been rolled out across all districts in the state covering 4,700 community health workers. 
Reducing the Burden of Non-Communicable 
Diseases 
A National Programme for the prevention of noncommunicable diseases including cancer and cardiovascular ailments is focused on promoting healthy lifestyles in collaboration with a range of stakeholders including civil society and the media. A National NonCommunicable Diseases Cell has been established along with 36 and 318 Cells at the state and district levels respectively. In addition, 71 Cardiac Care Units and 61 Day-care Centres for Chemotherapy have been set up in various districts across the country. The government has also launched a mobile health initiative, mDiabetes, for creating awareness about the illness. 
 
As heart diseases affect a large number of people in the country, the government has taken steps to ensure the availability of coronary stents at affordable prices. Further, the National Dialysis Services Programme has been launched for patients with renal diseases. Recognizing the significant burden of mental health issues, the Indian Parliament has recently passed the Mental Healthcare Bill, which decriminalizes suicide and protects the property rights of patients.  
 
Success Stories in Health: Kerala & Tamil Nadu  
The state of Kerala has had an excellent track record in the provision of healthcare. Recently, the state government has launched an initiative called Aardram for revamping the public health system and providing more patient-friendly services. Alongside health promotion and prevention, there is also a focus on strengthening facilities at the secondary and tertiary levels. The initiative will aim to ensure that at least one hospital in every district is equipped to provide super specialty services. Kerala, despite its achievements in the health sector, is not resting on its laurels given the changing epidemiology in the state and the emergence of new challenges like lifestyle diseases. 
Similarly, Tamil Nadu has made tremendous progress despite spending only around 1% of its GDP on health. The achievements have been underpinned by a well-functioning network of primary health care centers with monthly performance monitoring, rapid scale-up of the immunization programme, a reliable supply of essential drugs as well as a successful community health worker scheme. 
 
Ensuring access to basic health facilities for all 
Index for Spurring Improvements in 
Health  
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and NITI Aayog are spearheading the Health Index initiative. The Index has been developed to monitor state-level performance on various health indicators. The objective is to encourage states to improve their data collection systems as well as health outcomes. The Index comprises indicators pertaining to processes, governance systems and outcomes in the health sector. 
The National Health Mission provides flexible financing to state governments for improving infrastructure facilities at the district and sub-district levels. The Mission was allocated INR 267 billion (USD 4 billion) in 2017-18 making it one of the largest centrally sponsored schemes of the Government of India. Additionally, the government has launched a National Health Protection Scheme for giving financial assistance to families that are below the poverty line and have lost their primary wage earners. Such families will be provided with a health insurance cover to the tune of INR 100,000 (USD 1,563). For ensuring the availability of adequately trained doctors, the government is creating an additional 5,000 postgraduate seats per year. Additionally, steps are being taken to transform the regulatory framework for medical education and practice in the country.  
 
Traditional and Alternative Systems of Medicine 
A Ministry of AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy) was establised in 2014 for promoting indigenous and alternative systems of healthcare in India. There are currently 0.8 million registered AYUSH practitioners in the country who practice traditional Indian medicine as a complement to modern medicine. There is also a vast infrastructure for AYUSH in the country with 3,277 hospitals and 24,289 dispensaries. Further, several initiatives have been undertaken at the state-level for integrating AYUSH with healthcare initiatives. In Tamil Nadu, for instance, a pilot project was implemented for delivering AYUSH services as part of the nutrition scheme. The programme achieved positive results in the form of a reduction in the infant and maternal mortality rates as well as anemia among girls.   
 
The practice of Yoga originated in India thousands of years ago. It promotes wellness and prevents psychosomatic disorders. Given the immense popularity of Yoga across the world, the Indian Prime Minister moved a draft resolution, endorsed by 175 member states, for celebrating the International Day of Yoga. Since 2015, International Yoga Day is celebrated across the globe on 21st June every year.  
 
SDG 5: Gender Equality | Achieve Gender Equality and Empower All Women and Girls  
 
While much more progress remains to be made, a number of indicators pertaining to the status of women in India have moved in the right direction over the years. 
 

Addressing discrimination against women 
The Government of India has implemented several legislations and welfare schemes to curb the practice of female feticide and sex-selective abortion. In addition, the government has launched the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (Save the Girl Child, Educate the Girl Child) movement for catalysing a change in mind set as well as protecting and educating the girl child.  
Mukhyamantri Balika Cycle Yojana (Chief Ministeris bicycle initiative for the girl child) 
The scheme was launched in the state of Bihar for reducing the school dropout rates for girls. Under the scheme, a cycle was provided to every girl in the state who was entering Class 9 or 10. Following the introduction of the scheme, a substantial decrease in the dropout rate of girls from school has been achieved. 
 
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao
Rectifying the declining Child Sex Ratio in 100 gender-critical districts across all states & union territories
\0xEFMass Communication Campaign
The Campaign links interventions at the national, state and district levels with community-level action in 100 selected districts low in Child Sex Ratio, for achieving accelerated impact.
\0xEFMulti-Sectoral Interventions
For ensuring survival, protection and education of the girl child, efforts are being made to converge the initiatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as well as the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
 
 
Women also face other types of discrimination. For instance, a study on Gender and Livelihoods Impacts of Clean Cook Stoves in South Asia reveals that Indian women spend approximately 374 hours every year collecting firewood. This amount of time could otherwise be spent in education or productive work. As a response to this problem, the government launched the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana for providing clean cooking fuel in the form of Liquefied Petroleum Gas connections.  
 

 
The lack of sanitation facilities at home also affects women disproportionately. Additionally, the absence of adequate infrastructure for sanitation and menstrual hygiene management in schools is one of the factors that contribute to girls dropping out of secondary school. This issue is being addressed through the flagship sanitation programme of the government.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
Increasing access to employment 
A report released by the Labour Bureau reveals that Female Labour Force Participation Rate in India was as low as 23.7% in 2015-16. In order to address this, the government has launched several initiatives, some 

 
Initiatives for Improving Female Labour Force Participation 

 
Strengthening Social Protection and Security 
One Stop Crisis Centres are being established across the country for providing integrated support to women affected by violence, in private and public spaces. The services include medical assistance, psychosocial counselling, legal aid, shelter as well as a video conferencing facility to facilitate police and court proceedings. The Women Helpline initiative has also been integrated with the One Stop Crisis Centres. It aims to provide an immediate response to women affected by violence through a number that is active 24 hours a day. Another challenge faced by women is trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation. The government has launched several initiatives for curbing this problem. 
 
Initiatives by State Governments on Womenis Safety 

 
Building Resilient Infrastructure 
All forms of transportation - roads, railways, civil aviation and waterways - are being expanded rapidly. A total of 8,231 km of national highways has been constructed during 2016-17. Thus far, 70% of targeted rural habitations without road connectivity have been connected with all-weather roads. Further, development of 37 national waterways is planned over the next three years. This will have a positive impact on the reduction of overall logistics related costs and environmental impact. A total length of 8,000 km of pavements and cycle tracks will also be laid in 106 cities over the course of the next 5 years to promote non-motorized transport and reduce the carbon footprint. To strengthen the railways sector, 3,500 km of lines will be laid in 2017-18. 
 
The government has set an investment target of INR 25 trillion (USD 390 billion) for infrastructure development over a period of three years (2016-19). Efforts are also being made to mobilize additional resources. For instance, the monetization of 75 publicly funded highway projects of value INR 356 billion (USD 5.6 billion) via the toll-operate-transfer mode will finance the construction of 2,700 km of roads. Moreover, the Indian Railways is setting up an INR 350 billion (USD 5.5 billion) Railways of India Development Fund to serve as an institutional mechanism for raising funds from the market. In 2016, India moved up 19 places in the World Bank's Logistics Performance Index, to finish 35 among 160 countries. 
 
Another area that is being prioritized is ensuring access to electricity for all citizens. The Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana aims to provide a continuous supply of power to all parts of rural India. Thus far, over 99% of villages have been electrified.   
 
Strengthening the Manufacturing Sector 
The National Manufacturing Policy focuses on sustainable job creation in this sector in partnership with sub-national Governments. The Policy has raised the targeted output from 16% of GDP to 25% by 2025 along with creation of 100 million jobs.  
 
National Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) have been introduced as an important instrumentality. Eight NIMZs have been approved along the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor and three are being set up in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha. These Zones are envisaged as integrated industrial townships with state-of-the-art infrastructure, energy efficient technology as well as skill development facilities for providing an enabling ecosystem for manufacturing industries. Clean technologies are being promoted by providing appropriate incentives. For instance, buildings that obtain a green rating qualify for an incentive grant of INR 200,000 (USD 3,125). 
 
Further, several policy measures have been introduced for boosting the employment-intensive segments of the manufacturing sector. For small and medium enterprises, the measures include tax relief, preferential access to bank finance and greater access to venture capital options. For instance, the income tax rate has been lowered to 25% for companies with a turnover up to INR 500 million (USD 7.8 million). The recently introduced Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency) provides easy credit to small-scale business entrepreneurs. A special package has also been introduced for job creation and export promotion in the textile and apparel sectors. It targets the creation of 10 million jobs over three years. This is expected to increase the participation of women, in particular, as they constitute approximately 70% of the work force in this sector. 
 
With respect to Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), several policy reforms are being undertaken including an increase in the FDI limit to 100% with 49% under the automatic route in defence as well as 100% FDI under the government approval route for trading. These reforms have led to an inflow of USD 156 billion over the previous three fiscal years including a record-breaking USD 56 billion in latest fiscal year. Another initiative that has been launched by the government for attracting investments to 25 sectors, including manufacturing, is \0xEBMake in Indiai. These efforts have greatly accelerated Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows and helped the country sustain an average growth of 7.5% during the last three financial years (2014-15 to 2016-17). 
 
Overcoming the Digital Divide and Leveraging ICT 
Several initiatives are being implemented for enabling the digital empowerment of the society. For instance, Aadhaar, now covers more than 90% of the countryis population. Additionally, DBT has transformed service delivery in a majority of government programmes with a cumulative disbursement of INR 1.6 trillion (USD 25 billion) to 329 million beneficiaries. Further, the Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. Initiative aims to provide high-speed broadband connectivity to 2,47,864 villages or clusters thereof in the country. 
Internet penetration is also expanding rapidly. There are currently 432 million internet users in India. Another important initiative is DigiLocker through which access is provided to 1.7 billion digitized documents (driving license, school certificates etc.). 
 
Strengthening Capabilities in Science, Technology & Innovation 
India is among leading countries of the world in the domain of scientific research and among the top five in space exploration. It is ranked 9th and 12th in the world respectively on the number of scientific papers published and patents filed. 
 
In recent years, significant breakthroughs have been achieved in the area of Information Communication Technology applications as well as e-governance. These include Aadhaar, DBT and decision support mechanisms based on Geographic Information Systems. 
 
India is also emerging as a major research and development hub in Information Technology and electronics. India accounted for 40% (USD 13.4 billion) of the global engineering research and development in 2016. A recent initiative of the government is the Atal Innovation Mission, which aims to transform the innovation and entrepreneurship landscape in the country. More than 500 Tinkering Laboratories are being set up in schools across the country. These Labs aim to facilitate the holistic development of students by providing them the space to experiment and put their ideas into practice. Further, the India Innovation Index Framework has been launched for tracking and identifying promising innovations in the country. The President of India recently hosted a landmark event, the Festival of Innovation, for reinforcing the inclusiveness of the innovation ecosystem.  

Note: Over the last five years, there has been a consistent growth in installed electricity generation capacity. The installed capacity in non-fossil-fuel sectors has grown by 51.3% and more than doubled in the renewable energy sector (solar, wind, bio- and small hydro power). 
 
SDG 14: Life Below Water | Conserve and Sustainably Use the Oceans, Seas and Marine Resources for Sustainable Development 
 
India has taken various steps to protect and enhance the coastal and marine ecosystem. The first Maritime Summit was organized in the country in April 2016. More than 4,500 delegates from across 40 countries participated in the Summit. 
 
Mangroves and Coral Reefs  
India has a long history of mangrove forest management. The Sundarbans mangroves, located in the Bay of Bengal, were the first in the world to be put under scientific management. Government of India supports research and development activities with an emphasis on mangrove biodiversity. There has been a net increase of 112 square km in the mangrove cover of the country as compared to the previous assessment. 
 
In fact, more than 15,000 ha. of mangroves has been planted in the state of Gujarat alone through active participation of local communities under the Integrated Coastal Zone Management project. Further, India is a part of the regional initiative \0xEBMangroves for the Futurei, being coordinated by the United Nations Development Programme and the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Four major coral reefs have also been identified in the country for intensive conservation and management. 
 
India has 25 Marine Protected Areas in the peninsular region and 106 in islands, collectively covering approximately 10,000 square km of the countryis geographical areas.  
 
Ensuring Sustainability of Fisheries   
India has the highest population of fishing communities globally.  These communities are spread over 3,600 fishing villages. More than 14.50 million people depend on fisheries for their livelihood. In order to ensure sustainable development of the sector, a number of measures have been taken by the government, with an emphasis on livelihood creation as well as resource conservation. Some of the measures include establishment of a Potential Fishing Zone Advisory programme, modernization and upgradation of fishing centres as well as banning of mechanized fishing in certain areas.  
 
Indiais Prime Minister has emphasized the need for a \0xECBlue Revolution. In alignment with his vision, a central plan, the Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries, has been formulated. A detailed Integrated National Fisheries Action Plan, 2016 has also been formulated. The plan envisages connecting 15 million beneficiaries for livelihood opportunities through various interventions. Further, the government has emphasized maintenance of the ecological integrity of the marine environment, in order to ensure that there are no adverse effects on endangered marine species.  
 
Protection of Coastal Ecosystems 
Various national and sub-national legislations are in place for the management and protection of the coastal and marine environment. India has also ratified numerous international conventions related to the use of oceans and their resources, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.  
An online mechanism for predicting the movement of oil spills, the Online Oil Spill Advisory System, was launched in 2015. In addition, the revised National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan, 2015 reflects the important national regulations as well as the current international norms.  
 
Further, levels of marine pollution are being monitored by the government at various locations along the 

India launched a flagship programme, Sagarmala, for promoting port connectivity, development and industrialization, in a phased manner during 2015 to 2025. Holistic and sustainable development of coastal communities, especially the population engaged in fishing, is one of the key pillars of the programme. Coastal tourism is also being promoted under the programme for enabling access to better livelihood opportunities. 
 
SDG 17: Revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development | Strengthen the 
Means of Implementation and Revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
 
Financing the SDGs in India and Status of Official Development Assistance (ODA) Globally 
While working towards revitalising the global partnership for the achievement of the SDGs, India reaffirms the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. Despite significant efforts for domestic resource mobilisation, India is unlikely to gather sufficient revenues for achieving the SDGs. Therefore, India reiterates that the developed countries have an essential obligation to provide financial assistance to the developing countries, especially for global public goods such as climate change mitigation and control of pandemics, so that they can fully achieve the SDGs. India also highlights the need for international cooperation for curbing illicit financial flows, defining aid unambiguously and establishing robust systems for monitoring commitments made by donor countries. Against this background, India is making all necessary efforts to raise its own revenue resources as described below. 
 
Improving Taxation Capacity and Compliance 
The tax-GDP ratio in India is significantly lower than the average for the BRICS countries. Thus, there is considerable scope for boosting domestic resources by expanding the tax base as well as strengthening the tax administration system.  
 
The Indian government has committed to the implementation of an ambitious tax reform agenda, including the Goods and Services Tax (GST) as well as direct tax reforms to increase domestic resource mobilization, while committing to keeping public debt at sustainable levels in the medium term.  An innovative tax like the Swachh Bharat Cess (Clean India Cess) has also been levied for mobilizing resources for the Clean India Mission. Additionally, implementation of the budget responsibility legislation is ensuring predictable and sustainable budgeting as well as long-term debt sustainability. In Indiais efforts to improve the efficacy of tax collection, a critical constraint is the absence of adequate global cooperation on capping money laundering and poor progress on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters. Global cooperation that alleviates this constraint will boost the ability of India and the entire developing world to secure the means of implementation for achieving the SDGs. 
 
It is estimated that developing countries lose nearly USD 1 trillion every year on account of illicit financial flows (black money generated through money laundering and adverse practices in financial transactions like under or over invoicing). International tax havens and tax evasion make it very difficult for countries to mobilize the resources domestically. 
 
India has on several occasions highlighted the scale of revenue loss in developing countries on account of profit shifting practices of multinationals (transfer pricing). One of the important challenges is that developing countries are often required to adhere to standards that have been defined by the developed world. India with support from G77 and China had proposed stronger international tax rules and advocated for an intergovernmental tax body. However, this endeavour did not fructify. The modest achievement for India (hailed as significant in diplomatic circles) has been to introduce new modalities in the constitution of the UN promoted international tax committee (Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters under the Economic and Social Council of the UN). 
 
Strengthening Sub-National Governments 
The states and local bodies will be at the frontline of operationalizing the SDG strategy in India. The fiscal relationship between the national government and the sub-national governments is undergoing a paradigm shift. The Fourteenth Finance Commission increased the share of tax devolution to states from 32% to 42% of the divisible pool. In addition, special purpose grants to secure universal primary education, health, employment, affordable housing, and urbanization provide a solid collaborative fiduciary basis for securing the SDGs. In addition, the Centre also supplements Local Body finances by providing them with appropriate fiscal space. Targeted and adequately financed initiatives to promote inclusion and gender empowerment and addressing the special needs of vulnerable groups are key to Indiais development strategy.  
 
Enhancing Efficiency of Expenditures 
On the expenditure front, the government has comprehensively restructured the framework of the expenditure budget. This restructuring will enable the government to monitor the results of different public expenditure initiatives in terms of their impact on the SDGs and undertake course corrections when necessary. The introduction of sunset clauses for all public expenditure programmes will allow the government to divest itself from unproductive \0xEClegacy expenditures and deploy the freed resources towards programmes that will contribute to securing the SDGs. A comprehensive public financial management system is now operational that allows the government to track expenditure flows to end objectives in real time, thereby contributing to increased effectiveness in public expenditure management. These significant improvements in efficiency and predictability of public expenditure will play an important role in securing financing for the SDGs. 
 
 
Establishing Strong Partnerships with the Private Sector  
India has had one of the largest Public-Private Partnership (PPP) programmes globally. Given the substantial financing requirement for SDGs, a continued focus on PPP initiatives as well as addressing challenges in their rollout is crucial.  
 
Given the vast financing needs, it is important that the private sector has access to global finance. To this end, the government has embarked on a comprehensive set of reforms to attract FDI, including opening up key sectors like defence and railways to such investment. Increased private investment will be key to securing high growth, employment and improved productive efficiency. Thus, India has framed consistent policies that open up the economy to FDI so as to accelerate financing from this source; India has over the past year witnessed an increase of 36 % in FDI inflows despite a 5 % reduction in global FDI flows. Here too India faces a challenge that requires international action. Subjective assessments of the Indian policy and regulatory environment by global financial institutions and rating agencies raise the costs of private financial flows to India by positing a highly subjective \0xECregulatory risk premium. This particularly affects long-term finance for infrastructure and other investments that are crucial for achieving the SDGs.  It would be helpful to the cause of the Indian and global SDGs achievement, if this impediment to the means of implementation were to be addressed through global action.  
 
Promoting South-South Cooperation 
To achieve the objectives of SDGs in a framework of shared prosperity and destiny, particularly in the region to which it belongs, India has been following the principles of South-South Cooperation in its bilateral and multilateral engagements. This helps to foster the southern narrative on development and sustainability at multilateral forums. South-South Cooperation is particularly beneficial on sharing of best practices, sustainable use of resources available regionally and joint development projects on common challenges.  
 
Reforming the Aid System and Honouring Existing ODA Commitments 
While domestic resource mobilization is becoming increasingly important, high-income nations that are a part of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) also need to honour their commitments of providing 0.7% of GNI as ODA. ODA is especially important in the context of global public goods such as climate change mitigation, ecosystems and biodiversity as well as pandemics. For instance, at the 21st Conference of the Parties of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, developed countries reiterated their commitment to mobilizing additional resources to the tune of USD 100 billion every year by 2020 through the Green Climate Fund for meeting the requirements of developing nations. 
 
On average, DAC members only provide 0.3% of GNI with a handful of countries meeting or exceeding the 0.7% level. Ironically, the highest ODA-to-GNI ratio in 2016 was of a non-DAC member, the United Arab Emirates (1.12%). During 2013, it was estimated that if all DAC members had met the 0.7% target, it would have been possible to mobilize an additional USD 184 billion.  
 
Further, there is a need for setting clear eligibility standards and ensuring greater transparency with respect to ODA. Currently, there is considerable ambiguity about what counts as aid. For instance, contrary to the spirit of the Cancun agreement, a substantial share of ODA is often counted twice -- as climate finance as well as ODA. Moreover, robust systems for monitoring of aid commitments made by donor countries have not been put in place.  
 

Note: Only 6 DAC countries out of the 29 current members met or exceeded the UN target of an ODA/GNI of 0.7 % in 2016. 
 
Technology Facilitation Mechanism (TFM) for SDGs 
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda established a new mechanism for making technologies available to developing countries for implementing the SDGs known as TFM. India, through its submissions, has highlighted that urgent delivery of technology development, deployment, dissemination and transfer to developing countries requires a suitable response. This includes a continued emphasis by all countries on the enhancement of enabling environments, facilitating access to technology and financing that leverages private sector resources.  
 
Data, Monitoring and Accountability 
The Indian Statistical System functions within the overall administrative framework of the country. Central and state ministries are responsible for collecting statistics on a subject depending on whether it is a part of the central, state or concurrent lists of the Constitution. MoSPI has overall responsibility for statistical coordination in the country including defining standards as well as ensuring quality and timeliness of statistics. At the state-level, the Directorate of Economics and Statistics performs a similar function in alignment with the overall standards determined by MoSPI. 
 
Legal Framework for Data Collection  
Primary statistical information is collected under the legal provision of various Acts and Rules. In addition, MoSPI has notified Survey Guidelines in 2011 for conducting all-India Surveys. It is mandatory for government agencies to follow these guidelines while conducting nationwide surveys so that consistency in quality can be ensured. In May 2016, the Government of India notified the \0xEBFundamental Principles of Official Statisticsi adopted by the UN Statistical Commission in 2014. Data collected by a private agency under the \0xEBFundamental Principles of Official Statisticsi and the Survey Guidelines notified by MoSPI may be considered for SDG monitoring purposes, following validation by a government Ministry. MoSPI regularly organizes conferences with data producers and users to provide updates, identify gaps in data and statistical methods and initiate necessary course correction. 
 
 
Monitoring Framework for SDGs 
Efforts are underway at the national-level for finalizing the indicators that will enable monitoring of the progress made on the SDGs. Additionally, there is an emphasis on assessing and improving the availability of data as well as putting in place transparent monitoring systems. India appreciates that tracking the SDGs effectively will require mechanisms to be established for generating a set of data that is broader, more disaggregated and available at shorter intervals of time as compared to the data that is currently utilized for reviewing development efforts. Disaggregated data is vital as it enables the formulation of effective policies for targeting specific disadvantaged groups and geographical areas in the country. 
 
Through a series of technical workshops conducted by NITI Aayog in which MoSPI was an active participant, the draft indicators for SDG monitoring were assessed based on regularity of data generation and availability of disaggregated data. Civil Society Organizations and other stakeholders are also providing significant inputs towards the development of the measurement framework. Moreover, the government plans to strengthen the mechanisms for SDG monitoring and reporting through a dashboard currently under development, with technical support from the UNDP.  
 
A number of goals in the SDGs do not require the government to deliver public services, but instead to develop and enforce the necessary policy and regulatory frameworks. Given the interrelatedness of the goals and targets, the government is also considering setting up a high-level Committee headed by the Chief Statistician of India to oversee the monitoring framework for SDGs at the national-level. 
 
Steps are being taken to strengthen the statistical system in the country through adequate financial and human resource investments. There is also a focus on bridging the gaps and identifying new sources for meeting the growing data requirements. For instance, it has been decided that Labour Force surveys providing employment/unemployment estimates will be conducted on a quarterly basis for urban India and annually for the country as a whole. Additionally, it is proposed to carry out Time Use surveys, which will serve as an important source of data for assessing gender-related economic disparities. Further, several initiatives are being launched for modernizing the data system including e-collection, e-dissemination and use of space technology for household surveys. While national efforts are paramount, global technical support is also important in various areas including developing methodologies for data collection as well as monitoring and evaluation. This is especially relevant in the context of the fact that a number of the indicators for tracking SDGs at the global level are not necessarily readily measurable at the country level. In its VNR last year, Estonia had highlighted that following their initial review of 231 global sustainable development indicators, only 14% were found to be measurable.  
 
WAY FORWARD 
India will continue to pursue the implementation of the SDG agenda through close collaboration between the national and sub-national governments as well as active participation of all other relevant stakeholders. Bi-annual reviews will be conducted with the state governments for identifying good practices as well as challenges and undertaking the appropriate course corrections. 
 
The SDG implementation process has started yielding valuable insights. Documentation and dissemination of such experiences coupled with the extension of technical support for resolving problem areas will be the key functions of a knowledge management system to be coordinated at the national level. 
 
Relevant ministries and stakeholders for each of the SDGs have been already identified. Given the interconnectedness of the SDGs, relevant strategies for enabling collaboration among different actors will be developed as part of the overall implementation process. Additionally, consultations and capacity building activities at the national and regional levels will be continued. Expertise provided by different stakeholders is being leveraged for carrying out various exercises (e.g. planning, modelling, monitoring) related to the implementation of the SDG agenda. In order to promote systematic and regular access to such knowledge, NITI Aayog is promoting a national network of resource institutions called Samavesh. 
 
Apart from integrating the SDGs into its on-going national and sub-national policies and programmes, India will continue to focus on nurturing partnerships at the regional and global levels. It will work towards ensuring a greater flow of finances and technology from developed countries - in alignment with their explicit commitment in the context of the 2030 Agenda - to developing and least developed nations. India believes that with combined and sustained efforts at the national and global levels, it will indeed be possible to eradicate poverty and ensure a prosperous world for all.  
1 Converted at the exchange rate of INR 64 per USD; all subsequent conversions to USD have used this exchange rate. 
