

INTRODUCTION
I. Methodological Approach
   The drafting process leading to the elaboration of the NSDS builds on the shared concept of sustainability as the development model to be achieved as well as on the involvement of all relevant actors. The identified structure of the strategy originates from this vision. The elaboration of the Strategy was based, indeed, on a participatory process that focused on three main and subsequent objectives: 
   A) compilation of a Positioning of Italy (national reference context), i.e. an assessment in terms of Italian 
performances vis-\0x2021-vis the 2030 Agendais 17 SDGS and their 169 targets;
   B) identification of strengths and weaknesses on which to build national objectives/priorities to be pursued; 
   C) elaboration of national strategic choices organized around the 5 areas of the 2030 Agenda - People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership - reflecting the interlinkages across the three dimensions of sustainable development.
   The NSDS is the direct result of such work condensing contents, instances and ideas emerged in the long consultation process.
RNSDSOADMAP- NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
6

II. Multilevel Consultation process
  In line with 2030 Agenda  principles, the consultation process involved  all kinds of  stakeholders, during all stages. All national public research institutes - CNR, ISPRA, ENEA, ISTAT - were involved, with the objective to ensure a scientifically-sound document. In terms of academia, the consultation allowed interactions with 217 organizations, essentially Universities, or other relevant research centres. More than 200 NGOs were contacted to ask for their factual and prospective inputs. Ministries and other public entities, institutionally mandated for the definition and execution of policies, were key to identify the national strategic choices. 
  The final steps in the elaboration of a National Strategy are imagined as strongly related to the National Reform Program (PNR), dealing with social and economic programming in the context of EU policies and processes and containing the bulk of present and future Government actions.  
  In order to give full implementation to the Strategy, also in terms of financial resources and operative tools, every year, the Economic and Finance Document (DEF) will reflect the national targets, taking into account any new European initiatives and strategies, and will outline actions and tools to achieve them.  It is foreseen that Regional and Local Authorities will have to take part in the further implementation of the Strategy according to their specific institutional mandates and competencies. 
7


1 Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Development
2 National Research Centre
3 Italian National Institute for Environmental Protection and Research
4 National Institute of Statistics



III. The structure 	by National Institute of Statistics, will be associated to each national strategic choice and goal. The NSDS has 
of the Strategy	been provided with a set of \0xECsustainability vectors, that 
are to be intended as crosscutting, transversal areas of 
  The NSDS is organized in five core areas: People, action, essential to guiding, managing and monitoring Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership. Each area the integration of sustainability into national policies, consists of a set of national strategic choices articulated plans and projects. 
in strategic national goals. The goals integrate the three The NSDS sets the path for a long-term vision dimensions of sustainable development and are the based on the 2030 Agenda. The Strategy will represent result of a synthesis and abstraction procedure of the the reference framework for Italy also within the EU. most relevant issues emerged in the Ownership of the Strategy is to be consultation process. The chosen The Strategy considered a factor for its success. structure represents a concise way is organized Only a shared effort aimed at to reflect the complexity of the 2030 reducing inequalities, poverty, Agenda n and balance the three in five areas: unemployment, and at protecting environmental, economic and social People, Planet, the environment, nature and the pillars of sustainable development, climate, will enable us to be pioneers focusing with particular attention Prosperity, of a more equitable, cohesive and on the environmental dimension sustainable model. whose integration is traditionally Peace,  The chapters below describe weak. Furthermore, this Partnership the strategic areas, priorities and arrangement allows to synthesized national goals. Each goal has a the information yielded from corresponding set of 2030 Agenda the consultation, without scattering the significant targets. For each of them, the degree of consistency with contribution provided by the institutional players, who the 2030 Agenda (high, medium, low) is highlighted know best about the different matters of intervention. with different grey shading, while key implementation In the future, SDGs indicators, as recently published tools are linked.  
8

IV. Synthetic table of Areas, Choices and National Strategic Goals
 
Ensure ecosystems restoration and defragmentation, strengthen ecological urban-rural connections 
	9	 	10


 
	11	12
Improve access to health services and contribute to the extension of universal health coverage 
Strengthen basic healthcare systems and staff training 
Limit risk factors and the impact of health emergencies: improve early warning and prevention mechanisms 
	HEALTH 	Be committed to fight against pandemics, particularly AIDS, and to promote vaccination campaigns (Global 
Fund, GAVI) 
	Support scientific research, promote health and prevention awareness 	 
Carry on a forceful action to relaunch public health functions and to support health reforms 
Ensure high quality basic education without gender discrimination 
                   Promote training and improve professional skills of teachers, school staff and development workers EDUCATION 	Provide inclusive education  for the most disadvantaged, marginalized and discriminated social groups. 
Improve young people and minorsi living conditions, combating: trafficking of young  Promote social and employment integration of young people and unemployed adults by offering  people, women, children and adolescents; work exploitation of children; new forms of professional training 
slavery; juvenile crime; disabled minors; minorsi sexual exploitation; all forms of abuses, 

among which sexual mutilations; sexual violence; sexual diseases (HIV AIDS); discriminations on the citizenship rights 
Valorise Universities contribution:  
- Define training paths offering new professional skills, addressed to students from partner countries;  
Encourage youth and children participation to make them \0xECactors of change, promote social integration, 	 	 	--  Contribute to the development and strengthening of institutional capacities;Train future professionals and leaders in partner Countries; 	 	 inclusive education and training 
Promote the role of migrants as actors for development 	- Provide research tools in order to produce innovation for development and to deliver assessment methods and models in line with good international practices 
Promote migrantsi and diasporasi professional and entrepreneurial skills, in close connection with the 
	Countries of origin 	Ensure governance and access to land, water, natural and productive resources by farmersi families and 

	Promote cooperation models between Europe and Africa to prevent and manage migrantsi flows by 	small-scale producers 
strengthening institutional capacity, creating employment and economic opportunities, supporting micro- Support and develop traditional adaptation techniques to biotic and abiotic factors entrepreneurship and infrastructure investments 
                                                                                                             Strengthen the capacity to cope with natural disasters by also promoting "green infrastructure" Encouraging the adoption of measures to promote the competitiveness of products respecting sustainable 	SUSTAINABLE 	Promote agricultural, environmental and social policies supporting family farming and craft fishery diet principles  
MIGRATION AGRICULTURE 	Encouraging the adoption of measures to promote the competitiveness of products respecting sustainable 
AND 	Provide qualified technical assistance, training and institutional capacity building in order to strengthen the 	AND FOOD 	diet principles  
DEVELOPMENT 	commitment to the development of key production chains recalling the peculiar Italian development model 	SECURITY 	Provide qualified technical assistance, training and institutional capacity building in order to strengthen the 
- SMEs and local districts -, increasing productivity and production, improving quality, enhancing product 
typicality, spreading good farming practices, preserving production areas, promoting fair trade, technology 	 	commitment to the development of key production chains recalling the peculiar Italian development model transfer, agroindustry development and export 	- SMEs and local districts -, increasing productivity and production, improving quality, enhancing product 
Strengthen education and training, institutional capacity, transfer of know-how, technology and innovation 	typicality, spreading good farming practices, preserving production areas, promoting fair trade, technology 	 and addressing heritage protection, even in post-conflict crisis and natural disasters 	transfer, agroindustry development and export 

Launch and set up pilot initiatives oriented towards a greater understanding of landscape and natural 	 heritage, targeted to different groups among the general public, to be properly monitored and assessed in time 

 
	13	14

PARTNERSHIP  

V. National indicators for the SDGs and the 
PARTNERSHIP  	international framework 
	Engage the private national sector, from cooperatives to agro-business, by promoting partnerships 	of the United Nations
Promote actions in the fields of reforestation, sustainable urban regeneration, preservation of protected terrestrial and marine areas, wetlands and river basins, sustainable fisheries management, land and soil recovery, particularly by revitalising family farming 
	Contribute to increase resilience and manage new environmental risks in most vulnerable regions 	The United Nations Statistical Commission has called 
ENVIRONMENT, 	Promote technology transfers - also involving profit actors - in areas such as energy, transport, industry and 	upon all National Statistical Institutions, including 
CLIMATE 	urban management. 
National Institute of Statistics, to play an active role, in 
CHANGE AND 	Promote energy for development: appropriate and sustainable technologies optimized for local contexts 
ENERGY FOR 	particularly in rural areas; new models for income generating energy activities; support to the development 	national co-ordination for the elaboration of appropriate 
DEVELOPMENT of enabling policies and regulatory mechanisms that lead to energy governance modernization based on national indicators to measure sustainable development local needs; development of technical and managerial skills of locals, through multi-level training. and monitor progress. The 17 SDGs that are part of the 2030 Agenda refer to different areas of social, economic and environmental development. They need to be considered as integrated, taking into account that they  also interrelate with policies, including international 
Contribute to economic diversification - particularly in rural, mountain and inner areas - to income 
generation and employment, to sustainable tourism promotion, to urban development and environmental 	co-operation, and with political and institutional protection, to cultural tourism industry support, to valorisation of local handicraft and traditional crafts 	environments.
PRESERVATION 	recovery 	It is important to highlight that numerous references 
OF CULTURAL 	Strengthen education and training, institutional capacity, transfer of know-how, technology and innovation 	have been made to people's well-being and fair share of 
AND NATURAL 	and addressing heritage protection, even in post-conflict crisis and natural disasters 	the benefits of development.
HERITAGE 
Launch and set up pilot initiatives oriented towards a greater understanding of landscape and natural 
heritage, targeted to different groups among the general public, to be properly monitored and assessed in 	 	The 17 SDGs time 
1. No Poverty. End poverty in all its forms, everywhere
Promote innovative financial instruments to stimulate the \0xECleverage effect with private funds and 
2. Zero Hunger. End hunger, achieve food security 
THE PRIVATE 	improving access to credit by SMEs in partner Countries; promote structured dialogue with the private 
SECTOR 	sector and the Civil Society; support the transfer of know-how in the areas of excellence of the Italian 	and improved nutrition and promote sustainable economy 	agriculture
                   Encourage innovative forms of collaboration between private profit and non-profit sector, with particular 3. Good health and well-being. Ensure healthy lives reference to the Civil Society Organizations in partner Countries, in order to support local entrepreneurship, and promote well-being for all, at all ages  with the aim of contributing to the fight against poverty through creating jobs and inclusive economic 
	growth 	4. Quality education. Ensure inclusive and equitable 
	 	quality education and promote lifelong learning 
 	opportunities for all
  5. Gender equality. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
	15	16
  6. Clear water and sanitation. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
  7. Affordable and clean energy. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
  8. Decent work and economic growth. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all
  9. Industry innovation and infrastructure. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation
  10. Reduce inequalities. Reduce inequality within and among countries
  11. Sustainable cities and communities. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
  12. Responsible consumption and production. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
  13. Climate action. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
  14. Life below water. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
  15. Life on land. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, fight desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and stop biodiversity loss
  16. Peace, justice and strong institutions. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
  17. Partnership for the goals. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development
17
	The Classification of the 	The HLG has worked on the 
2030 Agenda indicators in A key role implementation of a strategic the international context for the document from  which the UN Regional Commissions can develop 
   In order to identify a shared statistical information framework as implementation tailored Roadmaps. The document an international tool to monitor and is the Cape Town Global Action evaluate progress towards the 17 of the 2030 Plan for Sustainable Development 
SDGs, the United Nations Statistical Agenda relies Data, presented at the UN Word Data Forum (January 2017) in 
Commission has established the 
Inter Agency Expert Group on on the UN High- South Africa. SDGs (IAEG-SDGs) which, in At a European level, the 2030 level Group
March 2016, at the 47th session 	Agenda has stimulated the launch 
of the UN Statistical Commission, 
proposed a first list of more than 200 indicators. This list was subsequently updated in March 2017. The set of currently revised indicators includes 244 indicators: 232 are used to monitor more than one goal. IAEG-SDGs is currently considering another 37 additional indicators.
   The indicators were classified according to three levels (Tier I, II, III). Tier I indicators included all those that presented a methodology and a standard regularly produced by the countries (Currently 84 indicators, 34%); Tier II indicators included those that, despite having a consolidated methodology and standards, were not regularly produced (64 indicators, 26%); Tier III indicators include those for which shared methodology and standards are not available (86 indicators, 35%). Some indicators (5%) belong to multiple levels due to the heterogeneity of their components or still do not have indication of the tier level.
   An important part of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda relies on the High-level Group for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity Building for Statistics for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (HLGPCCB), which was entrusted with the task of ensuring strategic leadership in the monitoring and statistical reporting during the process of achieving the goals.
                 of various initiatives. The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) has set up a Steering Group within the Conference of European Statisticians (CES), which is working on a roadmap for the development of SDG statistics at a European level. The road map, focusing on the coordination role of the national statistical institutes, aims at defining a strategy for the implementation of an SDG monitoring system and will guide the members of the CES towards achieving the objectives of the Declaration adopted in June 2015. The Road Map will be discussed in the Plenary Session of the Conference of European Statisticians scheduled for June 2017.
On 22 November 2016, the European Commission adopted three Communications outlining the path to the 2030 Agenda implementation. The first Communication clarifies how the Commission's priorities for action can and should contribute to the achievement of sustainable development objectives and how the Commission intends to further reinforce the implementation of the sustainable development principle in its political action. The other two communications relate to the Commission's co-operation policies revised in view of the objectives of sustainable development. Eurostat is supporting the process to develop and implement the 
global framework, by contributing to the definition of the set of indicators. It has been carried out an analysis of the information gaps associated with SDGs while assessing existing statistical information. The indicators were assessed based on relevance for the European context and for official statistics. From this survey work, Eurostat published a first analysis in November 2016 on the European Unionis situation in relation to the SDGs, 
18
thus analysing 51 indicators. Furthermore, Eurostat is developing a set of indicators aimed at monitoring the progress of SDGs at a European level, considering European policies, such as Europe 2020, the 10 priorities expressed by the Commission, the issues related to the circular economy. This set of indicators is open to subsequent changes and will be used to deliver a report in November 2017. 

19
VI. Goals of the proposition of the National Strategy for Sustainable Development
The institutional context and the Governmentis programmatic objectives presented in April 2017
   In the aftermath of the crisis, the hardest challenge for the Government is to produce noticeable results for citizens in terms of both individual and collective wellbeing, and to increase the number of those who benefit from economic recovery, while effectively supporting families and businesses left behind. Fighting inequalities is increasingly an inevitable goal for Governments, as a non-inclusive growth limits social mobility, damages growth, and creates political instability. To support this challenge it is essential to create employment, economic and social development. In this path, the sustainability of public finances plays a key role, especially in the countries with high public debt. In this context, the 2017 Budget law was also set up taking into account the NSDS and the measures were taken considering the goals of sustainable development (please visit http:// www.governo.it/sites/governo.it/files/ LeggeBilancio_ Agenda2030_20161111.pdf).
   One of the 2017 Budget lawis premises is an efficient welfare and taxation system, aimed at improving income distribution and restrict tax evasion. In this context, it is crucial to reduce the cost of labour and n simultaneously - to increase workers' disposable income. This measure needs to be accompanied by a more targeted use of taxation by facilitating the categories who were most penalized by the crisis. Finally, improving the equity of taxation can enable the gathering of the necessary resources to reduce the tax burden on the production factors. To 
pursue these goals, the Government is committed to strengthen the initiatives launched during the last years and to enhance their implementation, to promote a \0xECcooperative approach, based on transparency, mutual trust and simplification between Public Administration and citizens. Much has been done through the Jobs Act to protect work, a key element in a process of fair growth and social promotion: the Government's commitment is now aimed at strengthening active policies of employment. The selected approach also confers the employee an active role in re-entering the market or in searching for employment, in an innovative perspective for the labour market in Italy. It will be up to the Government to evaluate the first field experiences - including the job re-integration voucher - in order to strengthen and improve them. Along with active policies, it will also be necessary to develop skills to reduce the mismatch within the labour market and promote the culture of the Industry 4.0 national plan at a pilot stage (e.g. through the establishment of specific university paths, the activation of research fellowships on the topic and dedicated Technical Colleges).  
   It is essential to extend the field of application of these measures with targeted intervention on lower-income families as well as on the population still excluded from the labour market or on which caregiving and family care burdens prevent the reconciliation of work and life. The Government will continue to implement measures in support of family welfare and welfare in general and in the introduction of measures that benefit the work of second income generators.
   Moreover, job interventions are also at the basis of the policies that intend to stimulate growth and productivity. The enhancement of the corporate collective bargaining and the anticipation of an easier tax regime for an everwidening basket of services are the first steps towards more targeted interventions in the field of corporate 
welfare. At the same time, it is also necessary to look at the growth of the production system to increase employment, stimulate research and innovation, with a focus on sustainable patterns of production. To achieve these goals, the barriers to growth, both bureaucratic and structural, must be eliminated. Much progress has been made in this direction and in the coming months we will continue to implement the reform measures already underway, with reference to time reduction of civil justice cases.
  The Public Administration is also progressively improving its efficiency, whereas, for several years it has negatively affected the proper functioning of different sectors and the overall productivity. The interventions in this area have been extensive and have covered heterogeneous areas, but with a strong added value for the country. The completion and effective implementation of Public Administration reform is a key objective of the Government, since a better business environment, greater investments and productivity growth, depended on it.
  The country still has a low level of investment. The measures contained in Industry Plan 4.0 will be the key to the country's competitive revival over the next few years. In addition to supporting the investments, an enormous effort to secure the territory will also be 
20
confirmed, carrying on 'Casa Italia' initiative, launched by the Government in 2016. Significant resources have been devoted to the prevention, maintenance and restructuring of infrastructures, homes and urban environments that have suffered damages from the earthquake or are still under seismic or landslide risk. 
  This is an important boost for one of the Country's most active sectors, which has greatly suffered from the economic crisis and will be accompanied by a major streamlining effort to maximize the use of available funds. The link between the state of ecosystems, social welfare and economic prospects is essential for territorial development and infrastructure policies. 
  In this sense, the ability to 'measure natural capital' is decisive to jumpstart Italy towards a lasting development through public policies that can capture economic growth by focusing on environmental quality. 
  This path will have to provide sustainable and efficient services, infrastructures and technologies across the whole national territory and reduce the impacts of climate emissions on human health and the environment.
  A key role will also be played by the new National Energy Strategy, which will provide the horizon of the energy sector as the facilitator of the country's sustainable growth.
PEOPLE	I. Fight poverty and social exclusion, eliminating territorial gaps
  The area \0xECPeople focuses on the promotion of system to ensure access to fundamental rights the social dimension in order to ensure a dignified (work, public services, housing, health). At the life for the entire population, so that everyone same time, it is essential to share policies aimed at is enabled to fulfil his or her potential within a boosting growth and providing opportunities for healthy environment. individuals. 
  This objective can be pursued through a This implies making use of the full range of coherent and effective policy that focuses not only available tools, including budget policies and on income, but extends to other key dimensions structural reforms. In addition, the expansion of of well-being, targeting selected socio-economic the welfare state implies the promotion of equality groups such as low-income families, young people conditions with specific impacts for social policies and women. (income protection, integration measures, and 
  The economic crisis affecting the current decade labour, education, health and housing policies), opened the path to the growing phenomenon and requires a local welfare system involving of inequality, with a relevant impact on social civil society. Measures along these lines include cohesion. The great income inequality poses a the Support for Active Inclusion (SIA), which threat to long-term growth and sustainability. introduces a financial benefit for disadvantaged The inequality of opportunities slows down social families, and the Income for Inclusion (REI), mobility, with obvious repercussions on the quality a newly adopted law that provides a structural of life. In this context, it is the task of the welfare instrument to combat poverty.
Strategic choices
I. Fight poverty and social exclusion, eliminating territorial gaps
II. Guarantee the conditions for the development of human potential
III. Promote health and welfare
21
   In the last few years, simoultaneously with the economic crisis, the individual absolute poverty rate in Italy has risen from 3.6% in 2008 to 7.3% in 2013 and 7.6% in 2015. Over the same period, the relative individual poverty rate has increased from 11.1% to 13.7%. According to Eurostat, people at risk of poverty or social exclusion in Italy have grown from 15 million in 2008 to 17.4 million in 2015. The highest percentage of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion was reached in 2012: 29.9%. The percentage declined in the following years and reached 28.7% in 2015.
   In the framework of this strategic goal, the identified national objectives aim at reducing all the facets of poverty: economic poverty, food and material deprivation, inadequate housing, focusing on families and individuals living in extreme conditions.
key instruments 
   The government has implemented a strategy to combat poverty and social exclusion, which is an important step towards the introduction of a universal measure to economically support the families living in poverty. The main tool to achieve the objective will be the Income for Inclusion (REI), which prioritizes families with children in absolute poverty. It will only be assigned when the head of the family is engaged in a personalized social and work inclusion project. Other measures will be introduced and will have to intervene on the reorganization of welfare benefits and the reinforcement of the coordination of social service interventions. The following policies will also contribute towards the achievement: National Plan for food waste prevention; \0xECAfter us Fund; \0xECNot Self-sufficiency Fund; \0xECSuburban regeneration Plan; European Aids to the most deprived people Fund (FEAD); ASDI (unemployment benefit for over 55is and unemployed people with minors); Partnership Agreement on Cohesion Policy 2014-2020 (PON Inclusione, PON METRO, POR FESR, POR FSE, PSR, FSC); PO FEAD.
National Strategic Goals 

I.1. Reduce the intensity of poverty
I.2 Combat food and material deprivation
22
I.3 Reduce inadequate housing
I.1. Reduce the intensity of poverty
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
 	1.1 By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people living on less than $1.25 a day
 	1.2 By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions  	1.b Create sound policy frameworks at the national, regional and international levels, based on pro-poor and gender-sensitive development strategies, to support accelerated investment in poverty eradication actions
    	5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate
 	10.1 By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40 per cent of the population at a rate higher than the national average
 	10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of 
all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
I.2. Combat food and material deprivation
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
 	1.a Ensure significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources, including through enhanced development cooperation, in order to provide adequate and predictable means for developing countries, in particular least developed countries, to implement programmes and policies to end poverty in all its dimensions
       2.1 By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
23	24
    6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations

I.3. Reduce inadequate housing
 2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	1.4 By 2030, ensure that all men and women, in particular the poor and the vulnerable, have equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic services, ownership and control over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new technology and financial services, including microfinance
\0xEF 5.a Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws
\0xEF 6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all
\0xEF 6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
\0xEF 7.1 By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services
 	11.1 By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums
25
   The moderate recovery of employment levels continued in 2015: from 55.5% in 2013 (IV quarter) to 57.4 % in 2016 (IV quarter). The 2016 value is however lower than 2008, the year of the economic crisis, when this indicator reached 58.8 %. The positive result of the last year involved both women (from 47.4 % to 48.2 %) and men (from 66 % to 66.7 %). For both, the growth of the indicator is widespread across the national territory, particularly in the South (from 19.2% to 20.2 %). In this part of the country, the unemployment rate now stands at 20.1 %, about 13 % above the value reached by the northern regions. Moreover, the female condition is particularly critical, with an employment rate of 31.7 %. On the contrary, in the Northern regions, the incidence of male employment on the population has exceeded 75 %. 
   The labour market situation has an impact on families, on young people, among which there is a high number of NEETs (young people who do not work and 
do not study) and people at risk of social deviance. In Italy, the percentage of young people between the ages of 18 and 24 who abandoned school early, without obtaining secondary qualifications or vocational training certificates, dropped from 19.2 % in 2009 to 14.7 percent in 2015. However, there are strong disparities between male and female drop-out rates. More specifically, setting the Italian population aged 18-24 equal to 100, the incidence of school dropouts is 12.8 % for Italian citizens, reaching 34.1 % for the foreign population. The school drop-out phenomenon affects the South more heavily, with 24.3 % in Sicily and 22.9 % in Sardinia. 
   Hence the national objectives identified to guarantee the development of human potential aim at reducing social and wealth distribution inequalities, also at a local level, to promote inclusive labour and education policies, eradicating labour exploitation and guaranteeing universal access to basic services.
II. Guarantee the conditions for the development of human potential
National Strategic Goals  

II.1 Reduce unemployment for the weakest segments of the population
II.2 Ensure the effectiveness of the social protection and security system
II.3 Reduce the school drop-out rate and enhance the education system
II.4 Fight deviance through prevention and social integration of vulnerable individuals
26
key instruments 
II.1 Ensure the effectiveness of the social protection and security system
 2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
    	4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship
    	4.6 By 2030, ensure that all youth and a substantial proportion of adults, both men and women, achieve literacy and numeracy
    	5.5 Ensure womenis full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life
    	5.a Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws
    	5.b Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications technology, to promote the empowerment of women
    	5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels
       8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
28
The Italian Government implemented a coherent strategy to reduce the phenomenon of school disadvantages as well as to increase well-being, and to guarantee good living conditions and a good coexistence amongst students. In addition, this strategy focuses on the prevention of juvenile distress, with reference to gender equality, bullying and cyberbullying and overcoming drug and alcohol addictions. Furthermore, the strategy is aimed at ensuring the effective exploitation of the right to education throughout the national territory. For this reason, a Plan for a more open, inclusive and innovative school was introduced through 10 actions, 
which are part of the SDGs set by the 2030 Agenda. The key tools identified for the implementation of this choice are the following: Partnership agreement 2014-2020 (PON Imprese e Competitivit\0x2021, PON Inclusione, PON SPAO, PON Cultura, PON METRO, PON Legalit\0x2021, PON Istruzione, POR FESR, POR FSE, PON Pesca, FSC); PN FAMI; National Inclusion Strategy for Rom, Sinti and Caminanti population, National Plan for digital school, National Plan to fight poverty and social exclusion; National Plan for teacher training; Carta cultura giovani, Anti-cyberbullying Plan; Garanzia Giovani, Self-employment support).

27
II.2 Ensure the effectiveness of the social protection 	II.3 Reduce the school drop-out rate and enhance 
	and security system	the education system
	2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency	2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    1.3 Implement nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures  4.1 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary for all, including floors, and by 2030 achieve substantial coverage of the poor and the and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes
	vulnerable 	4.2 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood 
    	3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including development, care and pre-primary education so that they are ready for primary education narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol 	4.5 By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all 
    	4.2 By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, development, care and pre-primary education so that they are ready for primary educationindigenous peoples and children in vulnerable situations
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere 	4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote 
    	5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development public services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and nonresponsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriateviolence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of cultureis contribution to  	16.6 Develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levelssustainable development
 	4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
    	8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training
    	8.7 Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms
 	13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning
	29	30

II.4 Fight deviance through prevention and social integration of vulnerable individuals
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol
    	10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
31
III. Promote health and welfare
   The reform of Title V of the Italian Constitution has introduced a decentralized health care system, to better respond to the needs of the different regions. However, territorial gaps still persist and a growing section of the low-income population is forced to give up medical care. At the same time, special attention should be given to both the rise in poverty rates and emerging phenomena such as the intensification of migratory flows. Furthermore, the need to reduce population exposure to environmental, seismic and anthropic risk factors, promoting a healthy lifestyle and security, is becoming increasingly urgent. Finally, it is also important to promote a closer contact with nature, to improve the populationis health. This Strategy considers the country's position in relation to all these elements.
key instruments 
The Government has updated the Essential Assistance Levels - LEA (further yearly updates are planned) by broadening and largely improving the offer of both free public services and services where a ticket must be paid. One hundred and ten new rare illnesses are included 
with ticket exemptions and a list of chronic diseases is reviewed. The National Vaccine Prevention Plan (PNPV), on the other hand, aims at reducing or eliminating the consequences of vaccine-preventable infectious diseases through the identification of effective and homogenous strategies across the national territory. The National Chronicity Plan (PNC) has become operational to harmonize long-term health and social care activities with residential and territorial services at national level. These measures are part of a healthcare vision that is acknowledged not only as assistance by the Government, but above all as prevention. Moreover, other strategic plans are: Partnership agreement 2014-2020 (PON Governance, PON Legalit\0x2021, PON METRO, PON 
Infrastrutture e Reti, POR FESR, POR FSE, PSR, FSC); National Health Plan; National Plan for the Prevention; Health pact; National Plan for epidemic emergencies, National Vaccination plan; National Road safety plan; National program of care services for children and the elderly who are not self-sufficient; National Action Plan for the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection Products; Digital health pact; National Chronicity Plan; National Action Plan for Mental Health; Definition and upgrading of LEAs; Government programme \0xECGuardare alla salute n rendere facili le scelte salutari; Guidelines to defend and promote the health into Neighbouring environment.
National Strategic Goals 

III.1 Reduce population exposure to anthropogenic and environmental risks 
III.2 Promote healthy lifestyles and strengthen preventive healthcare systems
III.3 Gauarantee access to effective healthcare services and reduce territorial gaps
32
III.1 Reduce population exposure to anthropogenic and environmental risks 
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	1.5 By 2030, build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters
    	2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality
 	3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination
 	6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally
\0xEF 11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
\0xEF 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
 	13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries
III.2 Promote healthy lifestyles and strengthen preventive healthcare systems
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons
 	3.3 By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases
 3.4 By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being
 3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol
	 	3.6 By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents
 3.7 By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes
 3.a Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate
 5.6 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences
 11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons

	33	34
III.3 Guarantee access to effective healthcare services and reduce territorial gaps
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	3.1 By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births
    	3.2 By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under 5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births
    	3.8 Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all
    	3.c Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States
    	5.3 Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation
	35	36
	PLANET	I. Halt the loss of biodiversity

  The "Planet" area intends to approach many challenges. Primarily, it is necessary to ensure the sustainable management of both land and maritime natural resources, to protect and strengthen the ecosystem services they provide, for present and future generations. Furthermore, it is necessary to properly assess the value of the Natural Capital within economic processes; promote the sustainability of cities and invert the depopulation trend in marginal areas; enhance the sustainability and resilience of communities and territories; protect landscapes as well as natural cultural heritage. Italy will have to increase effort to preserve half of the species and more than half of the habitats of European interest, as well as all 
Strategic choices  
I. Halt the loss of biodiversity
endangered species. It also must tackle invasive alien species, soil degradation and desertification and the negative impacts of human activities on water resources and the atmosphere. 
  To make this challenge possible, an integrated and inclusive approach geared towards the sustainability of decision-making, planning and implementation processes must be adopted. Such an approach is instrumental for building sustainable and efficient cities, more resilient and safe communities and more interconnected territories enhancing green infrastructures. It would reduce natural and anthropic risk levels and allow the preservation of identity features and landscapes through the appropriate management of territories and natural resources.
  In Italy, the percentage of protected land and maritime areas is relatively high and the forest land is gradually and constantly growing. Despite this, about half of the species and habitats of European interest show a poor conservation status. Furthermore, the number of identified invasive alien species is constantly increasing. 
  The national objectives for the area \0xECHalting biodiversity loss concern both specific preservation, management and conservation actions, and the integration of these objectives into sectoral policies and programmes (including agriculture, industry and tourism).
key instruments 
It is crucial to adequately consider the link between the health of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, social well-being and economic perspectives within territorial development and infrastructure policies. In this sense, the 
National Strategic Goals 

ability to account Natural Capital is decisive to promote long-lasting growth by focusing on environmental quality. This objective is at the basis of the first report on the State of Natural Capital, coordinated by a Natural Capital Committee, composed by representatives of institutions and research experts. In 2010, Italy adopted a National Strategy for Biodiversity, building on a participatory and shared process involving institutional, social and economic actors concerned with Natural Capital accountability and mainstreaming. The Strategy and its mid-term review are to be considered as the main instrument for integrating conservation and sustainable use of natural resources into national sector policies in line with the objectives set out by the European Biodiversity Strategy. The Objective will also be to adopt the following actions: National Strategy for the Marine Environment, Strategic Plan for research and innovation in the agricultural-food and Forestry sector, National Plan on biodiversity of agricultural interest; National Strategic plan for biological sector, Reporting on the 
State of Natural Capital, Partnership Agreement 20142020 (POR FESR, PSRN, PON Pesca); Rural development Programmes.

II. Ensure the sustainable management of natural resources 
III. Create resilient communities and territories, protect landscapes and cultural heritage
2030 Agenda: related goals

37
I.1 Safeguard and improve the conservation of species and habitats in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
I.2 Halt the spreading of invasive alien species
I.3 Increase land and maritime protected areas and ensure their effective managementI.4 Protect and restore genetic resources and natural ecosystems linked to farming, forestry and aquaculture
I.5 Mainstream natural capital accounting in planning, programming and national accounting
38
I.1 Safeguard and improve the conservation of species and habitats in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans
    	15.5 Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species
    	15.7 Take urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and fauna and address both demand and supply of illegal wildlife products
I.2 Halt the spreading of invasive alien species
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	15.8 By 2020, introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce the impact of invasive alien species on land and water ecosystems and control or eradicate the priority species
I.3 Increase land and maritime protected areas and ensure their effective management
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes
    	14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information
    	15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements
    	15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts
    	15.a Mobilize and significantly increase financial resources from all sources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and ecosystems
39	40
    	15.b Mobilize significant resources from all sources and at all levels to finance sustainable forest management and provide adequate incentives to developing countries to advance such management, including for conservation and reforestation
I.4 Protect and restore genetic resources and natural ecosystems linked to farming, forestry and aquaculture
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, 
knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
    	2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality
\0xEF 2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed
\0xEF 15.6 Promote fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and promote appropriate access to such resources, as internationally agreed
I.5 Mainstream natural capital accounting in planning, programming and national accounting
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources
41	42
    	15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts

II. Ensure the sustainable management of natural resources
	To ensure the sustainable use of natural resources 	key instruments 
n i.e. inland and marine waters, soil, air and The government has prioritized the upgrading and forests n the resource conservation criticalities and modernization of Italyis water infrastructure system within its political agenda.
management policies must be directly addressed. The ultimate goal is to improve efficiency and bridge the The transformative effort should be directed towards gap with European standards, providing better services to the following priorities: maintaining the vitality citizens and cities, together with a healthier environment.
of seas, preventing impacts on the marine and 	Key Tools also include: Partnership Agreement 2014-
2020 (POR FESR, PSR, PSRN; PON Pesca; FSC); National 
coastal environment, halting soil consumption and Adaptation to Climate Change Strategy, National Action desertification, ensuring sustainable management Program for the Fight against Desertification, National and fighting abandonment and degradation of forests. Action Plan for the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection 
	It is also necessary to minimize water, soil and air 	Products, National experimental scheme for sustainable 
daily mobility to school and work; Bio-economy Strategy; 
pollution, maximize water efficiency, reduce water 	Framework program for the forestry sector.
stress and ensure integrated water management at all levels.
National Strategic Goals   
II.1 Provide biologically diverse and dynamic seas and prevent impacts on maritime and coastal environment
II.2 Halt soil consumption and combat desertification
II.3 Minimize pollutant loads in soils, water bodies and aquifers, taking into 
consideration the good ecological status of natural systems II.4 Implement integrated water resource management at all levels
II.5 Maximize water efficiency and adjust withdrawals to water scarcity
II.6 Minimize emissions and reduce air pollutants concentration
II.7 Ensure sustainable forest management and combat forest abandonment and degradation
43
II.1 Provide biologically diverse and dynamic seas and prevent impacts on maritime and coastal environment
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
    	14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans
    	14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels
    	14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics
II.2 Halt soil consumption and combat desertification
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.3 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries
    	15.3 By 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradationneutral world
44
II.3 Minimize pollutant loads in soils, water bodies and aquifers, taking into consideration the good ecological status of natural systems
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally
    	12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment
 	15.3 By 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradationneutral world
II.4 Implement integrated water resource management at all levels
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate
II.5 Maximize water efficiency and adjust withdrawals to water scarcity
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all
    	6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
II.6 Minimize emissions and reduce air pollutants concentration
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
45	46
    	13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning
II.7 Ensure sustainable forest management and combat forest abandonment and degradation
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	15.2 By 2020, promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and substantially increase afforestation and reforestation globally
    	15.4 By 2030, ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in order to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable development
III. Create resilient communities and territories, protect landscapes and cultural
   Urban and territorial development must be capable of stimulating the full expression of the economic, social and cultural potential of cities, rebalancing the relationships between urban cores and their growing \0xECbelt territories, while reversing actual trends of population spreading outside the inner city.
   It is necessary to re-build and regenerate sustainable and efficient urban areas and resilient communities and territories, which have to be capable of adequately preventing and addressing natural and man-driven hazards, and to become 
accessible as well as physically, ecologically and digitally connected.  There is a demanding call upon the transformation of territorial development, planning and design practices. A cultural and civil shift is needed, in order to increase the quality of infrastructures, buildings and open spaces, by ensuring high environmental, energy and seismic performances.
   To this aim, planning as well as the whole project cycle n from design to implementation and maintenance n  are expected to fully combine all dimensions of sustainability.
National Strategic Goals 

III.1 Prevent anthropogenic and environmental risk and strengthen urban and territorial resilience
III.2 Guarantee high environmental performances of buildings, infrastructures and open spaces
III.3 Boost urban regeneration, ensure sustainable urban accessibility and mobility III.4 Ensure ecosystems restoration and defragmentation, strengthen ecological urban-rural connections
III.5 Ensure the development of potential and the sustainable management of territories, landscapes and cultural heritage 

	47	48
key instruments 
III.1 Prevent anthropogenic and environmental risk and strengthen urban and territorial resilience
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
 	11.b By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015n2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels
 	13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries
 	13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning
III.2 Guarantee high environmental performances of buildings, infrastructures and open spaces
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally
    	6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
    	9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human wellbeing, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all
    	11.1 By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums
    	11. 7  By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
50

Reducing and managing the risk of environmental disasters is not only a cost but a key investment to resettle the country.
The Italian Government activated the project "Casa Italia" in order to look after and enhance the housing assets. To this aim, a \0xECmission structure was included in the national budget. The project aims to strengthen the country's prevention system, ensuring the integration and consistency of the various existing measures aimed to protect buildings and infrastructures as well as to counter landslide and seismic risk. The mission structure defines a general safety programme for the country; it ensures constant monitoring of the safety and quality of life;  it defines guiding principles to set measures to detect and reduce risks; it identifies criteria to determine the state of the buildings; it promotes a more efficient and effective use of available resources.
The government has established a multi-year fund of 47.5 billion for prevention and infrastructure, which will be mainly used in the areas of landslide disaster, seismic risk reduction and public education and awareness, specifically targeted in schools. These resources are complemented by funds directly addressing landslide risk, namely 7.6 billion according to the new 2015-2023 programming and a further 2.2 billion under the previous programmes. Finally, the government has allocated 7 billion tailored to territories affected by recent earthquakes in Central Italy. They are being spent for re-building and renovation of public and private buildings as well as for industry resettlement. On the prevention side, the government has promoted, throughout the country, measures to encourage restructuring by private individuals (from real estate to condominiums), with tax deductions up to 85% of the expense for those who increase the seismic safety. A large portion of the national territory (sixty percent) has gradually overcome a marginalization process that has resulted in a demographic decline, declining employment, and inadequate soil protection. These are small centers, or areas that are far from centers offering essential education, health and mobility services, which are very diverse amongst themselves and have a strong attraction potential. Commitment to these territories is incorporated into the National Strategy for Inner Areas, which has the dual aim of adjusting the quantity and quality of education, health, mobility and promoting development projects, also targeting local production chains. 
Further main means are: Partnership Agreement 20142020 (PON Legality, PON METRO, PON Enterprises and Competitiveness, PON Infrastructures and Networks; POR FESR, PSR, FSC); National Urban Agenda; National Strategy for Inner Areas; National plan for prevention and control of landslide risk; National plan for social and cultural upgrading of degraded urban areas; Seismic bonus; National road safety plan; National Strategic Framework for the Development of the Alternative Fuel 
49
Market in the Transport Sector and the Realization of its Infrastructure; Infrastructure National Renewal Plan for Electric Power Vehicles; Complementary MIT Operational Program.
III.3 Boost urban regeneration, ensure sustainable urban accessibility and mobility
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.1 By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums
    	11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons
 	11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
III.4 Ensure ecosystems restoration and defragmentation, strengthen ecological urban-rural connections
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
    	15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements
III.5 Ensure the development of potential and the sustainable management of territories, landscapes and cultural heritage 
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, 
knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
\0xEF 2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality
\0xEF 2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed
\0xEF 6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate
\0xEF 11.3 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries
\0xEF 11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the worldis cultural and natural heritage
51	52
   The area \0xECPeace - strictly linked with the implementation of policies of social protection and poverty reduction outlined in the area \0xECPeople - refers to the need to promote peaceful, fair and inclusive societies. 
   The main challenges refer to global changes, in particular regarding the implementation of 
policies aimed at the inclusion of migrants and asylum-seekers in industrialized countries, promotion of respect for diversity and the fight against discrimination. 
   This goes with the implementation of measures to counter the phenomenon of organized crime, corruption and violence in all its forms.  
\0xEF 11.a Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, periurban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning PEACE
Strategic choices
I. Promote a non-violent and inclusive society
II. End discrimination in all its forms
III. Ensure legality and justice
53
I. Promote a non-violent and inclusive society
   The phenomenon of physical, sexual and psychologic violence against women and children is serious and widespread in the Italian territory. Episodes of female killings continue. 
   Furthermore, the current migratory flows cause new social problems, linked both to the need to monitor cases of violence perpetrated against and within migrant communities (for example, female genital mutilation), and to put in place adequate integration and reception policies aimed at guaranteeing the social rights of migrants and asylum seekers, with special focus on unaccompanied minors.
key instruments 
The action plan against sexual and gender-based violence as provided by the law against female homicides, establishes a system of multi-level governance to fight these phenomena and support their victims. Furthermore, the Government has arranged a national plan for integration articulated as follows: socio-occupational inclusion, sanitary assistance, linguistic education, family reunification, education and recognition of qualifications. Additional implementation instruments are reported: Partnership Agreement 2014-2020 [PON Inclusione (the National Operation Plan for Inclusion), PON METRO (the NOP for urban areas), PON Istruzione (the NOP for Education), PON SPAO (the NOP for active employment policies), POR ESF (the European Social Fundis Regional Operational Plan)]; PN FAMI (AMIF national plan); the National action plan against trafficking and serious exploitation of human beings; the National Strategy for Inclusion of Roma, Sinti and Travellers. 
National Strategic Goals 

I.1 Prevent violence against women and children and provide adequate assistance to victims
I.2 Guarantee migrantsi and asylum seekersi reception and the full integration of ethnic and religious minorities
54
I.1 Prevent violence against women and children and provide adequate assistance to victims
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
    	5.3 Eliminare ogni pratica abusiva come il matrimonio combinato, il fenomeno delle spose bambine e le mutilazioni genitali femminili
    	5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels
	 	16.1 Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere
    	16.2 End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children
I.2 Guarantee migrantsi and asylum seekersi reception and the full integration of ethnic and religious minorities
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
    	5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
    	5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels
    	10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
    	10.3 Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, including by eliminating discriminatory laws, policies and practices and promoting appropriate legislation, policies and action in this regard
55	56
	 	16.9 By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration
II. End discrimination in all its forms
	High exploitation rates, unreported employment	key instruments 
and irregular recruitment of agricultural workers are 
The following key implementation tools are indicative of 
phenomena that still characterize some sectors of the the efforts made: the Partnership Agreement 2014-2020 Italian economy. The specific investigative campaigns [PON Inclusione, PON SPAO, PON METRO, POR ERDF, and inter-active initiatives launched over the years, POR ESF]; National program of care services for children 
                                                     and the non-self-sufficient elders; the National Strategy have achieved good results, but it is necessary to for Inclusion of Roma, Sinti and Travellers.
strengthen monitoring and counteraction activities, as established by the new legislation against the gangmaster system (Law 199/2016). In addition, the participation rate of women in the labour market is amongst the lowest in the European Union, especially in the South. 
  For the effective implementation of the nondiscrimination principle, it is necessary to guarantee measures 	promoting 	gender 	equality, 	equal opportunities, the respect for diversity, and support the fight against any kind of discrimination based on race, ethnicity, religious or sexual orientation.
National Strategic Goals 
II.1 End all forms of labour exploitation and ensure the rights of workers
II.2 Ensure gender equality
II.3 Combat all forms of discrimination and promote respect for diversity
57
II.1 End all forms of labour exploitation and ensure the rights of workers
 2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, 
knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
\0xEF 8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
\0xEF 8.7 Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms
\0xEF 8.8 Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment
\0xEF 10.7 Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies
58
II.2 Ensure gender equality
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	4.5 By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and children in vulnerable situations
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
    	5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate
    	5.5 Ensure womenis full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life
    	8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
    8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
II.3 Combat all forms of discrimination and promote respect for diversity
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of cultureis contribution to sustainable development
 	4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all
 	10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
 	16.10 Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and international agreements
 	16.b Promote and enforce non-discriminatory laws and policies for sustainable development

59	60
Over the last few years, many initiatives have affected not decided by the terms of law and for which the parties criminal justice. Among these, itis worth mentioning concerned could request compensation from the State due the introduction of more effective means of fighting to an unreasonable duration. Finally, regarding urban transnational crime and self-regulation. Furthermore, redevelopment and the security of suburbs, a national plan the regulation on crimes related to eco-mafia was is dedicated to those metropolitan areas characterized by adopted and the following measures were approved: economic and social marginalization, urban decay and the law against the so called caporalato (gangmaster lack of services. Additional tools are: the Partnership 
pending cases. system), the revision of the false accounting charges and Agreement 2014-2020 [PON for legality, PON METRO, the tightening of the charges for \0xECmafia-typecriminal PON Governance, PON POAS, PON Education, PON conspiracy and for the most serious crimes against public for research and innovation, POR FESR, POR ESF, FSC administration. Civil justice is also involved in a broad (the national fund for development and cohesion)]; the reform process that is producing the first positive results. Action Plan on confiscated assets and cohesion; the antiIn 2016, pending civil cases decreased by 3.6% compared corruption national plan; the Internal Security Fund; the to 2015. Except for the Supreme Court, there has also been Single Fund for Justice; the anti-counterfeiting national a significant reduction in civil proceedings potentially plan; the national plan for cyber protection and computer subjected to the Pinto law, namely those pending cases security.
61	62

key instruments 

III.1 Reinforce the fight against crime
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation
    	15.5 Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened species
	 	16.1 Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere
    	16.4 By 2030, significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows, strengthen the recovery and return of stolen assets and combat all forms of organized crime
III.2 Fight bribery and corruption in the public sectors
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
III.3 Ensure a just and efficient judiciary system
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	16.3 Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for all
63	64
	 	16.5 Substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms

PROSPERITY
   To ensure prosperity, efforts need to be made to progress towards a new economic model, inspired by the principles of circular economy. The full development of human potential and a more efficient and responsible use of resources is crucial. The new development path will have to contribute to the minimization of the negative impacts on the environment by closing the loop between production and consumption cycles, by 
rationalizing the use of resources and by enhancing human capital. 
   The economic, social and technological progress must focus on challenges such as the decarbonization of the economy; research and innovation in sustainability; sustainable production and consumption patterns; continuous professionalization and vocational training and sustainable employment.
Strategic choices  
I.Financially support and promote research and innovation in sustainability
II. Ensure full employment and high quality education
III. Promote sustainable production and consumption patterns
IV. Decarbonize the economy

65
I. Financially support and promote research and innovation in sustainability
   In 2014, the most recent year for definitive data available, R&D expenditure incurred by businesses, public institutions, private non-profit institutions and universities was about 22.3 billion. Compared with 2013 (around 21 billion), expenditure increased both in nominal (+ 6.2%) and real terms (+ 5.3%). The current percentage incidence of R&D on GDP is 1.38%, up from 2012 (1.31%). Compared to 2013, R&D spending increased in all areas. By December 2016, the number of innovative startups in Italy was 6,745, an increase of 31% from 2015 and 112% over two years. 75% of innovative startups operate in the services sector, with a predominance of those active in R&D. The growth rates of investments made by innovative startups are significantly higher than by other newly established companies. The number of innovative SMEs has also increased considerably. 
   In this context, crucial steps need to be taken in the direction of creating a digital economy. Those steps will have to address: furthering research, innovation and technology transfer, activating research and business networks, empowering access to information and communication technologies.  
National Strategic Goals  
key instruments 
The Government has approved the \0xECNational Industry 4.0. Plan. The Plan intends to provide an opportunity for Italian companies who want to take advantage of the innovations introduced by the fourth industrial revolution entailing totally digitized and connected processes. The Plan contains a set of measures inspired by the principle of technology neutrality. It includes horizontal measures addressing the issues of productivity, flexibility and competitiveness, with the aim of favouring the quality of production while reducing production time through innovative technologies. The measures contained in the plan include tax incentives for private investments in 4.0 technologies and goods as well as for private spending on Research, Development and Innovation; it also includes measures that strengthen financial support in favour of 4.0, venture capital and start-ups. Another goal of the plan is to foster a 4.0 culture among students by creating skills and stimulating research through the \0xECDigital School and Alternative Training Plan; new dedicated curricula at College, University, and PHD level; National Competence Centres and Digital Innovation Hub. Also worth mentioning are: Partnership Agreement 2014-2020 (National Operative Programme (NOP) Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness, NOP Research and Innovation, NOP Governance, PON Legality, NOP METRO, PON SPAO, NOP Education, Regional Operative Programme FESR, POR FSE, PSR, NOP Fishing, FSC); National Intelligence Specialization Strategy; National Research Plan; Italian Strategy for the Ultra-wide Band; Strategy for Digital Growth; National Plan for Health Research; Strategy for Bio economics; Strategic Plan for Innovation and Research in Agriculture, Food and Forestry.

I.1 Increase investments in research and development 
I.2 Implement the digital agenda and enhance the diffusion of smart grids
I.3 Innovate processes and products and promote technological transfer 66
I.1 Increase investments in research and development
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-intensive sectors
    	8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
\0xEF 9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries
\0xEF 9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities
\0xEF 9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending
I.2 Implement the digital agenda and enhance the diffusion of smart grids
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship
    	9.3 Increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets
    	9.c Significantly increase access to information and communications technology and strive to provide universal and affordable access to the Internet in least developed countries by 2020
I.3 Innovate processes and products and promote technological transfer
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
67	68
    	9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending
II. Ensure full employment and high quality education
   In 2016, the labour market reform has shown its positive effects: employment is growing and the quality of work has improved. Labour market reform has been accompanied by the education reform. Education is indeed the prerequisite for the development of the skills necessary to intercept technological and productive change. Additionally, interventions will be increasingly targeting low-income families, people excluded from the labour market, better reconciliation of working and family time. In 2016, the 20-64 year-old employment rate has gone back to 2009 levels (61.6%). The unemployment rate has fallen steadily since 2014, though still occurring at 2009 levels (7.7%), reaching 11.7 % in 2016. Policies for youth have helped to reduce unemployment rate 
from 42.7% in 2014 to 37.8% in 2016. Illegal work deserves special attention: according to the last available data, illegal work affected 3.6 million in 2014, especially in Southern Italy. While considering public finance constraints, the job market reform will have to be continued, following the path initiated with the Jobs Act dedicated to the creation of permanent jobs through total or partial tax waivers, particularly for young people. Priority will be given to the improvement of the permanent vocational training system for the skill retraining of workers at risk of social and work exclusion, and to the continuation of experimental measures to reduce the placement timing of unemployed people benefitting from forms of income support. 
69
The Government has put in place a variety of instruments to support small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), start-ups and technology innovations, and to stimulate the size increase of Italian companies. 
New tools have been introduced to simplify access to credit, promote productive investments and innovation, encourage capitalization and stock market listing. Such tools include mini-bonds, credit-funds, equity crowdfunding and stock market listing. The Central Guarantee Fund for SMEs will play an increasingly crucial role. At least 20% of the resources of the Fund will be dedicated to companies and investments located in the regions in the South of Italy. The 2015-2020 National Research Plan (PNR), launched in May 2016, aims at stimulating industrial competitiveness and promoting the country's development by targeting 2.4 
billion for the 2015-2017 three-year period (4.7 billion for the whole 2015-2020 period) in areas considered as strategic for the Italian research system. The PNR complements the \0xECNational Industry 4.0. Plan that provides for the establishment of a permanent multistakeholder governance structure and whose resources will be coming from the increase in tax credit for R & D.  Other policies relevant for the achievement of this goal are: the Partnership Agreement 2014-2020 (NOP Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness, NOP Culture, NOP Legality, NOP SPAO, NOP Youth Employment, NOP Inclusion, NOP Education, ROP FESR, ROP FSE, PSR, NOP Fishing, FSC); Action Plan for Employability of Young People; Three Year Plan for the Development of the University System; National Energy Strategy; Rural Development Programs.
key instruments 
National Strategic Goals 

II.1 Ensure accessible, high quality and life-long learning
II.2 Increase sustainable and high quality employment
70
II.1 Ensure accessible, high quality and life-long learning
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
	 	4.3 By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable and quality 
II.2 Increase sustainable and high quality employment
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
technical, vocational and tertiary education, including university 	5.5 Ensure womenis full and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
    	4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life relevant skills, including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and  	8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, 
entrepreneurshiptechnological upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added 
    	4.5 By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all and labour-intensive sectors levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities,  	8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, indigenous peoples and children in vulnerable situationsdecent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the 
	 	4.6 By 2030, ensure that all youth and a substantial proportion of adults, both men formalization and growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including 
and women, achieve literacy and numeracy	through access to financial services
    	4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to  	8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable 	women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of 	work of equal value
peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of cultureis  	8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, 
contribution to sustainable development	education or training
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere
 	8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training
	71	72
	 	5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere

III. Promote sustainable production and consumption patterns
	Supporting 	Sustainable 	Consumption 	and 	key instruments 
Production (SCP) patterns is to be considered crucial With the 2017-2022 Tourism Strategy Plan, approved in for the implementation of the NSDS. SCP addresses February 2017, the Government has set guidelines that not only environmental issues (resource efficiency, outline the sector's development over the next six years. 
The Plan includes measures to promote technological 
removal of environmental impacts not compatible and organizational innovation, enhancement of skills, with the self-generating capacity of natural systems, the quality of tourism services, as well as the sustainable closing production and consumption material cycles, and long-lasting use of environmental and cultural waste elimination and reduction), but lays the bases heritage. The main tools for implementing this choice are the following: Partnership Agreement 2014-2020 
to reinforce the link between the three sustainable (PON Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness, NOP development pillars, tangibly encouraging operating Culture, NOP Legality, NOP Inclusion, ROP FESR, models of circular economy. Through the promotion PSR, PSRN, POR FSE, PON Fishing, FSC ); National of new production, distribution and consumption Action Plan for Environmental Sustainability of PA 
Consumption; National Plan for Sustainable Production 
sustainability-oriented models in relevant economic and Consumption; Strategic Plan for Innovation and sectors, SCP aims at establishing new relationships Research in the Agricultural-Food and Forestry Sector; among economic actors based on principles of Strategic Development Plan for Tourism in Italy; National cohesion and social responsibility, on fair access to Fisheries and Aquaculture Plan; Plan for the promotion of Made in Italy; Art Bonus; Finance for growth; Italy 
resources, on the respect of work dignity and social Manufacturing Plan; Strategy for bio economics; inclusion. National Energy Strategy; Rural Development Programs; 
Environmental Aid Catalogue.
National Strategic Goals 
III.1 Dematerialize the economy, improving the efficient use of resources and the circular economy 
III.2 Promote environmental taxation
III.3 Ensure fair access to financial resources
III.4 Promote social and environmental responsibility in companies and institutions 
III.5 Reduce waste production and promote secondary raw material market
III.6 Promote the demand and increase the supply for sustainable tourism
III.7 Substantially increase sustainable farming and forestry throughout the production and supply chain 
III.8 Substantially increase sustainable fishing and aquaculture throughout the production and supply chain III.9 Promote Italian excellence worldwide
73
III.1 Dematerialize the economy, improving the efficient use of resources and the circular economy 
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
    	6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate
    	8.1 Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries
    	8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10 Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and 
Production, with developed countries taking the lead
    	9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries
    	12.1 Implement the 10 Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns, all countries taking action, with developed countries taking the lead, taking into account the development and capabilities of developing countries
	 	12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources
    	14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
74
III.2 Promote environmental taxation
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
    	10.4 Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage and social protection policies, and progressively achieve greater equality
    	12.c Rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by removing market distortions, in accordance with national circumstances, including by restructuring taxation and phasing out those harmful subsidies, where they exist, to reflect their environmental impacts, taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of developing countries and minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development in a manner that protects the poor and the affected communities
III.3 Ensure fair access to financial resources
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, 
knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
\0xEF 5.a Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources, in accordance with national laws
\0xEF 5.c Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels
\0xEF 8.10 Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to banking, insurance and financial services for all
75	76
\0xEF 9.3 Increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets
III.4 Promote social and environmental responsibility in companies and institutions
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	12.6 Encourage companies, especially large and transnational companies, to adopt sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information into their reporting cycle
    	12.7 Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance with national policies and priorities
III.5 Reduce waste production and promote secondary raw material market
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
    	12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse
    	14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
III.6 Promote the demand and increase the supply for sustainable tourism
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	8.9 By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products
    	11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the worldis cultural and natural heritage
    	12.b Develop and implement tools to monitor sustainable development impacts for sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products
77	78
    	15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts

III.7 Substantially increase sustainable farming and forestry throughout the production and supply chain
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and 
inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
 	2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality
 	2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed
\0xEF 2.a Increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries
\0xEF 12.3 By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses
\0xEF 12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the environment
   III.8 Substantially increase sustainable fishing and aquaculture throughout the production and supply chain
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
     	2.3 By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, 
knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment
 	14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
\0xEF 14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics
\0xEF 14.b Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets
III.9 Promote Italian excellence worldwide
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
79	80
    	8.9 By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products
IV. Decarbonize the economy
   The Paris Agreement provides, as a long-term Package objectives; (iii) define the priorities for action objective, the containment of the temperature and allocation of national resources; (iv) manage the key role of the energy sector as the enabler for sustainable increase below 2\0x221EC compared to pre-industrial levels. growth in the country. The strategy to pursue the Countries that have signed the Agreement must carry national renewable energy target is contained within the out decarbonizing policies in all economic sectors. National Action Plan (NAP), which outlines the objectives 
Therefore, Italy must undertake a \0xECsystem process 	and main actions taken to reach 17% of renewable energy 
                                                     consumption. In Italy, in recent years there has been to support a transition towards a low carbon emission rapid growth in the production of renewable energy 
economy, in line with the commitments taken within sources, also because of the incentive policies undertaken. the United Nations and European Union. This path Relevant tools are also Partnership Agreement 2014must ensure sustainable and efficient services, 2020 (NOP Enterprises and Competitiveness, NOP 
                                                     METRO, NOP Infrastructures and Networks, ROP infrastructures and technologies on the entire 
FESR, PSR, PON Fishing, FSC); National Strategy for 
national territory, promoting competitiveness and Climate Adaptation; National Energy Strategy; General employment. Particularly important in this context Transport and Logistics Plan; National Action Plan for is the National Energy Strategy. the Reduction of Greenhouse Gases; National Action Plan for Renewable Energy; National Action Plan for Energy Efficiency; Energy Regeneration Program for Central 
Government Buildings; National road safety plan; 
               key instruments National Strategic Framework for the Development of One of the main implementation tools for this choice is the Alternative Fuel Market in the Transport Sector and the new National Energy Strategy (SEN), which is in the Construction of its Infrastructure; National Plan the process of being approved. The SEN is based on the for Airports; National strategic plan for sustainable following objectives: i) reduce the price differential of mobility; Complementary MIT Operational Program; energy products compared to other European countries; Infrastructure National Renewal Plan for Electric Power ii) identify the main strategic choices in the energy Vehicles; National action plan to promote near-zero field, also considering the new European Clean Energy energy buildings.
National Strategic Goals 
IV.1 Increase energy efficiency and renewable energy production, avoiding or reducing impacts on natural and cultural heritage and landscapes IV.2 Increase sustainable mobility of people and goods IV.3 Reduce greenhouse gas emissions in non-ETS 
81
IV.1 Increase energy efficiency and renewable energy production, avoiding or reducing impacts on natural and cultural heritage and landscapes
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
	 	7.1 By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services
	 	7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy 
mix
	 	7.3 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency
    	9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries
    	9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities
    	12.c Rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by removing market distortions, in accordance with national circumstances, including by restructuring taxation and phasing out those harmful subsidies, where they exist, to reflect their environmental impacts, taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of developing countries and minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development in a manner that protects the poor and the affected communities
82
IV.2 Increase sustainable mobility of people and goods
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
	 	7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency
    	9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human wellbeing, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all
    	11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons
 	14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
IV.3 Reduce greenhouse gas emissions in non-ETS
2030 Agenda: related targets and degree of consistency
    	2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality
\0xEF 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
\0xEF 13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning

	83	84
among interventions funded by other institutions and cooperation with stakeholders. Such actions will contribute to increase the overall effectiveness and consistency of interventions, also with respect to domestic growth policies to carefully assess the displayed impacts, to consolidate mechanisms that allow a permanent review of the cooperation action and make it adaptive to an increasingly evolving context, to elaborate a national vision to promote in multilateral cooperation fora. 
   On environmental and climate change issues, the MAECI and the Italian Ministry for Environment, Land and Sea (IMELS) deliver a shared framework 
of actions. IMELS intervention is particularly inclined to agreements concerning bilateral cooperation (at present 60 Countries are involved in bilateral projects) as well as development banks and multilateral institutions, prioritizing Africa and Small Developing Island States in the Pacific and Caribbean.
   Partnerships and agreements in this field are also intended as opportunities of technologies exchange and promotion of the \0xECSistema Italia. 
   Within this framework the Partnership Area identifies the following Strategic Choices and National Objectives.
PARTNERSHIP
  Partnership area embodies the \0xECexternal thematic, sectoral and geographical priorities. dimension of the 2030 Agenda, including It also provides the budget framework for strategy, areas of intervention and targets of the development cooperation, delivering a renewed Development Cooperation Strategy, intended planning approach towards the predictability as part of the wider Italian foreign policy and and effectiveness of the  implemented measures. carried out by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and The Italian Government is also committed to 
International Cooperation (MAECI).	strengthen development cooperation and to 
  Principles and purposes of development gradually realign the relationship between the cooperation are defined by National Law 125/2014 Official Development Assistance (APS) and the as follows: Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to international 
  \0xEF Eradicate poverty and reduce inequality, standards. To this end, ODA intermediate growth improve peopleis living conditions and promote targets are set to achieve 0.30% of GDP in 2020 sustainable development; and 0.7% in 2030.
  \0xEF Protect and affirm human rights, self- In the short or medium term, attention should dignity, gender equality, equal opportunities and focus also on completing the achievement of democracy principles and rule of law; the 8 UN Millennium Development Goals in all 
  \0xEF Prevent conflicts, support peace- Countries. At the same time, efforts of the Italian keeping processes, reconciliation, post-conflict Cooperation are framed within the integrated stabilisation, democratic institutions building perspective set by the adoption of the 17 SDGs, and strengthening. thus providing the widening of their field of 
	In line with these main aims, the Italian 	action. 
strategic lines are set in the Triennial Programme Geographical priorities must be set, in adopted each year by the Council of Ministers on order to allow for Italian Official Development a proposal by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Assistance to leverage further resources, International Cooperation jointly with the Ministry implement innovative bilateral and multilateral of Economy and Finance. The Programme sets cooperation schemes, strengthen coordination 

2030 Agenda: related goals	2030 Agenda: related goals

	85	86
Improve access to health services and contribute to the extension of universal health coverage 
Strengthen basic healthcare systems and staff training 
Limit risk factors and the impact of health emergencies: improve early warning and prevention mechanisms 
Be committed to fight against pandemics, particularly AIDS, and to promote vaccination campaigns (Global Fund, GAVI) 
	Support scientific research, promote health and prevention awareness 	 
Carry on a forceful action to relaunch public health functions and to support health reforms 
Ensure high quality basic education without gender discrimination 
Promote training and improve professional skills of teachers, school staff and development workers 
Provide inclusive education  for the most disadvantaged, marginalized and discriminated social groups. 
Promote social and employment integration of young people and unemployed adults by offering 	 professional training 
Valorise Universities contribution:  
- Define training paths offering new professional skills, addressed to students from partner countries;  
- Contribute to the development and strengthening of institutional capacities; 
- Train future professionals and leaders in partner Countries; 	 
- Provide research tools in order to produce innovation for development and to deliver assessment methods and models in line with good international practices 
Ensure governance and access to land, water, natural and productive resources by farmersi families and small-scale producers 
Support and develop traditional adaptation techniques to biotic and abiotic factors 
Strengthen the capacity to cope with natural disasters by also promoting "green infrastructure" 
Promote agricultural, environmental and social policies supporting family farming and craft fishery 
Encouraging the adoption of measures to promote the competitiveness of products respecting sustainable diet principles  
Provide qualified technical assistance, training and institutional capacity building in order to strengthen the commitment to the development of key production chains recalling the peculiar Italian development model - SMEs and local districts -, increasing productivity and production, improving quality, enhancing product typicality, spreading good farming practices, preserving production areas, promoting fair trade, technology 	 transfer, agroindustry development and export 
88

	Concerning 	humanitarian 	aids, 	Italian 
Cooperation will continue to provide assistance to people affected by humanitarian crises caused by catastrophic events, whether human or natural, with the aim to protect life, alleviate or prevent sufferings and safeguard the dignity of people. 
  Humanitarian aid actions will be set in coherence and complementarity with the general strategic guidelines of the Italian Development Cooperation. Particular attention will be paid to those areas considered crucial for the survival and improvement of essential living conditions such as the protection of refugees and displaced people, health, food safety and access to water. At the same time, attention will be paid to cross-cutting issues such as promoting the status of women, and protecting children, elderly people and people with disabilities.
   In line with the objectives of the "World Humanitarian Summit", aid is directed towards respecting humanitarian principles and strengthening its effectiveness through greater accountability, a results-based approach and the use of innovative technologies to improve - at both local and central level - the prevention, mitigation and disaster risk response systems. Finally, special attention will be paid to the link between humanitarian aid, the private sector and migrations. The Istanbul Summit in 2016 
90
represents the starting point of a renewal process for the response system to humanitarian crises, which have greatly increased in number and became longer and more complex. 
  Governments are called to engage in political and, in part, financial commitments to translate the principle of humanity into concrete actions. Together with the other partners of the European Union, Italy fully supports the humanitarian reform process launched by the "World Humanitarian Summit".
  Indeed, the international humanitarian system needs to urgently undergo a deep reform capable of reflecting a radically changed world of donors (with the introduction of new financiers), the complexity and number of crises, the challenges for humanitarian protection and the protection of the operators.
  The definition of the main lines of humanitarian action, intervention areas and channels must be widely shared with sectors of civil society active in the field of volunteering and emergency interventions in coordination with their representative networks. Their engagement will also facilitate the exchange of information with a view to launch local public calls for the financing of emergency projects. 
  Lastly, the MAECI collaboration with the Department of Civil Protection will be further strengthened.
of action and adequate monitoring indicators.
2030 Agenda: related goals
areas of interest
Further areas to be deepened will relate to the following priorities: increase of national Red Lists, species and habitats of European interest, the conservation status of which is defined as \0xECUnknown; indicators to determine the maritime environmental status (D.M. 17 October 2014); database of plant and animal genetic resources; development of national knowledge systems (i.e. to support the management of the Natura 2000 websites).
Further areas to be explored will be identified for each category of natural resources: water (inland and maritime waters), air, soil, species (for commercial use), forests, cultural heritage (dimension, conservation, enjoyment), traditional and historical landscapes.
Further areas to be explored will aim at improving the knowledge of the causal links and the statistical measurements of complex and interconnected phenomena such as equality, dignity, immigration, social inclusion and legality.
The identification of further areas to be explored will consider the evolution and improvement of available instruments, including Istat-BES (Equitable and Sustainable Wellbeing in Italy) and UN SDGs indicators, as well as the development of new statistical instruments to measure, also locally, those phenomena that are not yet analysed in-depth in public statistics.
Further areas to be explored will deal with processes, strategies and instruments (i.e. gateways, open data systems) already available and under development, to ensure availability, access and networking of data and information.

	91	92
II. Monitoring and evaluating policies, plans and projects
   The vector \0xECMonitoring and evaluating policies, plans and projects includes objectives targeted to the definition and implementation of integrated systems to monitor and assess policies, plans and projects. Such systems should be the reference framework to monitor the implementation of the 
NSDS, to analyse and evaluate the impacts of the decision-making process and to understand whether and how the triggered dynamics are coherent with the selected targets. The effectiveness of this vector is closely linked to the definition of integrated information frameworks (1st Vector).

III. Institutions, participation and partnerships
   The objectives of the vector \0xECInstitutions, participation and partnerships aim at promoting the realization and dissemination of effective initiatives and continuous pathways for the inclusion of all stakeholders in each decisionmaking and implementation phase at different territorial levels. To this end, it is necessary to 
develop institutional integration mechanisms and to promote the active participation and involvement of civil society, following EU and international guidelines. Furthermore, it aims to promote effective public-private partnerships to ensure the adoption of criteria for sustainability, quality and innovation, as provided for in national and EU legislation.

cross-cutting goals
II.1 Ensuring the development and population of integrated monitoring and assessment systems for interlinked policies, plans and projects
II.2 Creating an integrated monitoring and assessment system for the NSDS, ensuring its effective management and unceasing implementation
areas of interest
The priority for the identification of further areas to be explored is the monitoring and evaluation of strategic and sectorial policies, plans and projects. This includes environmental, landscape and socio-economic assessments, as provided for also by the Ministerial Decree of 11th February 2015 entitled \0xECIdentification of indicators and monitoring plans to evaluate environmental targets, as required under Legislative Decree n. 190/2010, Arts. 10.1-11.1.
Further areas to be explored will deal with the criteria to define and create the monitoring system and the reference framework for the further evaluation of activities under the NSDS. These instruments will be developed as consistent with the principles set out by Art. 74 of the 2030 Agenda. Priority will be given to the fulfilment of the needs emerging from the NSDS implementation path and instruments at a national and regional level, and to comply with the international evaluation and monitoring mechanisms.
93
cross-cutting goals
III.1 Promoting the active participation of civil society in decision-making processes and policy implementation and evaluation
III.2 Promoting the establishment of effective mechanisms to promote interaction between the different institutions and implement and evaluate the NSDS
III.3 Ensuring sustainability, quality and innovation in public-private partnerships
areas of interest
Further areas to be explored will look at the consistency, effectiveness and quality of the mechanisms set up to promote the involvement and participation of civil society in decision-making processes and policy implementation and evaluation.
Further areas to be explored will follow the strategic guidelines to establish a governance system for the implementation and evaluation of the NSDS. This system will define how, when and where institutions shall interact (horizontal and vertical integration mechanisms), considering existing national and European guidelines.
Further areas to be explored will deal with the legislative instruments and the existing national and international guidelines (i.e. COM (2009) 615 DEF) for the development of public-private partnerships, with a focus on criteria for sustainability, quality and innovation.
94

IV. Education, awareness and communication
   The vector \0xECEducation, awareness and communication is fundamental to achieve the NSDS goals. 
   The \0xECculture of sustainability must be spread at all levels (companies, civil society, institutions, research), including formal and informal education centres, in a life-long learning perspective. This is the most important vector to trigger the 
transformation of the current development model and the dissemination of knowledge, skills, lifestyles and best practices for sustainable production and consumption. 
   To implement this vector, relationships and collaborations between professionals in the field of sustainable development and environmental education will be facilitated.

V. Modernising public administration and restructuring public expenditure
   The vector \0xECModernising public administration and restructuring public expenditure includes pivotal areas to ensure the proper functioning of public administration, which is a prerequisite for the achievement of all the national strategic goals. In fact, the public sector plays an important role 
to ensure inclusive growth, based on an enhanced environmental, social and financial sustainability. This role entails the strengthening of public governance, the simplification and improvement of regulation, and an efficient and sustainable use of public financial resources.

cross-cutting goals
IV.1 Turning knowledge into competences
IV.2 Promoting education on sustainable development
IV. 3 Promoting and applying solutions for sustainable development
IV.4 Communication
areas of interest
Promoting mechanisms and instruments to exploit data and knowledge on sustainable development, in synergy with the first vector, to improve individual skills.
Ensuring the inclusion at all stages of education (from pre-scholar age to university, up to vocational training, including both formal and informal education) of cross-thematic paths aimed at spreading knowledge, skills, capabilities and lifestyles following a sustainable development approach. This can be realized also investing on teacher training, integration of educational programmes, and respect for the principles of environmental sustainability and social inclusion in education centres.
Promoting initiatives for education, research and innovation with a high impact potential. Valuing solutions with positive impacts on society. Considering all education structures as laboratories for the elaboration of innovative solutions. Facilitating the application of innovative solutions in communities, companies and civil society, also developing new professional specialisations.
Promoting the dissemination, in the widest and most accessible manner, of principles, objectives, instruments and solutions for sustainable development, starting from the knowledge developed inside the education and research system. The recipients will be people inside the education system as well as the society as a whole.
95
cross-cutting goals
V.1 Strengthening public governance
V.2. Ensuring regulatory simplification and quality.
V.3 Ensuring the efficient and sustainable use of public financial resources
V.4 Implementing gender budgeting
areas of interest
In-depth analysis and fields of actions will be provided on the following issues: integrity and transparency of the public sector, accessibility and quality of public services for citizens and companies, effectiveness of the public sector, efficiency of digitalisation processes and systems to manage human resources and performance.
Main deepening areas will relate to: simplification of laws and procedures; effectiveness, quality and accessibility of legal and regulatory system.
Further areas will be defined and developed under the following priorities: efficiency of the public expenditure per sector, interactions within existing monitoring instruments, including BESs indicators (The Equitable and Sustainable Wellbeing in Italy); dissemination of methodologies for public expenditure evaluation; quality capital expenditure; green procurement.
Main priority areas will relate to: defining a general methodology for reporting on gender budgeting, by building upon the budgetary reporting experience of local authorities; testing gender budgeting for the evaluation of the different impacts of budget policies on women and men in terms of money, services, time and unpaid work; reporting to the Parliamentary Chambers on the outcomes of the test performed by the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and eventually proceed to its adoption.
96
