Summary
Japanis efforts toward achieving the SDGs through Public Private Action for Partnership (PPAP)
(1) Fundamental Idea
Prior to the formulation of the 2030 Agenda, Japan was already implementing measures in an integrated manner to build a sustainable society through environmental, economic and social improvements. Japan has also embarked on creating an inclusive and participatory society in which every individual can achieve his or her full potential. In line with this ideal, Japan has forged ahead by reforming its relevant systems. Also, Japan has set Human Security as the guiding principle that lies at the foundation of its foreign assistance and has placed issues such as health, disaster risk reduction and gender equality, which are listed in the SDGs as major challenges to be addressed, at the core of its international cooperation.
Based on this experience, Japan played a leading role in the formulation of the 2030 Agenda, including the individual goals and targets.
Japan aims to become a role model for the world in the implementation of measures to achieve the SDGs and will make efforts both in Japan and in cooperation with other countries to achieve sustainable societies worldwide where no one is left behind.
(2)  Institutional Framework and the Implementation Guiding Principles 
On May 20, 2016, the Government of Japan established a new Cabinet body called the \0xECSDGs Promotion Headquarters, headed by the 
Prime Minister and comprising all ministers. The SDGs Promotion Headquarters was established to foster close cooperation among relevant ministries and government agencies, and to lead the comprehensive and effective implementation of SDGs-related measures as a control tower.
Under the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, we have held roundtable meetings on items related to the promotion and implementation of the 2030 Agenda, attended by representatives from a wide range of stakeholders, including NGO/NPOs, academia, the private sector and international organizations. So far, roundtable meetings have been held in September and November, 2016, and we have also solicited public comments. Through these processes, the government has widely sought the opinions of citizens and has held dialogues with a range of stakeholders. Based on these discussions, at the second meeting of the SDGs Promotions Headquarters held in December 2016, we adopted the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles, which represent Japanis national strategy to address the major challenges for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
In the Guiding Principles, Japan established the following vision: \0xECBecome a leader toward a future where economic, social and environmental improvements are attained in an integrated, sustainable and resilient manner while leaving no one behind. Besides the vision, the document includes five implementation principles and an approach to the follow-up and review processes. By restructuring the SDGs in light of Japanis national context, it has identified eight priority areas among the goals and targets of the SDGs on which Japan should focus:
(1) Empowerment of All People (related SDGs: 1, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12)
(2) Achievement of Good Health and Longevity (related SDG: 3)
(3) Creating Growth Markets, Revitalization of Rural Areas, and Promoting Science Technology and Innovation (related SDGs: 2, 8, 9, 11)
(4) Sustainable and Resilient Land Use, Promoting Quality Infrastructure (related 
SDGs: 2, 6, 9, 11)
(5) Energy Conservation, Renewable Energy, Climate Change Countermeasures, and Sound Material-Cycle Society (related SDGs: 7, 12, 13)
(6) Conservation of Environment, including Biodiversity, Forests and the Oceans (related SDGs: 2, 3, 14, 15)
(7) Achieving Peaceful, Safe and Secure Societies (related SDG: 16)
(8) Strengthening the Means and Frameworks for the Implementation of the SDGs (related SDG: 17)
In the Annex to the Guiding Principles, 140 specific measures to be implemented both at home and abroad are listed together with indicators.
(3) Stakeholder Engagement 
The Government of Japan attaches great importance to implementing measures for the 2030 Agenda, monitoring progress, and conducting follow-up and review activities across agency boundaries and through public-private partnerships; in other words, through Public Private Action for Partnership (PPAP), in order to achieve the SDGs. It will do this in cooperation with a wide range of stakeholders, including local governments, NGOs/NPOs, academia, the private sector, international organizations and other entities, parliamentarians, scientists and cooperatives. It was to this end that the Government of Japan established the SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings, mentioned above, comprising a wide range of stakeholders. The roundtable meetings were held to draft the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles as well as in preparation for the voluntary national review.
Also, a variety of efforts by other stakeholders, such as NPOs and NGOs, private companies, local governments, the science community and parliamentarians at home and overseas, to promote the SDGs have started to spread. In order to further encourage the private sector to work on the SDGs, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters decided to create the \0xECJapan SDGs Award, which will be presented to leading initiatives by private companies and organizations during its meeting in June 2017.
On the other hand, public awareness of the SDGs is not yet sufficient. In order to promote SDGs-related measures as a national movement, it is critical to promote the understanding of every single Japanese person about the SDGs. To this end, under the leadership of SDGs Promotion Headquarters, Japan will work hard on raising public awareness through communication campaigns in collaboration with all the stakeholders.
Furthermore, in order to nurture in children, who will lead society in 2030 and beyond, the competencies to be the future creators of sustainable societies and leaders of world, we are promoti ng Educati on for Sustainable Development (ESD), as well as encouraging learning about the SDGs in all setti  ngs, including schools, households, workplaces and local communiti es.
. Introducti on
Todayis global economy is driven by the worldwide movement of people, goods and currency, and an economic crisis in one country can have immediate impact on other countries. In additi on, climate change, natural disasters, infecti ous diseases and other global issues can set off  chain reacti ons, hampering social and economic growth and causing serious impacts across the globe. In light of these facts, the United Nati ons adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (the 2030 Agenda) in September 2015 to not only address the issues faced by developing countries, but also to encompass global agendas that are integrated and indivisible, harmonizing the three dimensions of sustainability\0xF3economic, social and environmental sustainability. The 2030 Agenda was thus adopted to describe the universal goals of the enti re internati onal community, both developed and developing countries, to achieve together. 
Accordingly, in order to implement the 2030 Agenda, it is not enough for developed countries to merely support developing countries. The 2030 Agenda begins with \0xECtransforming our world and further states in its preamble that \0xECWe are determined to take the bold and transformati ve steps which are urgently needed to shift  the world on to a sustainable and resilient path. We renew our resoluti on to further accelerate our eff orts under the banner of Proacti ve Contributi on to Peace based on the principle of internati onal cooperati on. We also bear in mind that our work to bolster domesti c eff orts on economic, social and environmental sustainability as well as cross- dimensional issues are part of global eff orts to tackle the challenges to sustainable development.
Japan, prior to the formulati on of 2030 Agenda, had already begun implementi ng measures in an integrated manner to build a sustainable society through environmental, economic and social improvements. It also has embarked on creati ng an inclusive and parti cipatory society in which every individual can achieve his or her full potenti al. In line with this ideal, Japan has forged ahead by reforming its relevant systems. Also, Japan has, under the Development Cooperati on Charter, set Human Security as the guiding principle that lies at the foundati on of its assistance and placed issues such as health, disaster risk reducti on and gender equality, which are listed in the SDGs as major challenges to be addressed, at the core of its internati onal cooperati on. 
Based on this experience, Japan has played a leading role in formulati on of the 2030 Agenda, including the individual goals and targets. Japan wishes to contribute to the world as a leading soluti on provider by sharing its successes and lessons learned in building a sustainable economy and society at home. Japan aims to become a role model for the world in the implementati on of measures to achieve the SDGs and will make eff orts both in Japan and in cooperati on with other countries to achieve sustainable societi es worldwide where no one will be left  behind.
.  Preparati on of the Report

In response to the adopti on of SDGs, the Government of Japan established the SDGs Promoti on Headquarters, headed by the Prime Minister and comprising all ministers (Details: see IV-(1)).
This report explains Japanis eff orts to establish an SDGs implementati on framework, including setti  ng up the SDGs Promoti on Headquarters and formulati ng the SDGs Implementati on Guiding Principles. It also provides examples of Japanis domesti c and internati onal eff orts in line with 
Japanis priority areas which have been set in relati on to each goal of the SDGs. To implement the SDGs, the eff orts of the enti re nati on, including the involvement non-governmental actors, are essenti al. Case studies presented in this report include not only eff orts of the public sector but also advanced endeavors of the private sector.
The Government of Japan has composed 
this document under the SDGs Promoti on Headquarters through consultati on among relevant governmental agencies. In draft ing the report and preparing the presentati on, the SDGs Round Table Meeti ngs were held comprising representati ves of related governmental agencies and other stakeholders. Moreover, consultati ons were also held with civil societi es and private companies.
.  Policy Measures and Enabling Environment

(1) Insti tuti onal Mechanism 
The SDGs Promotion Headquarters

On May 20, 2016, the Government of Japan established a new Cabinet body, the SDGs Promoti on Headquarters, headed by the Prime Minister with the Chief Cabinet Secretary and Foreign Minister as vice-chairmen, and comprising all ministers. The SDGs Promotion Headquarters established within the Cabinet will foster close cooperation among relevant governmental agencies and lead the comprehensive and effective implementation of related measures. 
The Headquarters will focus in particular on the following items, while cooperating closely with the relevant governmental agencies that are individually implementing the related initiatives: 
Monitor the progress of measures taken in line with the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles and review the Guiding Principles, including adjustments of and additions to the current indicators, based on the monitoring results (follow-up and review)
Promote exchange of opinions and cooperation/collaboration with stakeholders
Conduct awareness raising PR activities for the 2030 Agenda and the Implementation Guiding Principles.
Promoting the implementation of measures related to the SDGs under the SDGs Implementation Promotion Headquarters will promote solutions to domestic issues in the economic, social and environmental sectors and strengthen vitality for sustainable growth. Moreover, internationally, Japanis active engagement in development cooperation through ODA will support the efforts of the entire international community toward achieving the SDGs, and lead to the realization of the stability and prosperity of the international community.
(2)  Incorporation of the SDGs into a National Framework
(Drafting the Implementation Guiding Principles)
At the first meeting of the SDGs Promotion Headquarters on May 20, 2016, it was decided to formulate Japanis SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles. Following this decision, the government widely sought opinions of citizens and held dialogues with a range of stakeholders to draft the Implementation Guiding Principles.
Subsequently, at the second meeting of the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, on December 22, 2016, the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles were adopted as a national strategy to implement the 2030 Agenda.
Through the Guiding Principles, Japan established the following vision: \0xECBecome a leader toward a future where economic, social and environmental improvements are attained in an integrated, sustainable and resilient manner while leaving no one behind. The document sets out Japanis vision, priority areas, implementation principles, implementation framework and approach to the follow-up and review processes. It aims to mobilize all ministries and government agencies by partnering with all relevant stakeholders to implement a wide variety of measures and resources in an effective and coherent manner, based on an analysis of the present situation in Japan and abroad. Under the eight priority areas, 140 specific measures to be implemented are listed in the Annex with as most specific indicators as possible. 
(Assessment of the present situation)
As a result of its past efforts, Japan has continued to achieve an extremely high level of development. However, some areas in which Japan must continue its efforts have also been noted. For example, in the 2016 joint report by the Bertelsmann Foundation 

Japan - Performance by indicator

Indicator 
Value 
Rating 


Indicator 
Value 
Rating 

 	 	 	 	 	 
SDG1 	 	 	SDG9 	 	 
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.90 a day (%) 	0 	 	R&D expenditures (% GDP) 	3.4 	 
Poverty line 50% (%) 	16 	 	R&D researchers (per 1000 employed) 	10.5 	 
SDG2 	 	 	Logistics Performance Index (1-5) 	4.2 	 
Prevalence of undernourishment (%) 
Cereal yield (t/ha) 
Prevalence of stunting, under-5s (%) 
Prevalence of wasting, under-5s (%) 
1.2 
6.1 
7.1 
2.3 
   
 
Quality of overall infrastructure (1-7) 
Mobile broadband subscriptions (per 100) 
Internet use (%) 
Patent applications (per million) 
6.2 
120.5 
90.6 
343.1 
  
 
 
Sust. Nitrogen Management Index (0-1) 	0.6 	 	SDG10 	 	 
Prevalence of adult obesity (%) 	3.3 	 	Gini index (0-100) 	32.1 	 
SDG3 	 	 	Palma ratio 	1.3 	 
Under 5 mortality (per 1000 live births) 	2.7 	 	PISA Social Justice Index (0-10) 	n/a 	 
Maternal mortality (per 100,000 live births)  	5 	 	SDG11 	 	 
Neonatal mortality (per 1000 live births) 
Physician density (per 1000) 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000) 
Traffic deaths (per 100,000) 
Adolescent fertility (births per 1000) 
Subjective wellbeing (0-10) 
Healthy life expectancy at birth (years) 
0.9 2.3 18 
4.7 
4.4 
6 
75 
 
  
 
  
 
PM2.5 in urban areas (g/m3) 
Rooms per person 
Improved water source, piped (%)  
Wastewater treated (%) 
Non-recycled municipal solid waste 
(kg/person/year) 
16 
1.8 
98.7 
 
71.3 
1.4 
 
  
 
 
 
Infants who receive 8 WHO vaccines (%) 	98 	 	SDG13 	 	 
Daily smokers (%, aged 15+) 	19.3 	 	CO2 emissions from energy (tCO2/capita) 	9.3 	 
SDG4 	 	 	Climate change vulnerability (0-1) 	0.1 	 
Literacy rate of 15-24 year olds (%) 
Net primary school enrolment rate (%) 
Population with tertiary education (%) 
PISA score (0-600) 
Share upper secondary education (%) SDG5 
n/a 
100 
46.4 
540.3 
100 
 

    
 
 

Ocean Health Index - Clean waters (0-100) 
Ocean Health Index - Biodiversity (0-100) 
Ocean Health Index  - Fisheries (0-100) 
Marine sites, completely protected (%) 
Fish stocks overexploited or collapsed (%) SDG15 
63.7 
90.4 
29 
34.8 
51.1 
 

 
  
  
 

Women in national parliaments (%) 
Female years of schooling (% male) 
Female labor force participation (% male) 
9.5 
97 
69.9 
 
  
Red List Index of species survival (0-1) 
Annual change in forest area (%) 
Terrestrial sites, completely protected (%) 
0.8 
1.8 
26 
  
 
Expected years of schooling (years) 	15.3 	 	SDG14 	 	 
Unmet demand for contraceptives (%) 	30.4 	 	SDG16 	 	 
Gender wage gap (% male wage) 	26.5 	 	Homicides (per 100,000) 	0.3 	 
SDG6 	 	 	Prison population (per 100,000) 	51 	 
Access to improved water (%) 
Access to improved sanitation (%) Freshwater withdrawal (%)  
100 
100 
18.9 
 
 
 
Feel safe walking at night (%) 
Corruption Perception Index (0-100) Registered births (%) 
70.2 
75 
100 
 
 
 
CO2 from fuels & electricity (MtCO2/TWh) Renewable energy in final consumption (%) 

1.2 
4.2 
 

 
 
 

Official development assistance (% GNI) 
Tax revenue (% GDP) 
Health, Education & R&D spending (% GDP) 
0.2 n/a 
17.5 
 
  
	 	4.6 	 
Access to electricity (%) 	100 	 	6.2 	 Access to non-solid fuels (%) 	95 	 	 
Automated teller machines (per 100,000) 	127.5 	 	 
Adjusted growth rate (%) 	-1.1 	 
Youth not in emp., education, training (%) 	6.6 	 	Detailed metadata and quantitative thresholds used for each 
Child labor (%) 	0 	 	indicator are available online at www.sdgindex.org. Data refer 
Employment-to-population ratio (%) 	60.7 	 	to the most recent year available during the period specified in http://www.sdgindex.org/download/
of Germany and the Sustainable Development Japan has already begun addressing many of Solutions Network (SDSN), Japan received low the aforementioned issues in its policy agenda, achievement scores regarding some of the but there still remain areas in which Japan indicators for Goal 1 (Poverty), Goal 5 (Gender should further strengthen its efforts. It is indeed Equality), Goal 7 (Energy), Goal 13 (Climate necessary for Japan to re-identify the issues to be 
Change), Goal 14 (Marine Resources), Goal 15 tackled in relation to the SDGs and make better (Terrestrial Resources) and Goal 17 (Means of use of its past experiences, both domestically 
Implementation). and internationally, to forge a sustainable future for Japan as well as for the international 

community.
In the environmental field, the Government of Japan mapped out the Basic Environment Plan, which is its direction toward the integrated improvement of the environment, the economy and society. The Government of Japan is also committed to fostering measures for integrated improvement of the environment, the economy and society including through the Plan for Global Warming Countermeasures, developed in line with Japanis Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) and the Paris Agreement adopted at the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (held in December 2015). In addition, the Fundamental Plan for Establishing a Sound Material-Cycle Society and the National Biodiversity Strategy of Japan 2012-2020 had already been developed and are serving as the basis for various policy measures, which are underway. These Plans and Strategy are consistent with the spirit of the 2030 Agenda.
Moreover, in the area of global health, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) was included in the SDGs targets. Japan attaches great importance to UHC as a country that established its own universal health insurance coverage system (Kokuminkaihoken) as early as 1961, and has maintained the system for more than 50 years. Japan will demonstrate leadership in this field as a clear testimony to its commitment to human security in the context of international cooperation. 
(Priority areas)
Japan established the following vision in the Implementation Guiding Principles: \0xECBecome a leader toward a future where economic, social and environmental improvements are attained in an integrated, sustainable and resilient manner while leaving no one behind. In order to achieve the aforementioned vision, Japan has set out eight priority areas which outline what areas among the goals and targets of the SDGs Japan should focus on, in light of the national context. These priority areas include both domestic measures and those to be implemented through international cooperation. The priority areas are clustered into the \0xECFive Ps, upheld in the 2030 Agenda: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership. 
All the SDGs and targets are indivisible and should therefore be attained in an integrated manner; similarly, the eight priority issues are closely related and inseparable. Based on the recognition that the aforementioned national vision will not be achieved if any one of the priority issues is not successfully addressed, Japan will implement related measures under the priority areas in an integrated manner.
(Mainstreaming the SDGs)
The 2030 Agenda states that \0xECEach government will also decide how these aspirational and global targets should be incorporated into national planning processes, policies and strategies. Accordingly, the Implementation Guiding Principles prescribe that the Government of Japan and related governmental agencies will incorporate the SDGs into their plans, strategies and policies as much as possible. At the same time, the government will explore means to achieve necessary systemic reforms and endeavor to appropriately secure financial resources as policy incentives to foster both individual and collective efforts of the ministries and other government offices to implement measures in achieving the SDGs.
(3)  Mainstreaming the principles of the 2030 Agenda
(Main Principles for implementation of SDGs) Japan will implement the measures for the aforementioned eight priority areas in accordance with the following principles: Universality, Inclusiveness, Participatory Approach, Integrated Approach, and Transparency and Accountability. These principles should be taken into account in all priority areas in the course of implementation. The concrete measures to promote the SDGs will be appraised based on the principles in the course of action, as well as in considering the necessity of new measures or revising measures. The principle of an Integrated Approach upholds that the Government of Japan will endeavor to solve the issues related to the three dimensions of economy, society and the environment holistically, while attaching importance to fostering interactions and synergies among various issues in each priority area. Measures shall be carried out in an integrated and organic manner, bearing in mind the significance of linking different priority areas. For example, taking into consideration that the 2030 Agenda requests that the viewpoint of the SDGs be reflected in each countryis National Plan, Japan is currently reviewing its Basic Environment Plan, which outlines comprehensive and long-term measures in Japan concerning the conservation of the environment. In this context, the concept of the SDGs, featuring multiple benefits, integrated solutions to multiple objectives, participation of all stakeholders and back casting, is being utilized in the review. 
(No One Will Be Left Behind)
The key phrase of the 2030 Agenda, \0xECNo one will be left behind, which encapsulates the philosophy that underpins the Agenda, reflects the concept of human security, for which Japan has been a leading advocate and practitioner in the field of international cooperation. This notion is in line with Japanis domestic policies that promote a society where all citizens can participate and play an active role through its Plan for Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens decided by the Cabinet in June 2016. Under the plan, the government is implementing measures to create virtuous cycles of growth and distribution, i.e. to build a new economic system where we enhance childcare support and social security as a broader economic policy which will lead to a more robust economy. Many countries across the world are now confronted with ageing populations, and Japan is striving to provide a \0xECJapan model for a sustainable economy and society ahead of other developed countries. 
(4) Fostering Ownership
(Cooperation with Stakeholders)
The Government of Japan needs to implement measures for the 2030 Agenda, monitor progress, and conduct follow-up and review activities across agency boundaries and through publicprivate partnerships. It will do this in cooperation with a wide range of stakeholders, including local governments, NGOs/NPOs, academia, the private sector, international organizations and other entities, parliamentarians, scientists and cooperatives. To this end, the Government of Japan holds roundtable meetings on items related to the promotion and implementation of the 2030 Agenda. These SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings are attended by representatives from the related governmental agencies and other stakeholders. Through these meetings, the Government of Japan aims to cooperate more closely with all stakeholders.
(The SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meeting) With regard to the promotion and implementation of the 2030 Agenda, Japan established the SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meeting, consisting of representatives from Government ministries and agencies, as well as relevant stakeholders. By fully utilizing the round table meeting, Japan intends to further strengthen collaboration among different stakeholders.
In the process of drafting the aforementioned Implementation Guiding Principles, Japan hosted roundtable meetings twice, enabling active exchange of views among stakeholders. The Implementation Guiding Principles were finalized by incorporating various views put forth during the roundtable meetings. The most recent roundtable meeting was held in May 2017. During the meeting, stakeholders discussed ways to expand our efforts for the SDGs nationwide. Japanis main focus and presentation for the Voluntary National Review (VNR) were also discussed. Japan is committed to deepening cooperation with a wide variety of stakeholders for the promotion as well as smooth implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Japan also aims to set up platforms to promote collaboration and the exchange of views among relevant stakeholders in specific areas, regardless of whether it concerns single or multiple ministries. Those subject-specific issues will also be referred to the roundtable meeting for discussion.
As prime examples of such subject-specific platforms, the Ministry of the Environment (MOE) hosts a Stakeholdersi Meeting, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and MOE together serve as co-secretaries of a Roundtable Meeting on Education for Sustainable Development (ESD).
(Example: The Stakeholdersi Meeting hosted by the MOE)
In order to raise public awareness of the SDGs in Japan, the MOE regularly convenes a Stakeholdersi Meetings as a framework to share the unique practices of different stakeholders. Since August 2016, the Stakeholdersi Meeting has been held three times, attracting about 600 participants. The meeting enables stakeholders to deepen their network and to share various programs of work of different companies and local municipalities that have contributed to laying groundwork for mainstreaming the SDGs.
It is of great importance to make the best use of the Stakeholdersi Meeting to share the latest global trends, and use the meeting as a springboard to highlight and introduce domestic efforts to the global arena. It is vital to link domestic efforts and overseas practices to further promote the SDGs. 
(NPOs and NGOs (Civil Society Organizations, CSOs))
Civil society organizations (CSOs), such as domestically-focused NPOs and internationallyfocused NGOs, played significant roles in reflecting and incorporating diverse perspectives of people representing diverse communities to the 2030 Agenda. In terms of implementing the 2030 Agenda, in order to create a future where \0xECNo one is left behind, NPOs and NGOs will continue to play a critical role in partnership with people who are in vulnerable situations. This is done by conducting research to identify what challenges they face, and carrying out projects to improve their situations. Utilizing their domestic and international networks, the role of NPOs and NGOs in formulating policy proposals is also important. The Government of Japan places great importance on partnership with NPOs, NGOs, cooperatives, and local communities to further promote the implementation of SDGs.
 
In Japan, NGOs have been collaborating with the Government of Japan on its ODA in order to implement diverse development and humanitarian projects in developing countries to achieve the SDGs. NPOs have been working together with central and local governments for environmental conservation, reduction of poverty and inequality, and building sustainable communities in rural areas. CSOs have been working to achieve gender equality, promote sexual reproductive health and rights, and eliminate gender-based violence. People with disability have been leading activities to promote their full and effective participation in the society and elimination of discrimination against them. In April 2016, these Japanese NGOs and NPOs established a civil society network, named the "Japan Civil Society Network on the SDGs (SDGs Japan)" to achieve the goals of the SDGs. The Government of Japan has held a series of meetings with the Civil Society Network as the main focal point of Japanese civil society on various occasions. There are also three participants from the Civil Society Network at the SDGs Roundtable Meeting hosted by the Government. Government officials have actively taken part in numerous seminars and symposiums hosted by NPOs and NGOs, with an eye to enhancing cooperation with civil society. As for the preparation of VNR, in May 2017, the SDGs Promotion Secretariat exchanged views with the Civil Society Network to gain insight from Japanese civil society.
 
(Private Companies)
For the achievement of the SDGs, it is critical that not only the public sector, but also the private sector contribute to solutions for the public agenda. Private technologies and resources are necessary for the success of the SDGs. In addition to conventional corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities, some companies have already begun engaging in activities that contribute to solutions to social issues by incorporating the SDGs into their core business. The Government of Japan welcomes this trend.
In Japan, in September 2015, right after the adoption of the SDGs, as a business development platform that provides insights to future society with a focus on the SDGs and encourages corporate transformation and innovation, \0xECOPEN 2030 PROJECT was launched. The project provides programs such as business development consultations and co-creation business lab, working together with stakeholders with diverse values, such as research institutes, government agencies, local governments, private companies, NGOs/NPOs and social entrepreneurs.    In April 2017, the Global Compact Network Japan (GCNJ) and Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) published a report named "Japanese Companies and SDGs in Motion (Attempts by Japanese Companies on the ground)" which highlights the general trends of Japanese companiesi activities to achieve the SDGs. 
Moreover, Keidanren (the Japan Business Federation) is showing its eagerness to lead the attainment of the SDGs by realizing \0xECSociety 5.0. Through this initiative, Keidanren intends to alter the corporate activity charter and its guidelines, mainstreaming the SDGs into Japanese business practices and corporative trends, in order to promote SDGs-related activities. The CSR Forum Japan conducted a study on the unique activities of both Japanese and European companies that would contribute to the SDGs as well as their partnerships with stakeholders. As a result of this study, the CSR Forum Japan released a report entitled \0xECInvestigative Research Report Concerning the Desirable State of Efforts and Partnerships with International Organizations, the Government, and the Industrial World Aimed at Resolving Social Issues (Such As the SDGs) with an aim to further promoting corporate activities that would help address social issues and achieve the SDGs. 
The Japan Innovation Network (JIN) established the \0xECSDGs Holistic Innovation Platform (SHIP) jointly with UNDP. SHIP is an open innovation platform which considers the attainment of the SDGs as a means to promote innovation. SHIPis objective is to solve global challenges through the technological expertise and knowhow of the private sector. Through active engagement with a number of domestic and international stakeholders, SHIP first aims to create the so-called \0xECSHIP ecosystem. Through this channel, SHIP collects first-hand information on global challenges and seeks opportunities for innovation that will help achieve the SDGs. SHIP offers membership and programs to Japanese companies. As such, these initiatives, both domestic and international, are promoting SDGsrelated activities among companies. In the public sector, given the importance of working in tandem with the private sector and industries, MOE is pressing ahead with its effort to create a guideline for small and mid-size enterprises to implement the SDGs. In order to implement the SDGs, the 
Government of Japan will share its good practices on advanced implementation measures and give incentives through awards and other means, with the goal of the further implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Government will also make efforts to create an environment conducive for companies in the private sector to foster innovation in their business. As part of such efforts, the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, in its meeting in June 2017, decided to create \0xECJapan SDGs Award, which will be granted to advanced efforts by private companies and other entities. 
(Local Governments)
Local governments and other local stakeholders are absolutely essential to the nationwide implementation of SDGs-related measures. The national government will therefore encourage local governments to incorporate the SDGs into their strategies and policies as much as possible. Government ministries will support the efforts of local governments through measure to promote partnership among various stakeholders in achieving the SDGs. 
Some of those local municipalities actively engage in SDGs-related work have already begun to incorporate aspects of the SDGs into their policies. For instance, in Shiga and Nagano Prefectures, the local governments are considering factoring in the concept of the SDGs into their prefectural guidelines. As part of its consideration, on June 1, 2017, Shiga Prefecture, the city of Otsu and the Shiga Business Federation co-hosted a symposium, which was attended by Mr. Thomas Gass, United Nations Assistant Secretary-General, as well as various government officials and experts in order to inform citizens of the importance of the SDGs. 
Looking ahead to worldwide urbanization, the 
Japanese Cabinet Office is promoting the \0xECFuture City Initiative, which embodies the concept of a sustainable economy and society. Eleven cities are designated as model cities, each of which is implementing various efforts to create value for self-sustaining development. 
In line with such initiatives, many more citylevel initiatives are sprouting up across Japan, including ones in the cities of Yokohama and KitaKyushu. For instance, in the city of Kita-Kyushu, which is one of the \0xECFuture Cities, a symposium entitled \0xECLocal efforts to achieve the SDGs in Japan was convened on June 3, 2017, co-hosted by Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Environment. In the symposium, participants reaffirmed the importance of collaborative efforts by all the local stakeholders. Also, a recognition was shared that reviewing local activities in sight of the SDGs, in other words, the worldis common language, could contribute to an integrated solution to economic, social and environmental issues of local communities, as well as to regional reinvigoration. Furthermore, before the symposium, officials from eight voluntary local governments, including from the cities or towns of Kita-Kyushu, Yokohama, Kamaishi, Shimokawa, Higashi-Matsushima, Oguni, Minamata and Sapporo, participated in a workshop to present their regional SDGs-related activities and to exchange views with government officials. 
Another example is the city of Omihachiman in Shiga prefecture. It established a city-level SDGs promotion headquarters in February 2017, which is taking initiatives in getting local communities and groups of young people involved. In addition, the city of Sapporo is currently reviewing its basic environment plan from the viewpoint of how to contribute to the SDGs. On June 16, 2017, the city of Sapporo, with the Ministry of Environment and Hokkaido University, co-hosted a symposium on sustainable community building under the theme of SDGs.
In the city of Kanazawa, the Kanazawa Institute of Technology established the \0xECSDGs Business Award, which gives awards to business cases that have shown significant progress and showcasing them abroad. Also, the \0xECKanazawa Declaration was adopted by the Junior Chamber 
International (JCI) of Kanazawa in November 2015, which shows JCI Kanazawais commitment to work actively towards the achievement of the SDGs. Subsequently, JCI Kanazawa plans to hold the Kanazawa Conference every year after 2016 until 2020, inviting JCIs from other Asian countries.
Furthermore, as a model example in towns and villages, the town of Uchiko, in Ehime Prefecture, whose population is only around 18,000, hosted a meeting with town residents, local government staff, researchers and NPO/NGO staff to come up with ways to achieve the SDGs shortly after the adoption of the SDGs. Uchiko has a specific vision for its future; namely \0xECA city that cherishes sustainable development with beautiful villages, towns and mountains. Although the town is dogged by serious challenges, including the decline of agriculture and forestry coupled with a diminishing and ageing population, it strives to maintain a sustainable and comfortable town by taking measures to adapt to the changing dynamics of the time. These initiatives are a testament of the deep links between the SDGs and the realization of disaster-resilient society, the revitalization of local communities, and Public-Private partnership. The implementation of the SDGs will result in the rejuvenation of cities, the active involvement of local residents and the maintenance of biodiversity, a sustainable environment and livelihoods. 
In December 2016, the Ministry of Environment and the United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS) held a symposium on \0xECCreation of the sustainable local community and partnership between companies and local municipalities. The symposium focused on local communities and shed light on the partnership between the private sector and municipalities in building sustainable communities.
Moreover, 	the 	Institute 	for 	Building Environment and Energy Conservation led discussions on ways implement the SDGs in local communities and the discussion was released as a guideline titled \0xECSDGs in our town-Guideline to introduce the SDGs-. The guideline suggests ways to interpret each goal of the SDGs in a local context. 
The Government of Japan will continue to work with local governments and further accelerate its efforts to raise awareness of the SDGs across the country by strengthening its support for the initiatives in local communities 
(Science community)
Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) itself is not only one of the priority areas of the SDGs, but also a cross-cutting factor which will be essential in achieving various goals across different sectors. It is important for the Government of Japan to make the full use of its advanced STI in the field of international cooperation as well as to swiftly deal with emerging challenges. STI can be utilized to monitor and set appropriate parameters to measure progress. It can also be used to measure the cross-sectorial influence of different policies and properly follow and review the progress of achieving the SDGs based on scientific analysis. In this context, it is of great importance to enhance cooperation in a systematic manner among the science community in Japan and international initiatives including Future Earth. For instance, in 2013, when the SDGs was still in the process of being drafted, the Ministry of the Environment initiated \0xECComprehensive Research on Governance and Sustainable Development Goals, with a view to comparing challenges unique to Japan with global challenges and paving a way for solving domestic issues by achieving the SDGs. The Government of Japan has stressed importance of networking among scientists from diverse fields and has promoted a comprehensive study. The result of the research was compiled as \0xECJapanis prescription to achieve the SDGs in March 2016. The research has benefitted not only the science community, but also a wide variety of other stakeholders, including the Government. 
The Advisory Board for the Promotion of Science and Technology Diplomacy (comprising the Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs as chair and 17 members specialized in relevant academic fields) has compiled a recommendation on how to contribute to the attainment of the SDGs through STI in Japanis international cooperation, after deliberation based on knowledge and inputs from science and technology institutions across the government as well as the academic and industrial sectors. On May 12, the \0xECRecommendation for the Future: STI as a Bridging Force to Provide Solutions for Global Issues  Four Actions of Science and Technology Diplomacy to Implement the SDGs was submitted to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The core message of the Recommendation for the Future can be summarized as follows: STI has the potential to encourage various actors responding to the global challenges to engage in partnership and co-habitation and to move forward together. STI can act as a \0xECbridge between different sectors, countries and regions that otherwise tend to be divided, thereby opening a path to create a society for the future generation. In other words, STI can contribute to the achievement of the SDGs as \0xECa bridging force  the key to unite the world/ society to face common challenges for the future.
The key to implementing the SDGs is that countries across the world share this notion and address the challenges together by making use of the potential of STI.
To this end, Japan should take the following specific actions:
  Present a future vision of change through innovation;
  Grasp and solve the challenges by use of scientific data;
  Link and unite across different sectors, regions and states; and
  Foster human resources to undertake efforts of \0xECSTI for SDGs
Japanis diplomacy should vigorously play a leading role in implementing the SDGs across the world through STI with these four actions as the pillars of its initiative. 
As a backdrop to this conclusion, the Recommendation also highlights that, during its process of modernization, Japan has had the experience of overcoming its own challenges in such fields as health and medical care, the environment and disaster management by making the most of STI while maintaining social cohesion. Japan has also engaged in international science and technology cooperation in solving issues, including the Science and Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development (SATREPS). Based on such experience, Japan should actively participate in the international communityis efforts to implement the SDGs by taking advantage of STIis high potential for contributing to the broad range of global agendas covered by the SDGs. 
As shown in the Recommendation for the Future, the advancement of basic technology, including IOT, big data, and artificial intelligence, has made it possible to collect data on a global scale, covering even remote areas of the land and oceans, and to utilize them for economic development and the solution of social challenges. In the midst of the rising importance of observation data ranging from ocean to space, the use of data to resolve challenges is being actively pursued in various fields such as health and medicine, disaster management, water and food, energy, environment and climate change, ocean, and biodiversity. A prime example of such endeavors is the Data Integration and Analysis System (DIAS) of Japan. Japan has also played a leading role in the field of earth observation through active participation in international frameworks such as the Group on Earth 
Observations (GEO). 
Furthermore, there is a movement to connect real-world needs both at home and abroad to corporate activities, as illustrated in the \0xECSDGs Holistic Innovation Platform (SHIP) program jointly launched by Japan Innovation Network, comprised of major Japanese companies, and the UNDP. In the academic sector as well, there are initiatives like Future Earth, which promotes change in science itself by deepening the relationship between science and society. There is also a movement toward the management of university institutions for the \0xECglobal public, or in other words, for the benefit of the future of the Earth and human society. At the government level, too, taking into account the efforts and accomplishments within each sectors, Japan is aiming, on the diplomatic front, to promote co-design and codelivery with a view to promoting new Public Private Partnership (PPP) at the global level by linking and uniting diverse actors and regions/ countries and by sharing its experiences once again with the world, while the implementation of the SDGs is put into action under international frameworks such as the United Nations. As part of such efforts, in May 2017, the Government of Japan dispatched experts who were involved in drafting the Recommendation for the Future to the Second UN Multi-stakeholder Forum on STI for the SDGs. Japan also co-hosted a side-event related to SATREPS with the World Bank, and presented some of examples of utilizing data and collaboration with the business sector to solve global challenges, which gained high attention. 
(Parliamentarians)
Active support by parliamentarians is indispensable to ensure smooth implementation of the governmentis initiatives and to incorporate the perspective of the SDGs in the national budget. The Special Committee on Official Development Assistance and Related Matters of the House of Counsillors adopted a \0xECResolution on Japanis development policy towards \0xEBTransforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developmenti in May 2016 to encourage the governmentis efforts. Also, the Komeito Party established the \0xECSDGs Promotion Committee in collaboration with citizens groups like NGOs in January 2016 to support Japanese governmentis work on the SDGs. When the Japanese Government drafted the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the Komeito Party hosted meetings to hear the views of the private sector and to exchange views with parliamentarians. In April 2017, the Democratic Party hosted a study meeting to better understand the SDGs. Similarly, in April 2017, LDP established the parliamentarian league on SDGs diplomacy. The League will focus on four pillars; namely, Finance, 
Science Technology and Innovation, Judicial Diplomacy, and Capacity Building in order to study the potential of Japanis contribution to achieve the SDGs by making full use of its strengths from the perspective of international cooperation. The work of the League is expected to reinforce the initiatives of the Japanese Government. The Government of Japan will continue to seek the engagement of parliamentarians to promote the SDGs by raising their awareness and working in collaboration with their activities. 
(Communication)
In order to realize the nationwide implementation of the SDGs, it is of paramount importance for every single Japanese national to understand what the SDGs are. Under the leadership of the SDGs Promotion Headquarters, the Government of Japan is raising public awareness by means of hosting public awareness campaigns in collaboration with various stakeholders. Japan, in cooperation with the UN, international organizations and other stakeholders, will also actively share its efforts with the world through a range of international conferences and other opportunities. Although public awareness of the SDGs is still not sufficiently high, a wide range of stakeholders are engaging in public awareness campaigns. For example, in order for the public to better understand the SDGs, in October 2016, the Global Festival Japan was held with the main theme being the SDGs. The Japanese Government, international organizations, and NGOs presented their activities before 100,000 participants. A similar event is going to be held this year, focusing on the SDGs. In addition, in order for students and the general public to deepen their understanding of the SDGs, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) offers a place to have fun learning about the SDGs through hands-on exhibits and related events and seminars at the JICA Global Plaza. Furthermore, the United Nations Information Centre and Sophia University co-hosted the SDGs photo contest by students in 2016. The winner of the photo contest received a prize from the Foreign Minister. Yoshimoto Corporation, which hires a number of comedians and is influential among Japanese public especially young people, planned and hosted a SDGs related event, including stamp rally, at the 9th International Okinawa Movie Festival which was held from April 20th to April 23rd, 2017. Japanese Media are also actively promoting the SDGs to enhance public awareness. Since January 2017, Asahi newspaper has published a series of articles on the SDGs. Nikkei newspaper has also reported on the activities of companies which contribute to the SDGs, and has hosted a symposium with the city of Yokohama to raise public awareness. 
The \0xECEnvironmental White Paper, which was approved by the Cabinet in June 2017, articulated the relevance of each goal of the SDGs and introduced in detail recent undertakings by local municipalities and private companies to simultaneously solve environmental, economic, and social challenges. The Government of Japan is making various efforts to mainstream the SDGs. 
The Government of Japan is intent on reinforcing public awareness activities by working closely with different stakeholders. As a concrete example, to share good practices of private companies, the Government plans to (1) introduce an SDGs platform on its website, (2) encourage the use of the SDGs logos by those who engage in work related to the SDGs, and (3) establish the Japan SDGs Award to commend 
the work of private companies and other organizations which contribute to mainstreaming the SDGs. 
Furthermore, it is critical to promote efforts that help to foster in young children, who will shoulder the world after 2030, the necessary competencies to be the creators of a sustainable society. In this respect, the Government of Japan will further promote Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) as well as encourage learning about the SDGs in all settings, including schools, households, workplaces and local communities. For instance, the Government of Japan is contemplating revising the contents of the government course guidelines and study materials. Moreover, the Government of Japan is planning to co-host a side-event intended to mainstream the SDGs in the Asia-Pacific Region on the occasion of United Nation High Level Political Forum. At this event, Japan will introduce its good practice to participants. 
Based on the outcome of the G7 Toyama Environmental Ministersi Meeting in 2016, the G7 will design collaborative activities to implement the SDGs, especially paying attention to the environmental dimension. In June 2017, Japan together with Germany hosted a workshop with other G7 countries focusing on Goal 12 \0xECSustainable Consumption and Production in Berlin. The workshop discussed such issues as consumer information, food loss and waste, and sustainable lifestyle and education. 
 (5)  Overviews of progress and highlights in Eight Priority Areas
  Priority Area 1  
"Empowerment of All People"

Japan is committed to the key principle, \0xECNo one will be left behind, which encapsulates the philosophy that underpins the 2030 Agenda. It was prescribed in the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles that respect for human rights as a universal value of international society, as well as realization of gender equality and mainstreaming of the gender perspective are indispensable as cross-sectorial values in attaining all goals and that they should be included and reflected in all measures.
Domestically, under the \0xECPlan for Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens, Japan has made efforts to achieve a society where all citizens, including women and men, elderly and young people, persons with disabilities and all those in vulnerable circumstances, can play active roles in all places including the workplace, at home and the local community.
In the area of international cooperation, Japanis guiding principle is the notion of Human Security, which pursues the right to live in freedom and dignity, free from poverty and despair. Japan has made efforts for the realization of human security, focusing on individuals, particularly children, women, persons with disabilities, older persons, refugees, internally displaced people, ethnic minority groups and indigenous peoples, who are prone to be in a vulnerable position, through its protection and capacity building. 
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Working-style Reform)
While the working-age population in Japan has continued to decline since 1997, the number of non-regular workers continues to increase, from 16.34 million in 2005 to 20.23 million in 2016, accounting for about 40% of workers in Japan. For example, many women choose nonregular employment after their mid-thirties as they seek more flexible work styles compatible with the responsibilities of childcare and nursing care. It is also an issue that differences in wage levels between regular workers and non-regular workers is larger in Japan than other developed countries.
In addition, the proportion of workers in Japan working more than 49 hours a week is 20%, which is higher than other developed countries. Long working hours make it difficult to balance work and family life, such as childcare, and have become one of the causes of Japanis declining birthrate, as well as preventing women's career development and men's participation in household affairs. Improvement in working hours by raising the quality of labor enables diversified lifestyles, which in turn leads to improved productivity.
Working-style reform represents the biggest challenge to be met to create a society in which all citizens are dynamically engaged. Based on "Japanis Plan for Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens", the government has implemented measures to provide workers with more working style options by improving the condition of nonregular workers, such as realization of equal pay for equal work, reducing overtime work and total working hours, and promoting employment of the elderly by providing supports for companies to extend the retirement age to 65 and offer their employees opportunities for continued employment even after reaching that age. "The Action Plan for the Realization of Work Style Reform" was decided in March 2017 and the government has been working on revising relevant legislatives with the aim to define the maximum hours of overtime work permitted in principle over 40 hours per week as 45 hours per month and 360 hours per year. For any violations other than special cases, penalties shall be imposed.
(Child poverty countermeasures) In 2014, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development published the child poverty rate of the OECD member states as per 2010. According to this, Japanis child poverty rate ranked 25th out of 35 member countries. Relative poverty rate of single-parent households is particularly high among active households with children. Poverty has various detrimental influences on a child's growth and development. Countermeasures against child poverty, which pursue improvements of necessary environments and equal opportunities for education, are extremely important so that the futures of children will not be harmed by the environment in which they grow and poverty will never succeed beyond one generation. In order to achieve a society where all children can grow with dreams and hopes, the government drafted "The General Principles of Policy on Poverty among Children " in August 2014, and encourages child poverty countermeasures overall. Particularly, to support single-parent households and households with multiple children, based on "suku-suku support project", decided in December 2015, comprehensive support measures have been implemented including: (1) promotion of onestop service centers among local governments, (2) promotion of creating child's whereabouts and (3) extending benefits for starting work.
(Promote gender equality and women's empowerment)
In Japan, there are some 2,740,000 women among the female non-workforce population who hope to start working. About 1,360,000 (49.6 %) of them are between the ages of 25 and 44 years old (2016). Thus, there are many women with untapped potential in Japan and accelerating the creation of a society where individual woman can play an active part according to her own preferences is important. Also, it has been pointed out that the proportion of women in leadership positions is low and current efforts to prevent harassment related to pregnancy and childbearing are insufficient. 
In order to encourage companies to establish action plans on gender and publish relevant information for womenis empowerment, the Government of Japan has provided the "Supporting Tools for Establishment of General Business Owner Action Plans" which facilitate companies to understand circumstances, analyze issues and formulate their own action plans toward their female workersi empowerment. Also, the government implemented the "Projects on Promoting Women's Participation and Advancement in Small-and-Medium 
Enterprises", which aim to support efforts of small- and medium-sized enterprises pursuant to the relevant regulations. By supporting owners who have achieved the objectives prescribed in the action plans through subsidies and providing opportunities to publish companiesi information and action plans on womenis empowerment on the webpage of the "Database of Companies Promoting Womenis Participation and Advancement", the government has promoted the efforts of business owners. As a result, among large companies (with 301 or more employees), which are obliged to formulate action plans and report them, 99.9% formulated and reported their own action plans. Furthermore, 291 companies have been approved as good standing companies for womenis empowerment.
Also, the Government of Japan revised its Act on Securing of Equal Opportunity and Treatment between Men and Women in Employment as well as the Child Care and Family Care Leave Law. Under these revised laws (which came into force on January 1, 2017), employers are now obliged to establish necessary measures to prevent harassment related pregnancy, childbirth and childcare leave. Japan will continue to make efforts to ensure the thorough awareness and solid implementation of these revisions. (Education)
SDG4 upholds ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all. Japan aims to reduce the burden of educational expenses, which continues from the early childhood education to higher education. It has been working on the step-bystep promotion of free-of-charge early childhood education and the establishment of a granttype scholarship scheme to extend economic assistance. Also, efforts to enhance special needs education for children with disabilities and to promote education and learning to foster gender equality have been enacted. 
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is essential for achieving the aims of the SDGs as a whole. ESD nurtures the capacities of children to play leading roles in a sustainable future society through interdisciplinary and comprehensive approaches. In line with the National Implementation Plan on ESD and the Act on the Promotion of Environmental Conservation Activities through Environmental Education, Japan has strengthened cooperation among multiple stakeholders which are involved in ESD and environmental education so as to provide suitable education to people at home, school, the workplace, the local community, and other locations in accordance with their development levels. In order to nurture children's competencies to be the creators of sustainable societies and the world, Japan will promote SDGs-related education by improving curricula and revising teaching materials at schools in accordance with the new national curriculum standards that will be implemented from April 2020.
(Persons with disabilities)
In order to realize a cohesive society where all citizens, regardless of whether or not they have a disability, can coexist with mutual respect for personality and individuality, Japan decided the Third Basic Programme for Persons with Disabilities and implements measures to further support the independence and social participation of persons with disabilities.
For example, the Government has promoted the adoption of barrier-free design of transportation facilities and vehicles, based on the concept of universal design (\0xECEasy-to-use and free-to-use, for anyone, anywhere) and in line with the "Act on Promotion of Smooth Transportation, etc. of Elderly Persons, Disabled Persons". Barrier-free design has been promoted generally through the adoption of multifaceted barrier-free design around stations by encouraging local authorities to create basic plans for barrier-free use and through raising awareness of the mental barrier-free concept for a wide range of age groups and the public in general. 
Moreover, Japan urges companies that have not yet achieved the legally mandated employment rate (2.0%) to do so by providing them with relevant instruction, as well as through other measures, and helps persons with disabilities to find jobs according to their preferences and personal characteristics and to continue to hold down those jobs. Through these efforts, the number of the persons with disabilities who are regular workers and work based on employment contracts continues to mark the highest rate for the past 13 years.
(Building a protector network for the prevention of consumer injury to senior citizens and persons with disabilities)
In recent years, due to various causes, such as poverty, social isolation and decline in ability of recognition, consumer product injuries to senior citizens have increased in recent years. To prevent consumer product injuries, after enforcement of the revised Consumer Safety Act in April 2016, Japan establish a national local cooperation network, in which a wide range of stakeholders including local consumersi affairs centers engage, and intends to prevent issues that cause consumer damage, including catching fraudulent business before damages occur and providing swift relief to victims.
(2) International cooperation
(Women's empowerment)
Based on the belief that maximizing the power of women will vitalize the whole of society and contribute instrumentally to the growth of both the Japanese and the global economy, Japan is strengthening cooperation with the international community as well as assistance for developing countries toward the realization of "a society in which all women shine". In May 2016, Japan announced the "Development Strategy for Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment" as one of its new thematic policies based on the Development Cooperation Charter, and presented its plan to train roughly 5,000 female administrative officers and assist in the education of approximately 50,000 female students over the three years from 2016 to 2018. Moreover, in December 2016, on the occasion of the Third World Assembly for Women (WAW!Tokyo), Japan announced its plan to implement over $3 billion USD in total assistance for women in developing countries over the three years from 2016 to 2018, and has been steadily implementing these commitments.
In addition, in May 2017, the Japan Science and Technology Agency and the Science Council of Japan jointly hosted the Gender Summit 10 in Tokyo, with the theme of "Better Science and Innovation through Gender, Diversity and Inclusive Engagement" and discussed women's empowerment in the field of science, technology and innovation.
(Investment in microfinance institutions)
In developing countries, women are facing various gender inequality issues, including poverty, inequality of educational opportunities, unwanted early marriage and a high maternal mortality rate. SDG5 also lists eliminating gender disparities and the empowerment of women (support for independence, etc.) as part of its aims. Among ASEAN countries, the elimination of gender disparities has become one of the issues to be addressed as a region. In this regard, the "JAPAN-ASEAN Women Empowerment Fund" was established to contribute to the empowerment of women in Asian countries including ASEAN by improving access to financial services among underserved groups in the region such as women in poverty through investment in and/or loans to microfinance institutions, which support women's empowerment. The amount offered by the fund is approximately 120 million dollars. JICA and JBIC and other investors financed the fund.
(Education)
The government of Japan has provided educational assistance in a wide range of fields including basic education, higher education and vocational training in developing countries, with a focus on nation-building and human resources development. Based on the "Learning Strategy for Peace and Growth" announced in September 2015, Japan supports the achievement of the SDGs in developing countries with the following guiding principles: 1) Educational cooperation to achieve inclusive, equitable and quality learning, 2) Educational cooperation for industrial, science & technology human resources development and sustainable social economic development, and 3) Establishment and expansion of international/ regional network for educational cooperation. Private companies have also actively engaged in the efforts. With the support of JICA, SuRaLa Net Co., Ltd. developed business in education sector collaboration with local women's groups in Sri Lanka. There is an increase in cases where Japanese companies provide educational services for the BOP class, including the informal sector of developing countries.
(Expansion of sports value)
Japan promotes the "Sports for Tomorrow" programme, under which efforts have been made jointly by the public and private sectors, with the aim to promote participation in sports among more than 10 million people in over 100 nations by 2020, and to spread understanding of the value of sports. Specifically, through sports, Japan has engaged in international cooperation to construct an inclusive society and care for the aftermath of disputes and disasters.
  Priority Area 2  
"Promotion of Health and Longevity"

Japan has a track record of achieving some of the world's best health outcomes and greatest longevity through its nationwide public health insurance system over the last 50 years. It is said that the healthy life expectancy of Japan is 71.19 years for males and 74.21 years for females (2013), estimated as the longest in the world, though a large gap between average healthy life expectancy and average total life expectancy has been pointed as a challenge. The extension of healthy life expectancy is important for the reduction of the burden of nursing care and for the healthy living of elderly persons. The Government of Japan is implementing measures to accelerate the rate of expansion of healthy life expectancy exceed that of average life expectancy, and to extend the average healthy life expectancy by more than two years by 2025 with lifelong preventive care and support. In international cooperation, Japan places great importance on efforts in health and medical care, which have direct links to the promotion of human security. With a view to supporting the achievement of the SDGs' health goals, in September 2015, the Japanese government formulated the "Basic Design for Peace and Health (Global Heath Cooperation as a guideline for its global health poly)", to build a response system for future public health emergencies, similar to the outbreak of Ebola virus, and to provide lifelong basic health services for all, while utilizing Japan's knowledge, technology, equipment, services and etc. 
In addition, Japan set health as one of the 
priority agendas at the G7 Ise-Shima Summit, in May 2016 as well as at the Sixth Tokyo International Conference for African Development (TICAD VI), co-organized with Kenya in August 2016. At the Ise-Shima Summit the G7 leaders agreed on the importance of reinforcing the Global Health Architecture in order to strengthen the response to public health emergencies, promoting Universal Health Coverage (UHC), which is the key to responding to a wide range of health issues including preparedness to public health emergencies, and strengthening the response to antimicrobial resistance (AMR). They also announced the "G7 Ise-Shima Vision for Global Health", elaborating the direction of their concrete actions. At TICAD VI, health was taken as one of the "three pillars" of Africais continued development, and the participants agreed in the Nairobi Declaration, which upheld "promoting resilient health systems for quality of life" to solve the challenges having emerged from the Ebola outbreak in Africa. 
Furthermore, in July 2016, Japan launched the "Basic principles of Asia Health and Wellbeing Initiative" to establish a \0xECnew Asia through the realization of UHC* and a society of health and longevity with sustainable economic growth. Japan will make efforts to share the lessons learned from its own experiences to other Asian countries by building upon mutually beneficial relationships, not only by sharing their representative system such as community-based integrated care system, but also by supporting the overseas advancement of the private sector. 
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Promotion of health and longevity)
Based on the Health Promotion Law, Japan formulated the "Health Japan 21 (Second edition)" in 2012, which sets various indicators and targets for health for the next 10 years, in order to extend the healthy life span of its population and reduce health inequality through partnerships with companies, private organizations and local governments.
(2) International cooperation
(Strengthening international response capacity for public health emergencies)
In order to strengthen the global health architecture to respond to cross-border public health emergencies, Japan has actively contributed to the discussions at various international fora as well as to support the expansion of the Emergency Response Department of the World Health Organizations (WHO) and their emergency response activities. In addition, the World Bank launched the Pandemic Emergency Facility (PEF), which is a financing mechanism to quickly mobilize funds by using insurance mechanisms at the time of pandemic occurrence. Japan actively engaged in designing this mechanism in partnership with the World Bank and WHO, and committed financial contributions to the PEF ahead of other countries in May 2016. Furthermore, in order to strengthen the global response mechanism, Japan supported an initiative led by WHO and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to formulate and utilize the Level 3 (L3) Activation Procedures for Infectious Disease Events to prepare for public health emergencies. All these measures and contributions are stated in the "G7 Ise-Shima Vision for Global Health" and have been disseminated widely around the world.
Interventions against some kinds of infectious diseases, like Ebola virus disease (EVD), see little demand at times of normalcy, but become immediately necessary globally once an outbreak occurs. Japan is supporting a new partnership called the \0xECCoalition for Epidemic and Preparedness Innovation (CEPI) which was launched in January 2017 to promote international research and development in producing vaccines for such diseases. 
(Attainment of UHC through strengthening health systems in developing countries)
UHC means that all people can access basic health services when they need them at an affordable cost. The achievement of UHC is important from the viewpoint of correcting health inequities and responding to the basic health needs of all the people, and to help recipient countries to cope with health and well-being related issues by themselves. In May 2015, Japan took the lead to include the promotion of UHC into the \0xECG7 Ise-Shima Vision for Global Health" as one of its pillars, in order to contribute to the prevention and preparedness against public health emergencies. Also, at TICAD VI in August 2016, Japan, in partnership with the World Bank and WHO, jointly announced a policy framework for action named \0xECUHC in Africa as one of \0xECJapan Brand. 
Ownership and leadership are indispensable for attaining UHC in Africa. In this connection, Japan has partnered with Kenya, Senegal and Ghana as model countries to extend cooperation in the areas of policy and institutional reform, as well as human resources development in individual policy priorities, so that such measures may spread throughout the entire continent.
In order to further promote UHC at the field level, Japan and the World Bank launched the \0xECJapan-World Bank UHC Initiative in January 2017. In order to follow the progress in the developing countries, an international conference named \0xECUHC Forum 2017 which is jointly organized by the Government of Japan, the World Bank and WHO as well as other organizations, will be held in Tokyo in December 2017.
In view of the ageing population in Asia, Japan intends to contribute to building sustainable social security systems in order to respond to the rapid changes of the demographic structure of the region, by sharing lessons and expertise gained from its own experience. A host country event on strengthening Health Systems and Promoting UHC at the 50th annual meeting of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) was held in the city of Yokohama in May, and a memorandum of understanding was signed between JICA and the ADB in order to establish a strategic partnership to strengthening health security and promote UHC at the annual meeting, to name but a few endeavors in this area. In July this year, the first Health Ministers Meeting on UHC and Ageing will be convened under the framework of ASEANJapan cooperation. 
In response to the views reflected in the 2030 Agenda adopted in September 2015, Japan has addressed the importance of strengthening multi-stakeholder partnerships on various occasions, such as at a side-event during the UN General Assembly meeting in September 2015, the UHC International Conference in December 2015, the G7 Ise-Shima Summit in May 2016 and other international conferences. To reflect the gaining international momentum, the International Health Partnerships for UHC2030 (IHP for UHC2030) was formed in June 2016, building on the multilateral health partnership under the International Health Partnership Plus (IHP+).
[Case Study] Cooperation toward Achieving UHC in Africa
JICA signed an ODA loan agreement with the governments of Kenya and Senegal and is implementing financial cooperation necessary to achieve UHC for both countries. 
In Kenya, JICA has supported the efforts of the Government of Kenya to implement its Health Insurance Subsidy Programs aiming at increasing the number of poor households receiving benefits from 0 to 420,000, and Free Maternal Services to increase the number of facility-based deliveries (from 44% to 65%) through the provision of free obstetric services.
(Promotion of the Asia Health and Wellbeing Initiative)
In order to address ageing Asia, Japan launched \0xECThe Asia Health and Wellbeing Initiatives which provide Japanese knowledge and expertise on long-term care and social welfare systems and support long-term care and related business providersi overseas advancement. As a nation at the forefront of ageing society, the Initiative intends to train experts in long-term care in Japan and return them to their countries to meet the new business opportunities there through circular migration across the region.
  Priority Area 3  
"Creating Growth markets, Revitalization of Rural Areas and Promoting Technological Innovation










Japan announced its target of reaching a nominal gross domestic product of 600 trillion yen ($5.7 trillion USD) under \0xECJapanis Plan for Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens through productivity revolution, innovations, venture creation capability, creation of new promising growth markets, regional revitalizations, etc. On June 9, 2017, in order to extend a virtuous cycle of growth and distribution, in addition to the implementation of Working-style Reform, Japan made efforts to improve productivity by investing in human resources and compiled the Basic Policies and the Investments for the Future Strategy for achieving Society 5.0 which solves social issues by bringing innovation into every industries and daily life. 
Japan extends its support to promote efforts in science, technology and innovation (STI) and research and development (R&D) in overseas. In addition, Japan supports other countries by exercising its unique and competitive edge in high technology sectors. At the same time, Japan also promotes the improvement of food security in the developing countries through building food value chains and promoting measures for improved nutrition.
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Expansion of \0xECFuture City Initiative)
The Government of Japan has been promoting the \0xECFuture City Initiative in anticipation of the future worldwide trend toward urbanization. The aim is to create urban cities and communities 
with sustainable economic and social systems.
The initiative is designed to address the common challenges of humankind such as ageing and environmental issues, to promote the creation new values in environmental, social and economic aspects in order to build a city where everyone wants to live and everyone is empowered. The initiative selects forerunner cities both inside and outside of Japan as \0xECFuture Cities which are to lead in innovating socioeconomic systems that can create successful cases, by receiving insights and networking experiences. The Government of Japan will prepare new guidelines and measures for the local governments in order to promote further development of the \0xECFuture City Initiative to take on the achievement of the SDGs toward the implementation of the SDGs in Japan by utilizing innovative approaches demonstrated under the Initiative.
As concrete efforts, the Government of Japan will hold an international forum under the framework of the \0xECFuture City Initiative focusing on the implementation of the SDGs, which will gather good practices and experts both from Japan and overseas, in order to help cities to promote sustainable measures for their own communities. In addition, the Government of Japan will support the initiatives of local governments in convening forums and seminars on the SDGs in order to foster momentum toward their implementation.
(Improvement of productivity at construction sites)
The Government of Japan is promoting a new approach at construction sites called \0xECi-Construction, which applies ICT to the entire process of construction work (including surveying, design, construction, inspection, maintenance and renovation) and aims to improve productivity at construction sites by 20% by FY2025.
(2) International cooperation
(Strengthening food supply systems in developing countries)
In developing countries, despite the growing consumer needs accelerated by economic development, farmers and producers are not successfully improving their income and value addition due to a lack of knowledge and techniques to meet the needs of the market.
In order to build their own food value chains (FVCs) fitted to the local needs and contexts, the Government of Japan is conducting training and seminars for government officials, farmers, food processors and traders in the developing countries on the production, processing, distribution and consumption of agricultural products, utilizing techniques and know-how practiced in Japan, in partnership with international organizations such as the Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations (FAO) and the ASEAN secretariat, as well as the private sector in Japan.
On research and development (R&D), the Government of Japan will conduct joint research with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and other international organizations in improving productivity and value addition for agricultural products in grains, beans and potatoes in Africa and elsewhere.
(Nutrition improvement)
Regarding nutrition improvement efforts, the Government of Japan has supported programmes to promote breastfeeding and human resources development in the health sector through bilateral cooperation as well as contributions through multilateral organizations such as the United Nations Childrenis Fund (UNICEF) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Furthermore, in recent years the Government of Japan has placed emphasis on partnerships with the private sector in this area. In September 2016, the \0xECNutrition Japan Public Private Platform (NJPPP) was launched to help food companies to start nutrition improvement projects in developing countries, through support to facilitate business environments, in partnership with stakeholders in the private sector such as business corporations, civil society and academic institutions. Japan will continue to contribute to nutrition improvement in Africa through this effort.
In addition, the Government of Japan is supporting the \0xECInitiative for Food and Nutrition Security in Africa (INFA) that accelerates practical activities for improving the nutrition situation in Africa. The Government of Japan also conducts research and development for improving the nutrition situation in Africa in collaboration with the said platform and IFNA through financial contribution to biodiversity.
(International cooperation through science, technology and innovation)
The Fifth Science and Technology Basic Plan, formulated in January 2016, places importance on making proactive contributions to international cooperation and partnerships that address global issues by fully exercising the potential of Japanis abilities and advantages in the area of STI. More concretely, 1) addressing global climate change and 2) responding to biodiversity loss were set as priority areas and relevant research and development activities were emphasized. Also, from the viewpoint of \0xECscience and technology diplomacy, which aims to utilize Japanis advanced science and technology toward its diplomacy, the international joint research framewprl called \0xECScience and Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development (SATREPS) was established in partnership with universities and research institutions in emerging and developing countries to tackle various global challenges in 2008. A project for the establishment of an early-warning system for infectious diseases incorporating climate predictions in southern Africa and a project for hydraulic engineering solutions and adaptations to water disaster in Thailand are examples of successful projects which have effectively contributed to targeted issues by use of observation data. Also, a project for the local application of the results of research on carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) in Indonesia is underway in cooperation with the Asian Development Bank. The Government intends to further promote similar efforts in the future.
(Support for developing countries utilizing ICT technology)
In recent years, partnerships between JICA and the private sector are have been making great progress in producing innovative cooperation in developing countries utilizing Japanis advanced Information Communication Technologies (ICT). For instance, in Viet Nam, Fujitsu Limited and Fujitsu Viet Nam Ltd. (collectively "Fujitsu"), with the assistance of JICA, commenced a field trial, taking advantage of the experience and expertise Fujitsu gained through a study on the effectiveness of a participatory disaster prevention system with resident representatives in Th\0x02D8a Thi\0xCDn-Hu\0xCD  Province. In this field trial, Fujitsu collected data such as farm-work records and reported market prices using smartphones, which are easy to deploy in Viet Nam. This data was aggregated and put into visual format at a Fujitsu datacenter before being presented. This project provided effective techniques and methods which Viet Nam needed and contributed to the establishment of a food value chain that improves the safety and productivity of farm products and their stable supply.
  Priority Area 4  
\0xECSustainable and Resilient Land Use, Promoting Quality Infrastructure

Based on the experiences of a number of disasters in the past, we are committed to promoting initiatives to build national resilience with the aim of creating safe and secure national lands, regions, and economic societies that are strong and flexible.
Around the world the development of high-quality infrastructure will lead to the improvement of the lives of the people living there, as well as to stimulate economic activity within the country and the region. Therefore, based on the recognition that developing quality infrastructure is essential to boost rapid growth in each country, Japan proactively supports the development of quality infrastructure that will lead to high-quality growth, together with the public and private sectors in line with the economic and development strategies of each country and region.
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Infrastructure)
Because of the geographical, topographical and meteorological nature of the country, Japan has repeatedly suffered from a wide range of disasters throughout its history. Based on the lessons learned from past large-scale natural disasters such as the Great East Japan Earthquake, the Government of Japan is committed to promoting initiatives to build national resilience with the aim of creating safe and secure national lands, regions, and economies that have strength and flexibility with the following four principles: 
(1) prevent human loss by any means, (2) avoid 
catastrophic damage to important functions for maintaining administration as well as social and economic systems, (3) mitigate damage to property of the citizenry and public facilities, (4) achieve swift recovery and reconstruction. Based on these principles, the government formulated the Fundamental Plan for National Resilience, and formulates its \0xECAction Plan for National Resilience every year. In addition to promoting this steady progress, we support the formulation and implementation of Fundamental Plans for Regional Resilience and promote efforts to contribute to strengthening the resilience of the private sector.
The Government of Japan recognizes four structural challenges faced by infrastructure development under severe fiscal constraints; namely, (1) the vulnerability of land (pressing issues for massive earthquakes and severe weather disasters), (2) the rapid ageing of infrastructure, (3) the impoverishment of local economies due to decreased population, and (4) intensified international economic competition. In responses to these challenges, the Government formulated the "Fourth Priority Plan for Infrastructure" in September 2015, which lists maximization of the stock effects of infrastructure as its fundamental principle. Under the priority plan, we will select and focus on infrastructure projects according to their purpose and necessity, while promoting strategic maintenance of existing facilities and their effective use (smart use).
Also, as decline and ageing of the population continue, especially in provincial cities, it is necessary to realize communities where the elderly and other residents can live without anxiety, while maintaining regional vitality and securing living functions such as medical care, welfare and commercial facilities. To this end, we are promoting city planning that aims at realizing of the concept of a \0xECNetwork-based Compact City. This concept aims to induce urban facilities and dwellings around hubs and networks of public transportation, as well as to promote the formulation of sustainable local public transportation networks that are well-balanced between convenience and efficiency.
(Water resources)
In Japan, in areas where depopulation and ageing are progressing, we are facing challenges in the maintenance of multifaceted environmental functions and services such as forest, agricultural land and water resources management, functions which all contribute to maintaining or restoring a sound water cycle, due to a lack of care. Also, in regions where the progress of urbanization has been most rapid, there is a risk that decreases in the underground penetration of rainwater will cause a depletion of spring water in urban area, as well as decreases in river flow rates in normal times (and accompanying deterioration of water quality) and increases in flow rates during flooding. Furthermore, in recent years, in addition to droughts occurring throughout the country, there is an increase in the range of fluctuation of precipitation due to the impact of climate change accompanying global warming. As such, compared to the time when the improvement of water supply facilities was planned, unstable factors such as the lowering of the available supplies have become apparent. Under these circumstances, in order to solve the problem of water circulation in watersheds and basins, we need to promote efforts by various actors in watersheds in a comprehensive and integral manner, including securing water volume and quality, conserving and recharging water sources, conserving and utilizing water, preserving ecosystems, disaster risk reduction and risk management at times of disasters and droughts.
To establish a sound water cycle, under the "Basic Plan on Water Cycle" formulated in 2015, Japan will promote efforts of "River Basin Management" in which relevant stakeholders in the watershed such as administrations, business operators and other organizations work together.
Furthermore, we aim to provide stable water supply through risk-management approach addressing disasters and droughts by thorough use of existing facilities and a combination of hard and software policy measures.
(2) International cooperation
(Quality infrastructure)
The global demand-supply gap of infrastructure investment has been a bottleneck for inclusive and sustainable development and addressing development challenges. In order to realize sustainable growth, securing the quality of infrastructure, along with the supply of both public and private funds, is essential in responding to huge demand for infrastructure development.
We need to promote quality infrastructure with open and fair access, considering elements such as lifecycle cost, safety and resilience against natural disaster, contribution to job creation and capacity building, social and environmental consideration, as well as alignment with economic and development strategy. Moreover, the infrastructure developed should be operated in an open, transparent and non-exclusive manner. 
Under these considerations, at the G7 Ise Shima Summit in May 2016, Japan led the adoption of the \0xECG7 Ise-Shima Principles for Promoting Quality Infrastructure Investment," whose importance was reaffirmed at the G20 Hangzhou Summit. Now that the supply side of infrastructure development is diversified, it is necessary to establish standards to be shared by the international community in order to develop quality infrastructure. With the G7 Ise-Shima Principles as a basis, we will work further to widely spread global standards in the international community. In this respect, Japan cohosted the \0xECFirst International Economic Forum on Asia together with OECD Development Center and Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) in April 2017, in which the importance of establishing global standards was affirmed.
Also on the occasion of the G7 Ise-Shima Summit, Japan announced its target to provide financing of approximately $200 billion USD over next five years to infrastructure projects across the world through an initiative called the \0xECExpanded Partnership for Quality Infrastructure. Based on the initiative, Japan continues to contribute to the development of quality infrastructure worldwide.
(Disaster Risk Reduction)
Japan actively supports disaster risk reduction and has been actively engaged in disaster relief operations along with emergency assistance, utilizing its advanced knowledge and technologies accumulated in its own past experiences of natural disasters such as earthquakes and typhoons. On the occasion of the Third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in March 2015, Japan announced the "Sendai Cooperation Initiative for Disaster Risk Reduction" as Japanis new contribution plan that will become Japanis future basic policy for cooperation in the field of disaster risk reduction.
 
Japan announced that in the four years from 2015 to 2018, it will provide $4 billion USD in total to areas related to disaster risk reduction and train 40,000 officials to play leading roles in national efforts for disaster risk reduction and postdisaster reconstruction. Through this initiative, Japan demonstrated its attitude to further contribute to the international community by utilizing its advanced knowledge and technology in the field of disaster risk reduction. In addition, we have held events related to tsunami disaster risk reduction to advocate the "World Tsunami Awareness Day (November 
5)" established by Japan's call, with the aim of encouraging the implementation of tsunami disaster risk reduction drills both in Japan and abroad and further raising awareness for disaster risk reduction.
From the perspective of disaster risk reduction education, in November 2016, in cooperation with the United Nations International Disaster Reduction Strategy Secretariat (UNISDR), Japan hosted the High School Students Summit on \0xECWorld Tsunami Awareness Day in the city of Kuroshio, to which high school students from 30 countries around the world participated. We are planning to hold the next High School Students Summit for island countries this year in Okinawa Prefecture.
Also, in the above-mentioned First International Economic Forum on Asia held in April 2017, disaster risk reduction was discussed under the theme of the challenge of sustainable cities.  
Furthermore, in April 2017, a bipartisan parliamentary association was formed to support UNISDR. The government will continue to work on mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction, which introduces disaster risk reduction perspectives to all development policies and plans, in cooperation with the parliamentary association, the international organizations such as UNISDR.
(Safe water and Sanitation)
Water and sanitation are vital issues linked to human life. In 2015, approximately 663 million people worldwide had no access to safe drinking water, such as piped water and wells, and approximately 2.4 billion people\0xF3about a half of the population of developing countries\0xF3had no access to basic sanitation facilities, such as toilets and sewage systems. Also, lack of access to safe water is being an obstacle to the economy, by depriving children of education and women of opportunities to enter into the workforce due to water drawing labor.
Japanis ODA disbursements for the fields of water and sanitation are the largest in the world.
Japan provides comprehensive support that offers both knowledge and expertise as well as equipment and facilities by drawing on Japanis extensive experience, knowledge, and technology in these fields, including: (i) promotion of integrated water resources management; (ii) provision of safe drinking water and basic sanitation (improvement of sanitation facilities); (iii) support to enable water use for increasing food production and other purposes (e.g., water for agricultural use); (iv) water pollution prevention (establishing effluent regulations) and ecosystem conservation (conservation of vegetation and sustainable forest management, etc.); and (v) mitigation of damage from waterrelated disasters (establishment of an early warning system and strengthening the disaster response capacities of communities).
(Global Positioning Standards)
On a planet that is constantly changing, it is important that positioning standards of latitude, longitude and height are universal in order to analyze the vast quantities of data related sustainable development. However, in approximately 30% of the worldis countries, their adopted reference frames are not consistent with global geodetic reference frame even now. Japan led the efforts to adopt the UN General Assembly resolution to strengthen cooperation between countries around the world for improvement of the Global Geodetic Reference Frame (GGRF) as one of the cosponsors at the 69th UN General Assembly in 2015.
Furthermore, Japan supports developing countries through technology transfer concerning the establishment and maintenance of GGRF. We are also supporting the promulgation of the GGRF by leading the discussion at the United Nations Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (UN-GGIM).
(Waste Management Sector)
Japan is contributing to reducing environmental impacts to the worldis ecosystems by efficiently promoting waste treatment, the implementation of the 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse, Recycling), and installation of waste to energy and the jkas on-site sanitation system, required by developing countries with a view to strategically expanding advanced waste management and 3R  industry globally. In particular, we actively support a wide range of efforts aimed at long-term environmental benefits in Asian countries which include: installing sophisticated technologies and promoting resource efficiency, providing financial support for feasibility studies, providing local information to Japanese companies, supporting project development as a package including support for developing guidelines in each country, supporting model cities, establishing business models, drafting standard specifications and collaborating with financial institutions such as the Asian Development Bank.
In addition, waste management was discussed under the theme of \0xECon track to a circular economy in the aforementioned First International Economic Forum on Asia held in April 2017.
  Priority Area 5  
"Energy Conservation, Renewable Energy, Climate Change Countermeasures, and Sound Material-Cycle Society"

In order to actively contribute to address urgent the challenges of climate change, Japan works steadily towards the achievement of its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), which will reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 26% by FY2030 compared to the FY2013 level. We are also working on promoting innovative technology development in the environment and energy sectors and actively supporting climate change countermeasures in developing countries. Regarding the establishment of a sound material-cycle society, we are advancing efforts of the 3Rs (Reduce consumption, Reuse and Recycle waste) in Japan based on the Fundamental Plan for Establishing a Sound Material-Cycle Society. In the area of international cooperation, in addition to supporting the development of quality infrastructure, we support the establishment of a sound material-cycle society in developing countries through sharing knowledge of the 3Rs and waste management.
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Energy)
To maximize the use of renewable energy while also reducing burdens imposed on citizens, the Act on Special Measures Concerning Procurement of Electricity from Renewable Energy Sources by Electricity Utilities was revised in May 2016. Furthermore, measures are being implemented to develop technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of renewable energy to 
foster its use. We are also working on expanding introduction of renewable energy.
Based on the Basic Energy Plan and the LongTerm Energy Supply-Demand Outlook, we will implement thorough energy efficiency measures in the industrial, household and transportation sectors through both support and regulatory measures.
In addition, we are promoting research and development for energy-related science and technology to accelerate the introduction of renewable energy and achieve drastic energy conservation.
(Climate Change Measures)
To mitigate global warming, we are implementing measures in a comprehensive and planned manner in line with the Plan for Global Warming Countermeasures, decided by the Cabinet in May 2016. For example, based on this plan, we are working on climate change research such as elucidation of climate change mechanism which is the basis for promoting measures against global warming.
Also, under the partnership among the government, private companies, other institutions and municipalities, we are promoting peopleis movement for "COOL CHOICE," for example on low carbon products and services that contribute to global warming countermeasures. As for climate change adaptation, we are steadily implementing the Climate Change Adaptation Plan (set by the Cabinet in November 2015). We also promote adaptation efforts by sharing climate risk information with local governments, private enterprises, and citizens through the Climate Change Adaptation Platform (A-PLAT), which has been operational since 2016.
(Ensuring sustainable consumption and production patterns) [Efforts for 2020 Tokyo Olympics] The Tokyo Organizing Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games (Tokyo 2020 Organizing Committee) issued the "Sustainability Plan (Version 1)." The Plan illustrates directions, objectives and examples of measures to be implemented for the preparations and operations of the Games in order to deliver the Tokyo 2020 Games with consideration not only for environmental issues but also for human rights and labor issues.
In addition, as one of the practical tools for the preparations and operations of the Games with consideration for sustainability, the \0xECTokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games Sustainable Sourcing Code (1st edition) was formulated in March 2017. Through conducting procurements in accordance with this sourcing code, the Tokyo 2020 Organizing Committee will contribute to realize a society that practices sustainable consumption and production in line with the SDGs, and work towards achieving widespread public recognition of the importance of sustainability. 
Furthermore, the Tokyo 2020 Organizing Committee is conducting the Tokyo 2020 Medal Project with citizensi participation to manufacture the medals for use at Tokyo 2020 Games from recycled metal extracted from used consumer electronics. Through this project, we are promoting the spread of the Small Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (SWEEE) recycling law, improving collection volume and making effective use of resources to establish a sound material-cycle society.
[Promotion of ESG Investments]
The government works on the establishment of a disclosure platform for environmental data, promotes private investment in Green Projects using public investment from the Japanese Green Fund, and developing eco-friendly products leasing, and promotes ESG investments in order to create a virtuous cycle in which the disclosure of environmental information by a company fosters dialogues between the company and investors, which in turn will encourage the company to conduct even more environmentfriendly business activities.
Specifically, the Ministry of the Environment held meetings of the Working Group on 
Incorporating Issues Regarding Sustainability into Investment (ESG Working Group), and in January 2017, it formulated a report aimed at contributing to the improvement of basic understanding on ESG investment. Also, we have published the "Green Bond Guidelines 2017" in March this year for the purpose of spurring Green Bond issuances and investments in Japan. In addition, we are studying to revise the Environmental Reporting Guidelines and the Environmental Accounting Guidelines.
 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) established the Study Group on Long-term Investment (Investment evaluating ESG Factors and Intangible Assets) toward Sustainable Growth in August 2016. Since then, the study group has held discussions on ideal approaches to strategic investment for companies to enhance their mid- to long-term corporate value, methods that investors should take for evaluating companies from mid- to longterm perspectives, and ideal approaches for encouraging companies to disclose information and hold dialogues with investors. As part of this effort, in May 2017, METI compiled \0xECGuidance for Integrated Corporate Disclosure and Company-Investor Dialogues for Collaborative Value Creation, a guide that may assist corporate managers in holding dialogues with investors or in disclosing management strategies, non-financial information and other elements. It may also assist investorsi evaluation of companiesi performance and management therefore improving corporate value.
 
In addition, the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE), together with S&P Dow Jones Index (S&P DJI) conduct the calculation and publication of stock price indices that can serve as an accelerator for ESG investment, thorough development of the "S&P / TOPIX 150 ESG Index" that measures the performance of companies in the S&P/TOPIX 150 (the underlying index), with a weighting scheme based on an ESG Factor Score. Also, the Japan Exchange Group (JPX) hosted the \0xECRI (Responsible Investor) in Asia conference in April 2017 in Tokyo, the Asia version of the world's largest international conference on socially responsible investment held annually in the US and Europe. Up-to-date information on corporate sustainability, responsible investment, trust in capital markets and ESG elements in finance were provided to domestic financial institutions and institutional investors, and the SDGs were discussed at the conference.
 
Furthermore, 	the 	Government 	Pension 
Investment Fund (GPIF), which manages pension assets, has been working to promote efforts for ESG, including the signing of the UN-backed Principles for Responsive Investment (PRI).
 
[Promotion of companiesi response by corporate governance code]
In \0xECJapanis Corporate Governance Code (JCGC) formulated by the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) in June 2015, it is noted that listed companies should take appropriate measures to address sustainability issues, including social and environmental matters. Together with the Financial Services Agency, TSE is following up with the prevalence and adoption of JCGC [Reduction of Food Loss and Waste]
The amount of food loss (eatable but discarded foods) in Japan is estimated to 6.21 million tons per year (FY 2014). The amounts of food discarded by businesses and consumer households are approximately equal; therefore both businesses and consumers should make efforts to reduce food waste. For this reason, the authorities concerned have been working together to reduce food waste as follows: preventing food losses, promoting food waste recycling based on the Act on Promotion of Recycling and Related Activities for Treatment of Cyclical Food Resources (Act on Food Recycling), studying commercial practices to reduce food losses, promoting food banking activities and supporting local governments in understanding the actual condition of food losses discarded by consumer households as well as in promoting public awareness for food loss reduction efforts. They also provide information for consumers to raise awareness on food loss or waste.
 
Furthermore, food loss reduction efforts are expanding to local governments. For instance, in October 2016, the "National Advisory Network for Enjoyable Ways to Not Waste Food" was established by Fukui Prefecture and supported by local governments (294 municipalities participated as of May 11, 2017) in order to share information and implement joint campaigns among local governments.
In addition, food-related businesses are working toward achieving numerical targets concerning reduction of food loss and waste and food recycling based on the Act on Food Recycling. They are mandated to report the implementation status of each year to the government. Cases have been reported in which thorough separation of sorting and weighing at the time of discharge leads to reduction of waste (generation), an appropriate order and resulting in not only reduction of environmental burden but also downsizing of business cost.
Besides this, under the Act on Food Recycling, a \0xECrecycling loop is established where feeds and fertilizers are manufactured from food loss and waste as raw materials, and agricultural and livestock products using them are consumed by those who had discharged food loss and waste. Through these initiatives, under the partnership among food products businesses, recycling businesses and agriculture, forestry and fishery businesses, the government is promoting recycling of resources within communities through food recycling.
One example of this is the Japan Food Ecology Center Co., Ltd., a recycling business operator, that is at the core of a recycling loop where department stores in the metropolitan area sell brand pork grown by feedstuffs made from food wastes derived from the same stores as brand goods, through high-quality food recycling. Another example is Uny Co., Ltd., Super Market, which actively disseminates a variety of environmental information for consumers. Uny has been building and implementing 13 recycling loops nationwide, as efforts that contribute to making the producer's face visible and ensuring traceability.
Such recycling loops contribute to the achievement of the SDGs, and above-mentioned cases are shared as advanced cases in Stakeholders' Meetings.
[Awareness-raising for Ethical Consumption]
In relation to ensuring the sustainable consumption and production patterns of SDG12, Japan is focusing on spreading and raising peopleis awareness of consumption behavior, which take into consideration people, society and the environment, including regional revitalization and job creation, which is called \0xECethical consumption.
In Japan, the government has held symposiums called "Ethical Lab" in local regions, and is actively introducing advanced cases of ethical consumption. We will also support a project to promote ASEAN countriesi policy dialogues on sustainable consumption and to develop information tools, by introducing Japanis policies and knowledge through measures such as holding workshops.
[Promotion of Consumer-Oriented Management]
In order to spread ethical consumption, it is important for business entities to conduct business activities from the viewpoint of consumers. Therefore, we are promoting efforts toward both consumers and businesses. \0xECConsumer-oriented management means that business entities conduct business from a consumer perspective in order to acquire the trust of consumers as a carrier of a healthy market, being aware of their social responsibility to build a sustainable and desirable society. In order to spread such consumer-oriented management, a promotion group, comprising administrative organizations led by Consumer Affairs Agency, business entity groups and consumer organizations, launched in October 2016, is expanding campaigns. Specifically, its calls for participation in the \0xECVoluntary declaration on consumer-oriented and follow-up campaign. In this campaign, business entities make a voluntary declaration and announcement that they will voluntarily practice consumer-oriented management, implement actions based on the contents of declaration, and follow-up and publish the results. We also hold seminars called \0xECTop Seminars, targeting business management.
(2) International cooperation
(Energy)
We will give more support to help developing countries implement measures to supply modern low-carbon energy at reasonable prices in a reliable manner, including energy conservation and renewable energy measures, and to give people better access to such energy. As an example of public-private partnership, in Morocco, JICA and Sumitomo Electric Industries, Ltd. are working together to implement a project to promote and spread the \0xECConcentrator Photovoltaic power generation system (CPV).
[Case Study] Promotion of Concentrator 
Photovoltaic power generation system 
(CPV) projects in Ouarzazad, Morocco As Morocco relies on imports for more than 85% of domestic energy consumption, they have set a national target to cover 42% of total electricity with renewable energy by 2020. With the cooperation of JICA, Sumitomo Electric Industries, Ltd. is working to promote the "Concentrator Photovoltaic power generation system (CPV)" in Morocco, which boasts a conversion efficiency about twice as high as that of ordinary crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules. 
(Measures on Climate Change) In 2015, Prime Minister Abe announced the 
\0xECActions for Cool Earth 2.0 (ACE 2.0), a set of contributions to advance global climate change measures. He announced that Japan would provide, by 2020, approximately 1.3 trillion yen of public and private climate finance to developing countries. To date, Japan has been providing various forms of assistance, including disaster risk reduction measures, forest conservation, introduction of renewable energy, and climate risk insurance to developing countries including in Asia, Oceania, Africa and Latin America. Also, in order to promote climate change measures, we give support to developing countries by fostering the implementation of the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM), a cobenefits approach to environmental pollution, observation of the global greenhouse gases from space, and the networking of researchers. Furthermore, we support the formulation of climate change adaptation plans and the assessments of climate change impacts in bilateral cooperation, and also share findings and support human resource development for climate change adaptation in multilateral cooperation. Regarding international cooperation in the field of climate change, other recent initiatives led by Japan include the following cases:
(1) Japan and Brazil, as Co-Chairs, hosted the Informal Meeting on Further Actions against 
Climate Change (commonly known as the JapanBrazil Informal Meeting) in March 2017 in Tokyo, which has been held every year since 2002. The Meeting served to share recognition among participating countries to move forward the work programs toward COP23. 
(2) Japan played a leading role in G7 discussions on \0xECclimate change and fragility at the G7 Hiroshima Foreign Ministersi Meeting during its presidency in 2016. Against this backdrop, in January 2017, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan organized the Roundtable Seminar on Climate Change and Fragility Implications on International Security. 
In this seminar, G7 countries, including Japan, affirmed that the issue of climate change and security should be addressed more proactively. 
In addition, through the intergovernmental framework of the Group on Earth Observations (GEO), Japan is working on research on global climate change, while promoting to share and utilize Earth Observation data including spacebased and in-situ data.
[Case study] Examples of Climate risk insurance 
 Support to the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) The PCRAFI insurance program provides Pacific Island Countries with parametric insurance as a mechanism for rapid response financing through an immediate injection of cash following a major tropical cyclone and/or earthquake/tsunami. In 2013, Japan launched the initiative jointly with the World Bank and continues supporting the establishment and management of a new facility that focuses on the payment of insurance premiums by island countries in the Pacific and that does not depend on contributions from donor countries. Private insurance companies are also contributing to risk hedge against largescale disasters through underwriting natural disaster derivative contracts.  


 Weather index insurance for farmers in Asia
Under the partnership between JICA and private enterprises, we are promoting innovative initiatives to reduce the impacts and damage caused by climate change such as droughts in developing countries in ASEAN and to enhance resilience by developing and selling weather insurance that reduces the risk of damaging rural areas due to unseasonable weather. Specifically, JICA, in collaboration with Sompo Risk Management & Health Care Inc., has been conducting a field survey on a weather index insurance business for agricultural workers in Indonesia since 2015. Through the introduction of weather index insurance, the project aims to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity of local farmers to climate-related hazards.
[Case Study] Asia-Pacific Adaptive 
Information Platform
The Ministry of the Environment has announced that the \0xECAsia Pacific Adaptation Information Platform (AP-PLAT) will be established by 2020 to share information on climate change adaptation in the Asia Pacific region by developing the "Climate Change Adaptation Information Platform" operated by the National Institute for Environmental Studies. The AP-PLAT will consolidate various data and activities on climate change collected and improved by projects of relevant ministries, and will create and consolidate data contents in collaboration with countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
Japan proposed the \0xEC3R Initiatives aimed at building a sound material-cycle society through the 3Rs (reduce, reuse, and recycle), aiming to balance the environment and economy through effective use of resources. For broad cooperation on promotion of the 3Rs in Asia, the Regional 3R Forum in Asia was established at Japanis proposal, whose name was later changed to the Regional 3R Forum in Asia and the Pacific. Members include central governments, international agencies, donor agencies, private sector entities, research bodies, and other relevant parties. Through discussions at the Regional 3R Forum in Asia and the Pacific, bilateral cooperation for waste treatment and the 3Rs, and information and data summarization in the State of 3Rs in Asia and the Pacific region to mitigate waste-related problems and reduce environmental impacts to establish a sound material-cycle society. 
In Africa, the "African clean cities platform" was established as a follow-up to the seminar on waste management, one of the side events of TICAD V. In the preparatory meeting for establishing "African Clean Cities Platform" in April 2017, aside from Japan (Ministry of the Environment, and JICA), participants included 24 
African governments and cities, UNEP and UNHABITAT, and the establishment of the platform was unanimously endorsed. As a regional mechanism to support the achievement of the SDGs on waste management in Africa, the platform aims at sharing information and experiences of appropriate waste management practices including the 3Rs in Africa, enhancing monitoring on the SDGs 

(Ensuring sustainable consumption and  production patterns)
targets, building capacities of human resources and institutions as well as developing and applying good practice guidance accommodating national circumstances in Africa, for the expansion of clean and healthy cities that is the foundation of well-being, investment and tourism promotion.
  Priority Area 6  
"Conservation of Environment, including Biodiversity, Forests and Oceans

Japan will promote sustainable use of ocean and marine and land resources in order to realize sustainable development. We will also improve ecosystem services provided by the natural environment such as forests, countryside, rivers, and seas in addition to promoting biodiversity conservation, which is the foundation of society and economy.
 
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts 
(Biodiversity, Ocean and Land Resources) [Promoting sustainable use of marine resources]
In order to promote sustainable use of fishery resources, the national government and local governments at the prefecture level formulate "resource management guidelines", which include management policies on fishery resources and concrete measures. According to these policies, fishers formulate "Resource Management Plans", which includes voluntary resource management measures by fishers besides public regulation. This fish resource management mechanism promotes marine resource management. At the end of March 2016, 1,868 resource management plans have been formulated.
In the private sector, two Japanese companies (Maruha Nichiro Co., Ltd. and Nippon Suisan Co., Ltd.) are committed to sustainable fishery through participating in the Declaration of Fishery Business for Marine Management, which was a new attempt by the eight largest global fishery enterprises to create a sustainable 
fishery industry.
 
[Promoting R&D and marine surveys for oceanographic science and technology] We continue to strengthen marine science and technology that supports the proper development, use and management of the ocean, such as research and observation technology of the ocean including the ice area, deep sea area and ocean floor. Also, we are promoting marine surveys strategically.
[Promoting Sustainable Forest Management] With domestic forest resources growing into a maturing stage for harvest, the sustainable use of forest resources through the establishment of the cyclic rotation of "harvest, use and reforest" while promoting thinning practices is the key to the fulfillment of multiple functions of forests thereby enhancing social, environmental and economic benefits. In this context, we are committed to take actions to turn the forestry sector into a growth industry including through sustainable use of forest resources as well as to improve forest management in disadvantaged areas.
[Realizing natural symbiotic society]
Japan is making efforts to realize a society that integrates the three dimensions of low carbon, resource circulation and natural symbiosis. These efforts include careful observation of areas with natural connections such as catchment areas as well as maximum utilization of the multifaceted effect provided by the linkage of the forest, countryside, river and sea. In order to realize this, we will work on creating a mechanism for bottom-up efforts with the participation and cooperation of a wide range of stakeholders and also create an economic structure to ensure the continuity of these efforts and human resource development. Through these efforts, it also contributes to regional revitalization including local communities.
There are several precedent examples such as conservation of grassland landscape and biodiversity through the participation of diverse entities including downstream regions and the promotion of traditional use, environmentallyfriendly agriculture with large birds such as crested ibises and oriental storks, and local forest management and promotion of renewable energy through sustainable use of local wood biomass.
(2) International cooperation
[Preservation of the environment (Promotion of co-benefits approach (Simultaneous realization of environmental pollution control and greenhouse gas reduction)]
Japan implements demonstration projects on co-benefits type technologies and capacity building projects to local practitioners such as engineers in Asian countries. In addition, we support the establishment of institutions related to environmental improvement and human resource development for government officials of partner countries.
In collaborations with partners such as UNEP, we also support review of scientific knowledge, dialogue with policy makers of other countries and capacity-building of both national and local government officials. 
There is cooperation among cities in Japan and China. This cooperation makes full use of the experience and technologies of environmentally advanced cities and private enterprises in Japan. Technology demonstration projects and capacity building support were implemented under this cooperation.
[Forest resources]
We are committed to implement REDD+ activities through public and private partnership, such as monitoring and measurement as well as conservation of forests, by means of the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM) scheme and remote sensing technologies of Japanis satellites in order to prevent deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries and further contribute to the promotion of sustainable forest management at the global level. These efforts will be help reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well as conserve and enhance sink and reservoirs of greenhouse gases while contributing to the provision of social, environmental and economic benefits.
[Case Study] Preparatory Survey on BOP 
Business for Procurement of FSC certified 
Wood
Yamaha Corporation, which globally develops products in a wide range of fields such as acoustic equipment and electronic components, mainly for musical instruments, in cooperation with JICA and local NGOs, has been engaging in tree plantation and sustainable management of forests in 
Tanzania. It aims for stable and efficient use of forest resources based on their own musical instrument manufacturing technology and 


sales market so as to ensure sustainable production of African ebony, a major material for musical instruments, and develop sustainable forest dependent community.
[Marine Resources]
Japan promotes bilateral and multilateral efforts toward eradicating illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing. Specifically, Japan takes initiatives to strengthen anti-IUU fishing 
measures in Regional Fishery Management Organizations and also promotes various measures according to both the Japan-EU and Japan-US joint statements regarding IUU Fishing. 
Also, Japan entered into the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing in May, 2017.
[Understanding the environmental situation] Japan is promoting R&D regarding satellite applications that contribute to solving global issues. Specifically, we make efforts for the following measures:
(1) We are promoting R&D that contributes to the construction of flood forecasting and warning systems through Global Satellite Mapping of Precipitation (GSMaP), utilizing several Earth observation satellites, such as "SHIZUKU" in cooperation with ADB, UNESCO and local institutions in partner countries. Currently, it is under operation in Asian countries (Pakistan, Bangladesh, Philippines, and Viet Nam), and will expand its operation to Sri Lanka and Thailand by FY 2017.
(2) We provide aerosol data in the Asia-Pacific region, which is collected by the geostationary meteorological satellite \0xECHimawari-8, since 2016 in order to monitor the atmosphere. This system utilizes "Himawari-8" data by using the algorithm developed for GCOM-C.
(3) In cooperation with JICA, we provide data on forest change through the JICA-JAXA Forest Early Warning System in the Tropics (JJ-FAST) using the data of advanced land observing satellite "DAICHI-2".
  Priority Area 7  
"Achieving Peaceful, Safe and Secure Societies"

Japan will continue to maintain its steady progress as a peace-loving country and strongly lead the international community from the standpoint of proactive contribution to peace based on the principle of international cooperation in order to secure global peace, stability and prosperity.
 
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Efforts to prevent unexpected accidents of children)
The government established the \0xECLiaison Conference of the Relevant Ministries and Agencies for Child Injury Prevention among related ministries in June, 2016 as a part of the \0xECProject for Child Injury Prevention so as to accelerate collaboration among ministries to take comprehensive approaches including raising awareness among parents and children, publicizing guidelines on accident prevention at relevant facilities, and measures to improve safe products. Concrete measures include the designation of "Child Injury Prevention Week" (4th week of May) since 2017, launch of the mascot characters ABUNAIKAMO (literally meaning \0xECpotentially dangerous with kamo being a pun on the Japanese word for \0xECduck) and the educational song Oshietene ABUNAIKAMO (Let me know, ABUNAIKAMO) in both Japanese and English by the Consumer Affairs Agency for using in various events for children held by local authorities. The Consumer Affairs Agency also launched a twitter account for child injury prevention and began issuing "Children Safety Mail from the Consumer Affairs Agency" every Thursday for raising awareness. In addition, the Consumer Affairs Agency participates in the Global Awareness Campaign organized by OECD. ABUNAIKAMO and its enlightenment song were presented at a meeting of OECD (the Working Party on Consumer Product Safety).
(Measures against child abuse) Based on the "Guideline on Work for Child Abuse Prevention Measures" (Decided by the Cabinet in March, 2008), we are trying to further strengthen a series of countermeasures from child abuse prevention to support for childrenis independence after suffering from child abuse. In April 2017, the "Law to revise a part of the Child Welfare Law" was fully enacted. The law encompasses strengthening the functions of local authorities and child consultation centers as well as the foster parent system. In addition, in June 2017, in order to protect children who have been abused, the government enacted a bill to strengthen judicial involvement with regard to the protection of children, and includes an article to allow the family court to recommend a government at the prefecture level to provide guidance to parents in order to protect children when there is a petition for approval of foster parent consignment or measures to enter a facility to care of children. 
(Measures against sexual exploitation of children)
In April 2017, the Ministerial Meeting Concerning Measures against Crime formulated the "Basic Plan on Measures against Child Sexual Exploitation". Based on this plan, we are taking a variety of measures to combat child sexual exploitation in cooperation with private enterprises and other organizations.
(2) International cooperation
(ODA based on the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus)
Japan puts emphasis on addressing root causes of conflict such as poverty and disparity under the philosophy of human security. We also make efforts to implement comprehensive measures on conflict prevention, humanitarian and development assistance and peacebuilding, namely the humanitarian- development-peace nexus, which leads to sustaining peace and the achievement of the SDGs. Specifically, we focus on the effective and efficient implementation of a variety of forms of assistance utilizing Japan's high-quality technology. This includes assistance for refugees and internally displaced people, support for women and socially vulnerable people, restoration of infrastructure, training of industrial human resources and administrative officials, security and governance capacity, landmine removal and support for legal systems. 
(Promotion of the rule of law)
Japan contributes to sustainable development of developing countries, which leads to peace and security of the international community, through support to establish legal systems for building a legal foundation for the rule of law. Specifically, we support the establishment of institutions in charge of drafting, revising and enforcing laws and also promote human resources development 
including inviting judicial officials to Japan for seminars. Japan provided approximately $2.7 billion USD in the decade from 2005 to 2014 in the field of governance including legal institutional support.
Japan will also host the 14th United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in 2020, which is the largest meeting held by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice. As the host country of the Congress, Japan will contribute to achieving SDG16 by promoting the rule of law at all levels of society, in particular, by highlighting the approach of fostering a culture of lawfulness at the Congress. Japan will also be committed in promoting the rule of law throughout the preparation as well as the follow-up activities of the Congress.
(Efforts for international peace and stability) In order to stabilize and improve the international security environment, we also provide capacity building assistance to the militaries of developing countries. We utilize the capabilities of the Japanese Self-Defense Force (SDF) for the international peace and stability, especially in response to diverse needs such as international law, aviation safety, and training for a military band in addition to significant capabilities for PKO and disaster responses including road construction and medical treatment.
  Priority Area 8  
"Strengthening the Means and Frameworks of the Implementation of the SDGs

\0xECSystem and Means for Promotion of SDGs Implementation" (Related SDGs: 17 (Means of implementation and partnership)
In recent years, the globalization of the world economy and the advancement of many developing countries are drawing attention as new investment destinations and markets open up and private finance-which is about 2.5 times as large as ODA-increasingly flows into developing countries. In this context, the international environment around development assistance is changing drastically. At the same time, activities by private enterprises and NGOs as well as governments and development agencies are becoming more important; and local governments and small and mediumsized enterprises are drawing attention as new development partners.
While various actors are working on the development of developing countries with diverse approaches, making full use of their respective specialized fields, ODA will continue to serve connect these efforts together and adopt a synergistic approach and thereby increase development effect.
(Cooperation with Stakeholders)
The Government of Japan needs to implement measures for the 2030 Agenda, monitor progress, and conduct follow-up and review activities across agency boundaries and through publicprivate partnerships. It will do this in cooperation with a wide range of stakeholders, including local governments, NGOs/NPOs, academia, the private sector, international organizations and other entities, parliamentarians, scientists and cooperatives. To this end, the Government of Japan holds roundtable meetings on items related to the promotion and implementation of the 2030 Agenda. These SDGs Promotion Roundtable Meetings are attended by representatives from the related governmental agencies and other stakeholders. Through these meetings, the Government of Japan aims to cooperate more closely with all stakeholders.
(1) Domestic Issues and Efforts
(Multi Stakeholders & Partnership) As mentioned in 4 (4) "Raising Ownership of SDGs", Japan has strengthened its partnership among all stakeholders such as private enterprises and civil society to implement the SDGs both domestically and internationally. We are strongly committed to working as \0xECall-Japan toward achieving the SDGs.
(2) International cooperation
(Development Cooperation)
The Development Cooperation Charter was decided by the Cabinet in February 2015 as the guiding principle of Japan's development cooperation so as to meet the needs of the new era after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Based on the Charter, Japanese development cooperation is implemented with a particular focus on (1) the eradication of poverty through quality growth, (2) sharing universal values and, realizing a peaceful and stable society and (3) building a sustainable and resilient international community through efforts to address global challenges.
Japan provided approximately $16.8 billion USD as ODA on a gross basis in 2016 according to provisional data announced by OECD DAC in April 2017, up 11.5% from the previous year. On a net basis, Japan provided $10.4 billion USD up 12.7% from the previous year. Japan is the fourth largest donor among OECD countries both on a gross and net basis and will continue to make efforts to strengthen the foundation of development cooperation, keeping in mind the international goal to provide 0.7% of GNI as ODA as well as severe fiscal circumstance of the country. The government of Japan believes that in addition to the increase in the volume of ODA, it is important to use ODA in a strategic and effective way, bearing also in mind financing for development from the private sector as well as domestic resources in developing countries. Japan announced a large scale package to support several globally prioritized issues at the G7 Ise Shima Summit in May 2016, which includes assistance for stabilization of the Middle East, global health, gender and quality infrastructure. Also, at TICAD VI in August 2016, another package was announced for further investment for the future of Africa. These assistance packages focus on specific fields and Japan is currently steadily implementing the commitments.
(Support for implementation system)
Japan supports developing countries to establish their own implementation systems for the SDGs. Japan has begun incorporating elements of the SDGs when assisting in the formulation of national strategies and related Implementation Guiding Principles. Also, Japan cooperates with developing countries in formulating domestic indicators for the SDGs. 
In Indonesia, JICA has supported the efforts of the government to set (1) national targets and indicators for the SDGs, (2) action plans to achieve the SDGs and (3) a mechanism for monitoring and evaluating their achievement. JICA has also assisted in formulating an action plan for "The Sustainable Development Goals Center for Africa (SDGC/A)", which is the independent and nonprofit international organization in Rwanda to enhance efforts towards achieving the SDGs by 54 African nations. Japan will accelerate efforts in Africa in partnership with SDGC/A through policy recommendations, research, capacity development, training and the promotion of science and technology and innovation. Also, in Asia, Japan implemented the ASEAN ESC Model Cities Programme and the High Level Seminar (HLS) in partnership with ASEAN countries and its cities, thereby supporting the creation of environmentally sustainable cities (ESCs) in the region toward the achievement of the SDGs. These programs mainly target cities in ASEAN countries in the framework of the East Asian Summit (EAS) Environment Ministerial Meeting. Japan has expanded these efforts by supporting ASEAN countries at the national level to formulate and implement programs regarding the environmental aspects of the SDGs.  With respect to science, technology and innovation (STI) as a means of implementing SDG17, Japan has, from the viewpoint of science and technology diplomacy, and in consideration of the Recommendation for the Future, dispatched speakers for the second Multi-stakeholder Forum on STI for the SDGs, and has co-sponsored a sideevent with the World Bank to share its experience in solving global issues through international cooperation utilizing STI (p.14-17). At the same time, given that STI is a cross-cutting factor affecting wide range of goals under the SDGs, it is widely utilized in various initiatives listed above, in addition to the following illustrative cases:
  Initiatives under the \0xECInternational Cooperation through Science, Technology and Innovation (Priority Area 3)(p. 30);   Research trough GEO including Earth observation under \0xECMeasures on Climate Change (Priority Area 5)(p. 39, 40);
  Initiatives under \0xECPromoting R&D and marine surveys for oceanographic science and technology and R&D regarding satellites under \0xECUnderstanding the environmental situation (Priority Area 6) (p. 42 and p.44).
 (Domestic Resource Mobilization) To help mobilize domestic resources in developing countries, Japan continues to provide technical assistances to build their capacity on tax policy and administration in partnership with international organizations as well as bilateral formats. For example, the government of Japan invites practitioners from tax authorities in developing countries to Japan where we have seminars on improving tax policy and administration. We also dispatch experts of the National Tax Agency of Japan to developing countries as part of JICAis aid programs. In terms of multilateral supports, Japan has been providing both financial and human contributions to the OECDis Global Relations Programme for over 20 years, in which tax experts of the OECD hold seminars on cutting-edge and highly-technical tax issues such as international tax treaties. In addition, the government of Japan has newly contributed approximately 5 million dollars (FY2016) and will add another 5 million dollars (FY2017) to IMF's "Revenue Mobilization Trust Fund", which is a flagship fund in the area of supporting domestic revenue mobilization of developing countries, and is actively participating in its management. Last but not least, the Government of Japan has secured 2 million dollars to be disbursed to a trust fund of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for domestic resource mobilization, which is to be launched in FY2017. 
Japan also mobilizes financial resources of the private sector in Japan for the benefit of developing countries through the issuance of JICA bonds as social bonds.
(Private-Sector Investment Finance)
To expand the role of the private sector in development, 	JICA 	resumed 	Private-Sector Investment Finance (PSIF) in 2010 in order to finance projects with high development impact in developing counties which are implemented by a private enterprise. Over 200 billion yen has been appraised for 16 projects as of the end of March 2017.
(Establishment of a scheme for business to engage in achievement of the SDGs) Prior to other donors, JICA launched the \0xECFeasibility Survey for SDGs Business and invites proposals from Japanese private enterprises planning business ventures which contribute to the achievement of the SDGs, utilizing their own products, technologies and expertise to conduct feasibility surveys in the developing country.
JICA also launched the "Preparatory Survey for BOP Business" in 2010 to encourage Japanese enterprises to promote BOP business (business that contributes to solving problems faced by people at the Base of the Pyramid) and adopted 114 cases for the survey through 10 public announcements. The \0xECFeasibility Survey for SDGs Business was launched by modifying the scheme of \0xECPreparatory Survey for BOP Business in order to strengthen partnership with private enterprises toward tackling more comprehensive issues listed in the SDGs beyond just addressing issues of people at the Base of Pyramid of global wealth. 
(Support for statistical capability in developing countries)
The United Nations Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific (SIAP), the only UN statistical training institution, in order to strengthen the capability of official statisticians to produce statistics, and their statistical training capability for developing countries, particularly focusing on Asia and the Pacific, implements statistical training programs including training courses for monitoring SDGs in partnership with JICA. The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIC) provides cash and in-kind contributions such as buildings and facilities, and human resources, namely dispatching staff members of MIC. These supports have been provided since 1970 when SIAP was established in Japan. Japan will continue the support for SIAP to implement programs, such as training courses on improving capability in producing official statistics, for monitoring SDGs.
. Next step
As a way forward, Japan will steadily implement the measures listed in the Implementation Guiding Principles, and follow-up and review the implementation status of the guidelines by 2019, with a focus on the next HLPF Summit in 2019. Japan also plans to publish the results of the review in an appropriate manner. In the followup and review, each measure under the priority areas will be monitored to discern whether it is implemented in accordance with the main principles of the Implementation Guiding 
Principles.
In addition, the government will also report progress to the United Nations as appropriate, based on the indicators at the global or national levels. In response to the adoption of the SDGs Implementation Guiding Principles, consultations have been conducted among ministries on the availability of official statistics for reporting the global indicators. As a result, it is anticipated that Japan could cover around 40% of all 244 global SDGs indicators (as of June 2017), provided that proxy indicators (data produced in the national context, not exactly the same as the global indicator) are to be included.
