As the State of Kuwait continues to follow the foreign policy traditions that have long been established by His Highness the Amir of Kuwait – may Allah protect and guard him well – the Government [of Kuwait] reaffirms its commitment to uphold its long-standing position in its relationship with other countries. The Government of Kuwait continues to uphold its support of the Gulf Cooperation Council and is keen to continue playing its active role as a member of the Security Council in championing issues relating to the Arab and Muslim world, and to world peace. 
Based on our constitutional and national responsibilities, and in keeping of our solemn oath and our covenant taken before the Almighty God, and then before His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, and before the beloved people of Kuwait, the Government, hereby, reiterates its commitment to the following well-grounded fundamentals:  
Firstly, the Government shall continue to follow its approach which places administrative, economic and financial reforms as a top priority, while adopting an objective course that builds on the experiences of the past and sets the foundations for a bright future.
Secondly, the Government shall focus on the economic and financial sustainability portfolios, given that we are partners with the private sector. We recognize its innovativeness and excellence, and are devoted to supporting its leadership role. This [commitment to a nationwide public-private partnership calls for cooperation and coordination with your esteemed Assembly so we can continue to adopt the necessary economic and reform legislations and take all necessary steps and measures to develop and support ease of doing business.
Thirdly, the Government reaffirms its keenness to continue its efforts aimed at developing and improving government services, for it recognizes that the right to education, health care, housing care, adequate employment opportunities for our competent and ambitious youth, and social services are not just matters for the fulfilment of constitutional privileges, but these are national obligations that the Government places at the forefront of its concerns. This, the Government also seeks the cooperation of your esteemed Assembly, in order to ensure their sustainability and priority, in line with the demands of reality, lawful rights, and aspirations and of the people of our beloved nation. We also look forward to completing all steps and efforts that will achieve balance between urban development and human development.
The youth of Kuwaiti is our true inexhaustible wealth; it is our winning bet that prompts us to keep pace with their excellence and ambitions and to share their active vigour 



This transformation will also shift operational burdens off the government’s shoulders and shall be borne by other sectors, mainly: the private sector.  In the meantime, every effort possible will be made to upgrading government practices and service delivery systems.  
Meanwhile, comprehensive reforms of the labour market aiming at increasing the competitiveness of the national labour force and encouraging young Kuwaitis to join the private sector are actively underway. There are pressing challenges that we are currently addressing, mainly: adjusting demographical imbalances, keeping a balanced approach to hiring expat labour to support development projects while increasing the participation rate of the national labour force in the economy.  Additionally, special focus is given to implementing comprehensive reforms of the education systems, on one hand, and on the other is to achieve the sustainability of public finances by approving new budgeting systems that link the projects of government agencies to allocation ceilings in order to ensure that financial resources are efficiently utilized. 
Moreover, and to further support Knowledge Economy, the government is currently developing a draft law for the Economic Activities which will be submitted in the near future for review by the Kuwait’s Parliament. The Knowledge Economy initiative has also launched the “Knowledge Economy Chair" to support human capital with specialized academic scholarships.  Kuwait is also in the process of launching the Knowledge Economy Indicator of government institutions.  
Since September 2015, our development priorities have been harmonized with Agenda 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and aligned under the slogan “Towards Sustainable Development” towards achieving the 17 SDGs in an integrated, interdependent and indivisible manner. A permanent National Sustainable Development Committee (NSDC) was established to oversee and steer the implementation of the SDGs, in partnership with civil society organizations, the private sector, regulatory bodies and observers from international organizations.  The NCSD is currently overseeing the production of Kuwait’s first Voluntary National Report (2019) for review by the esteemed HLPF. 
Kuwait is also in the process of finalizing its National Human Development Report (2019) in partnership with local expertise and international organizations. These and other reports reflect the country’s efforts at strengthening its human capital being at the core of its third development plan (2020 – 2025).
Recognizing the role of sound and rigorously tested public policies, Kuwait founded the “Kuwait Public Policy Center (KPPC)” to support its decision making process with evidence-based, well-researched public policies, leveraging local and international expertise and in partnership with distinguished institutions and thanktanks at the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences (KFAS), Kuwait University, Harvard University, the University of Ottawa (Centre for Governance), the American University of Beirut - Issam Fares Institute for Public Policy and International Affairs, the National School of Public Administration (France) École Nationale D'Administration (ENA), the Oxford Institute of Energy, the University of Syanes Po, and in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.  
Globally, Kuwait has always been keen to ensure its commitment to international treaties and conventions on the environment, immigration and other areas and to incorporate them into its development plans and economic programs. 
Kuwait has also been keen to shoulder its regional and international responsibilities towards achieving development in its various economic, social and environmental dimensions towards the implementation of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait’s initiatives to promote international partnerships, which are in continuation of Kuwait's long standing legacy to supporting development and humanitarian work and development assistance to developing countries and LDCs.  
And with the help of the Al-Mighty, we shall continue to advance our country’s development efforts to achieve the goals of our State Vision 2035, the growth and diversification of our national economy,  where the private sector leads economic activity, effective governance, developed infrastructure, improved healthcare and education outcomes, creative human capital and improved Kuwait’s ranking on global competitiveness indicators, and shall spare no effort to continue to serve the interests of the nation and our honorable citizens at present and in the future. 



entities from government, non-government and private sector partners. The workshops offered an opportunity to discuss & define SDGs priorities in the national context, interact with stakeholders on their respective roles in achieving SDGs, and mainstreaming goals and targets within the quinquennial Kuwait National Development Plan (2015-2020). 
The Government of Kuwait has significantly invested in national awareness raising on transformative scope of Agenda 2030 and its ultimate purpose of “leaving no one behind”. While setting strategic paths to overcome challenges, including strengthening the role of private sector, reducing dominance of oil sector on the economy, balancing public budget, creating conditions for reinvigorated direct foreign investments and improving infrastructure, the State of Kuwait has implemented strategic development projects for achieving relevant SDGs and their targets. 
Several achievements have been recorded on several SDGs including six priority goals of 2019 Review. Of relevance to this year’s VNR theme, namely “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”, Kuwait introduced over years several integrated social policy provisions and implemented all-inclusive social protection programmes, which resulted in raising standards of living, and ensuring universal access to basic services such as clean water, electricity, health care, education, transportation and other amenities for all residents. It devised capacity development programmes ensuring vulnerable groups are being empowered and given the means to be autonomous and economically productive.
One of Kuwait’s main messages is the commitment to allinclusive, rights-based, equal-opportunity and dignifying development of human capital and to economic, social and environmental sustainability. The state is also committed to regional and world peace and human dignity, and to global partnership and international solidarity. The Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED), founded in 1961, is Kuwait’s main institution providing development assistance (ODA). It has summed up over $19 billion US dollars ever since, in donations and grants that benefited over 106 countries around the globe. Kuwait’s ODA increased between 2012 and 2017 maintaining a funding level above 2% of GDP at a time when revenues were rather dwindling, due to oil price drop. 
“
In tune with the theme of the 2019 VNR Review i.e., “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”, Kuwait committed itself to achieving a resilient society, free of inequalities and discrimination. 
Leading up to the production of Voluntary National Report (VNR) 2019, the Government of Kuwait convened early on and throughout the drafting process, a series of national gatherings and workshops with a range of stakeholders including government, civil society organizations, the academia, the private sector and UN partners. The gatherings provided open fora for participants to actively participate in the successive preparations, discuss and provide required information and data, being engaged in reviews and revisions leading to final VNR report.
Kuwait’s 2019 VNR carries significant evidence to this message and attests to the determination of country’s Leadership, and to the policy, strategic, institutional framework and participatory endeavours of the Government in the short, medium and long-run, to bring about the highest dividend of sustainable human development for All, and to achieve SDGs Agenda 2030 and Kuwait Vision 2035.



SUBSTANTIVE 	3. Over the last four years, the Government of Kuwait has significantly invested in raising awareness 
SUMMARY	breadth and scope of Agenda 2030 and its ultimate among all national partners regarding the transformative 
purpose of leaving no one behind. It made consistent 

1. Starting with the Third Millennium, and prior to the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the State of Kuwait had met most goals and targets of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Indeed, the country had recorded concrete successes in ending poverty, winning the fight against hunger, providing universal education and closing the gender gap in education. It had attained universal health care, achieved admirable health indicators of infant, child, maternal and overall mortality, and ensured extensive water and sanitation services. Kuwait had also made important strides in economic, social and human development while paying significant attention to the environment and maintaining unwavering commitment to global partnership and international solidarity. 
2. Nonetheless, ever since the State of Kuwait officially endorsed the SDGs in September 2015, it has taken full ownership of the Agenda 2030 and made it its own. It did so to the point of inherently reflecting all 17 SDG Goals: substantively in the Kuwait Vision 2035; institutionally across its national development framework, plans and governance structure; and process wise, through a persistent engagement in mobilizing government and nongovernment actors and stakeholders including the private sector, at the policy, institutional, resourcebase, advocacy and consensus building level. efforts to match the triple premise of SDGs economic, social and environmental sustainability with the seven pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035, and to concretely and gradually incorporate the five critical SDGs dimensions of People, Prosperity, Planet, Peace and Partnership in the quinquennial National Development Plan 2016-2020. 
4. Leading up to the production of this Voluntary
National Report (VNR), the Government of 
Kuwait convened early on and throughout the drafting process, a series of national workshops and gatherings with a range of stakeholders including government, non-government, the academia and the private sector. The meetings provided open fora for attendees to be briefed on and participate in the successive preparations and revisions leading to the final writing of the VNR. 
5. The setting up of the National Sustainable Development 
Committee (NSDC) and the National Observatory on Sustainable Development (NOSD) were critical parts of an integrated institutional effort to roll out the SDG Agenda as a national and participatory undertaking. Indeed, the General Secretariat of the Supreme Council for Planning and Development (GSSCPD) together with the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) initiated more than 13 national workshops and seminars, which targeted more than 66 government entities and other non-government and private sector partners and stakeholders. The workshops offered an opportunity to explain the SDG Goals, define the SDGs priorities in the national context of Kuwait, interact with the different stakeholders and partners on their respective roles and responsibilities in achieving the SDG goals and targets, and guide the process of mainstreaming them within the quinquennial Kuwait National Development Plan (KNDP) and the national framework. 
6. As this is Kuwait’s first VNR on the SDG rolling out in the country, a deliberate decision was made to report on all seventeen goals, with particular emphasis on the 2019 Review Goals of Quality Education (SDG4), Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG8), Reducing Inequality (SDG10), Climate Change (SDG13), Promoting Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions (SDG16) and Partnerships (SDG17). The report makes a particular point of emphasizing the theme of this year’s VNR review of “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”. 
7. Over the last four years, the State of Kuwait took bold actions with a view to implementing no less than sixteen mega projects, fully interlinked with respective SDG goals and targets. It did so while endeavouring to overcome number of challenges including strengthening the role of the private sector, reducing the dominance of the oil sector on the economy, balancing the public budget, creating the conditions for reinvigorated direct foreign investments and improving the infrastructure. These efforts have enabled Kuwait to rank 105th among 156 countries in 2018, as it achieved 61.6 percent of all SDG goals at the international level and 62.1 percent at the regional level. 
8. Several achievements have been recorded on a number of SDGs including the priority goals of the 2019 Review. In matters of ending poverty, fighting hunger and providing universal health care, Kuwait introduced over the years several social policy provisions and implemented all-inclusive social protection programmes, which resulted in reduced income and non-income inequalities, eradicating extreme poverty, bridging the hunger gap, and ensuring universal access to basic services such as safe water, electricity, health care, education, transportation and other amenities for all residents. It devised capacity development programmes to ensure that groups who are subject to vulnerability are being empowered and given the means to be autonomous and economically productive. Interlinking KNDP with SDG3 targets for instance, was an opportunity to incrementally bridge coverage, quality and health seeking behaviour gaps across the health system, increasingly meeting the health needs of all people, Kuwaitis and non-Kuwaitis. As a result, the 2017 Atlas of Sustainable Development Goals attested to a completion rate of 86 percent in achieving SDG 3 in Kuwait.
9. Kuwait continued to provide free education for all, from kindergarten up to university attainment, mandating primary and intermediate education for all. 
In addition, and considering Kuwait’s interest in quality education (SDG4), new projects were designed and are being implemented under the Creative Human Capital pillar - one of the seven pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035. To that end, the Ministry of Education (MOE) is presently working on revisiting school curricula, enhancing school environment and improving school administrations’ competencies to better use computers and IT during the teaching process. Furthermore, Kuwait University and the Public Authority for Applied Education and Training (PAAET) are equally working on enhancing the capacities of higher education institutions to better cater for the growing demand among young males and females. With reference to the Global Knowledge Index 2018, Kuwait ranked 41th in terms of higher education with a value of 45.7 and ranked 50th in terms of pre-university education with a value of 60.2, where both values are above the world average. Nonetheless, in terms of technical and vocational education and training, Kuwait ranked 82nd with a value of 48.1, which is below world average. 
10. Kuwait had already made significant achievements, meeting most targets of MDG 3 regarding gender equality, while additional significant advances have been made recently in enhancing the status of Kuwaiti women. According to the World Economic Forum’s 2017 Global Gender Gap Report, Kuwait currently ranks among the top 5 performers on gender equality in the Arab region and in the top 10 Arab countries in the UNDP Gender Inequality Index Ranking. Furthermore, women’s political and leadership participation is progressively increasing where more women are running for parliamentary elections, and more Kuwaiti women are driven towards achieving their professional and educational growth, placing it as a higher priority. The Ministry of Justice data show that the number of girls getting married below the age of 15 had been progressively decreasing, and reached zero in 2015 and 2016. The same ministry showed a significant decrease of the prevalence of gender-based violence among both Kuwaiti and non-Kuwaiti females. On land ownership, recent data from the Public Authority for Agriculture and Fish Resources (PAAFR) indicate that 23% of the owners of agricultural land or partners with rights in agricultural land are women.
11. One of the seven pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035 revolves around achieving a “Sustainable Living Environment”. In fact, statistics show that access to safe and clean drinking water and to proper and hygienic wastewater networks is near universal in Kuwait. In addition, the Ministry of Electricity and Water (MOEW) is leading various interventions to achieve all SDG 6 targets including enhancing both the water and wastewater networks; undertaking research on water resources and water pollutants; making better use of all treated wastewater; conducting community sensitization activities starting from schools to impart a more responsible behaviour in consuming and recycling water resources; enforcing laws in vigour to ensure proper usage of water, where violators receive fines for wasting water; and building water tanks and drilling of wells to ensure long-term water reservation. According to the joint report “Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, 2017” of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Kuwait ranked first among Arab countries and 6th internationally with reference to drinking water quality. 
12. Concerning SDG7, statistics show that as of 2016, more than 80% of residents depended on clean energy and technology. However, in order to address future energy consumption level, Government devised plans to increase investment in a combined strategy of a) actionable national energy efficiency plans, b) an incentive and cleaner energy sensitization programme, and c) subsidy reduction. On that very last segment, government already passed a law, which went into force in 2017, raising the tariffs for electricity and water consumption. Considering the country’s significant solar and wind resources, Kuwait is aiming at increasing the share of the renewables in the electricity, generating capacity mix from today’s level of 1 percent to 15 percent by 2030. Other plans are underway to significantly reduce local emissions of SOx and NOx in addition to the reduction of other pollutants. In addition, MOEW has enforced the minimum requirements for efficient energy use in buildings since 1983 through an energy conservation plan. On the other hand, Kuwait is firmly moving towards a cleaner and greener energy sector through modernizing its desalination industry. 
13. In terms of economic growth, Government established in 2013 the Kuwait Direct Investment Promotion Authority (KDIPA) to attract foreign direct investment, develop the industrial sectors, diversify the sources of national income and create additional employment opportunities. In 2017, a Public Authority of Manpower (PAM) established to ensure the provision of decent work for all including women, persons with disabilities and others. PAM has conducted a study to identify the best working place and schedule for women, to ensure their protection. It also coordinated with the Public Authority for Disabled Persons to enforce legal clauses, which emphasize the importance of employing persons with disabilities in the private sector accounting for at least 4 percent of the staff. According to the National Labour Force Survey conducted by CSB in 2015, unemployment rate was 2.2 percent among males and 4.4 percent among females. Other ministerial laws were issued to regulate the conditions of work and protect the rights or workers, including laws that regulate the maximum number of working hours in open/public spaces. 
14. As for Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure, the Public Authority for Industry (PAI) is currently drafting the National Industrial Strategy (NIS), with the primary objective of increasing the shares of the industrial sector in Kuwait’s GDP and to generate job opportunities for youth in the private sector. It will also create, operate and rehabilitate various industrial cities with a total size of 93 square kilometres in collaboration with the private sector and attract foreign investments from major international industrial companies to help achieving national priorities. The aim is to increase non-oil industrial contribution to GDP and ensuring job creation. CBS statistics show that the added value of manufacturing reached 7.3 percent of the GDP in 2016 in comparison to 6 percent in 2012. Kuwait has plans to focus on localizing industries with industrial potential as this would contribute to the promotion of small and medium enterprises and provide industries with the required inputs and services.
15. Fully in tune with the theme of the 2019 VNR Review i.e., “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”, Kuwait committed itself to achieving a resilient society, free of inequalities and discrimination. The Leadership of the country decided to uphold the principles of human rights, inclusiveness and equality, drawing on the encouragement and support of national and international organizations and partners. Through several laws and specialized institutional frameworks, under the responsibility of several line ministries and through persistent collaboration with non-government partners, Kuwait has systematically worked to enhance inclusiveness across a range of interest groups such as people with disabilities, women, children, the elderly, foreign and domestic workers and residents with illegal status. No wonder that SDG 10 represents a pillar chapter of Kuwait’s 2019 VNR. 
16. Kuwait is free of slums. All urban dwellers live in houses and enjoy free access to quality social services including healthcare, education, public water, wastewater, electric networks and others. The Public Authority for Housing Welfare (PAHW) provides different housing welfare alternatives for eligible citizens, and works along public-private interaction and partnership. In terms of accessing safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, Kuwait Public Transportation cooperation (KPTC) provides extensive public transport services, which also cover transportation from the mainland to Kuwaiti islands. Government is currently preparing the Kuwait Fourth Master Plan (KMP4), which sets out the future urban policies regarding land usage within a specified period (25 to 30 years). The plan, which is part of a continuous process that had started a few decades earlier, aspires to achieve a balance among the elements of urban development, in order to absorb the expected population growth, within and outside the urban area. 
17. Of relevance to SDG12, Kuwait issued several laws and policies, ratified a number of conventions on sustainable and planned production and consumption of various materials and resources, and integrated production and consumption regulations within its national strategies. One of the issues of concern resulting from the sustained urban sprawl and population growth is the ensuing amount of solid waste that will most definitely be increasing over the next decades leading to further impact on both the landfills and the environment in general. This has prompted Kuwait to apply several policies and procedures to lessen the production of solid and hazardous waste and to ensure its recycling, re-usage and orderly disposal in fulfilment to its pledge to the Basel Convention. Furthermore, an environmental database known as the Environmental Monitoring Information System for Kuwait (eMISK) was established with the aim of boosting the monitoring capacity of national environmental sites and addressing environmental problems. The system uses the geographic information system (GIS) and remote sensors to support evidence-based decisions more accurately. 
18. Since the beginning of the 1980s Kuwait has been facing several environmental consequences as a result of the global climate change including desertification, increase in sea level, increase in temperatures and a loss of biodiversity. Such a change could have an adverse effect on the air quality and on the quality of life, health and wellbeing of the people. To address this situation, several positive measures have been taken such as the establishment of fixed stations to measure and monitor air pollution, setting up 4 mobile laboratories to attend to urgent cases, and to conduct field studies; and specialized stations to monitor the quality of air in areas close to oil fields and some residential areas. Furthermore, the government initiated 8 projects under the larger umbrella of Clean Development Mechanisms with the purpose of reducing the greenhouse gases emissions. National technical teams (Environmental Police) were initiated on 2008 and trained to efficiently monitor and assess air pollutants and initiate the necessary follow up actions.
Kuwait’s environment pollution indicators show that the level of pollution is still generally low. The pollution of wastewater however, is significantly alarming. Scientific evidence shows that it contains hazardous chemical and biological pollutants, which could endanger the marine and human life. This is critical since the country depends largely on the consumption of fish for food and on sea recreational activities. In light of that, the Government developed a National Biodiversity Strategy 2011-2020 aimed at protecting the biodiversity in natural, artificial and agricultural ecosystems. A lot of Efforts have been made to sensitize relevant sectors in society to the importance of this strategy and to enlist their support in the fulfilment of all its clauses, each according to their field of expertise and scope of responsibility. In addition, Kuwait established two marine reserves and a National Marine Environment Management Plan, which started in mid-December 2014. The plan aims at identifying the environmental goals related to the marine environment and meeting its legal obligations nationally, regionally and internationally. It also identifies the necessary actions required and integrates the necessary procedures and coordination mechanisms to meet these goals. 
19. Kuwait has passed through severe climate pressures, which made the ecosystem a vulnerable one. It has also been exposed to a number of human-related stressors and negative practices that led to soil fragmentation, destruction of vegetation and the demolition of wild animal habitats. Keen on protecting and upholding the ecosystem, Kuwait signed a number of international conventions and agreements on combating desertification, protecting wildlife and natural habitat and upholding biological diversity. It adopted a decennial national strategy on biodiversity (2011 – 2020), and passed an environmental protection law No. 42 in 2014, which was amended by law N0. 99 in 2015, and which represents a crucial starting point towards achieving Kuwait Vision 2035. The law protects endangered species and prohibits its trafficking in compliance with CITES and other relevant agreements. In collaboration with United States Geological Survey (USGS), Government is implementing an environmental project (eMISK terrestrial) that aims at rehabilitating some of the wild areas in the country. It is also implementing a project aimed at stopping the deterioration of land and the loss of biodiversity. Kuwait collaborates presently with the International Union for Conservation of Nature to develop a long-term plan with a view to conducting studies and defining biodiversity. Government has recently signed an agreement with the National Parks Board of Singapore, which aims at strengthening collaboration and strategic planning on land and life on land, and managing violations.
20. Kuwait is fully committed to world peace and international solidarity. Kuwait’s priorities in the Security Council have always privileged peace and stability in the region and in the world, preventing conflict, enhancing dialogue among nations and fighting all forms of terrorism. The state is signatory to many international instruments guaranteeing civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and has ratified conventions against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of punishment. Nationally, recent Ministry of Justice data shows a declining trend of murder rates from 122 cases in 2014 to 65 cases in 2016. In addition, Kuwait is fully committed to transparency in government transactions and in checking and fighting corruption and bribery. As to the annual budgets of government entities, they are regularly reviewed by Parliament and are subject to regular audits by relevant bodies such as the Audit Bureau, the Financial Control Authority and others. In 2018, Kuwait passed law 13/2018 on Prohibition of Conflict of Interest – mainly at the workplace, along with a number of articles and decrees with the aim of ensuring total transparency at work. In addition, the country is host to a number of independent Human Rights Organizations, operating in compliance with the Paris Agreement.  Kuwait allowed Human Rights Watch access to the country and engaged in a constructive dialogue with the organization on a range of human rights issues. On 2016 Kuwait improved foreign worker’s rights by enacting minimum wages, easing employer transfer rules and passing implementing rules of law 2015, which gave domestic workers forcible rights. 
21. Kuwait has been an active member of the United Nations since 1963. In 2009, it inaugurated a fullyfledged UN House in its capital. The Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED), founded in 1961, is Kuwait's main agency for overseas and international assistance (ODA). It has summed up over $19 billion dollars ever since, in donations and grants, and benefited over 106 countries around the globe. It is worth mentioning that Kuwait’s ODA increased between 2012 and 2017 at a time when Government revenues were rather dwindling due to the drop in the price of oil. Kuwait hosted 3 consecutive conferences, between 2013 and 2015 to raise funds for the humanitarian support for Syria after the war broke out there. It managed to mobilize US$7.3 Billion out of which US$1.3 billion were Kuwait’s own contribution. In 2014, the UN named the Emir of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah as Humanitarian Leader and declared Kuwait as an International Humanitarian Centre. Furthermore, Kuwait recently increased its voluntary contributions to a number of UN programs, councils and funds (CERF, OCHA, UNRWA, UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and UNWOMEN). Kuwait has been assuming one of the lead roles and responsibilities in the continuous cooperation and partnership between the European Union (EU) and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) that lead of establishment of 1988 EU-GCC cooperation agreement aiming at improving trade relations for economic and political cooperation. Under this framework, an annual Joint Council/Ministerial Meetings between EU and GCC foreign ministers has been established, as well as a Joint Cooperation Committee between senior officials. In addition, working groups have been established in the fields of industrial cooperation, energy and environment.





Figure 3
The Seven Pillars of “New Kuwait”

GLOBAL 	FLOURISHING	EFFECTIVE PROSPEROUS	CITIZEN 
POSITIONING COUNTRY GOVERNMENT ECONOMY   PARTICIPATION

Source: Kuwait National Development Plan Document (2015-2020)
Largely in tune with the SDG five dimensions of People, Prosperity, Planet, Peace and Partnership, Kuwait Vision 2035 consists of seven mutually supportive pillars representing the backbone of the entire strategy. These pillars are as follows: 
1. Effective Public Administration – aims at reforming administrative and bureaucratic practices for the purpose of reinforcing transparency, accountability, and efficiency in the government. 
2. Diversified Sustainable Economy – aims at developing a prosperous and diversified economy for the purpose of reducing the dependency on revenues generated from oil exports. 
3. Developed Infrastructure – aims at developing and modernizing the national infrastructure for the purpose of improving the quality of life for all. 4. Sustainable living environment – aims at ensuring the availability of living accommodation through environmentally sound resources and tactics.
5. High Quality Healthcarequality of services in the public health care system  – aims at improving the and developing national capabilities at a reasonable cost. 
6. Creative Human Capital education system for the purpose of better preparing – aims at reforming the youth to become competitive and productive members of the workforce. 
7. Global Positioningregional and global presence in scopes such as  – aims at enhancing Kuwait’s diplomacy, trade, culture and philanthropy. 



Ever since Kuwait officially endorsed the 17 goals, 169 targets and 232 indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in September 2015, the State has taken full ownership of Agenda 2030 and made it its own, to the point of reflecting its premises in Kuwait Vision 2035. Indeed, for the last four years, Kuwait has been strategically and persistently engaged in mobilizing all government and non-government actors and stakeholders including the private sector, at the policy, institutional, resource-base, advocacy and consensus building level. Its aim was to raise awareness among all partners regarding the transformative breadth and scope of Agenda 2030, the interdependence of the three economic, social and environmental sustainability premises of SDGs, and the interlinkages between SDGs and Kuwait Vision 2035. Its ambition was to strategically match the seven pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035 and the National Development Plan with the SDGs goals and targets, under the five critical SDGs dimensions of People, Prosperity, Planet, Peace and Partnership.

The Pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035 in relation to SDGs, are showcased in Table 1 below:
Table 1
Effective Public AdministrationGOAL 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries
GOAL 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patternsSustainable Diversified EconomyGOAL 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for allStrong Progressive InfrastructureGOAL 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
GOAL 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovationHigh Quality HealthcareGOAL 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all agesSustainable living environmentGOAL 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all GOAL 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
GOAL 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
GOAL 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
GOAL 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reserve land degradation and halt biodiversity lossCreative Human CapitalGOAL 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
GOAL 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture
GOAL 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education
GOAL 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girlsGlobal PositioningGOAL 6: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
GOAL 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable DevelopmentThe Pillars of Kuwait Vision 2035 in relation to SDGs
KUWAIT VISION 2035 PILLARSSUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL
Source: Executive summary, VNR’s first draft on SDGs, “Human-Centred Sustainable Development-- (GSSCPD), 2018


Table 2
Composition of the National Steering Committee (NSDC)

#REPRESENTATIVES#
REPRESENTATIVESGOVERNMENT ENTITIES

15Public Authority for Housing WelfareLOCAL AND INTERNATIONAL OBSERVER PARTNERS16	State Audit Bureau17	United Nations Development Program (UNDP)
18	World Bank (WB)PRIVATE SECTOR19	Chamber of Trade and Commerce KuwaitCIVIL SOCIETY20	Kuwait Environment Protection Society

Source: Progress Report, National Permanent Steering Committee for the Implementation of SDG Agenda 2030, (GSSCPD), 2018 

partners and stakeholders. The workshops offered an opportunity to explain the SDGs agenda, define its priorities in the national context of Kuwait, interact with the different stakeholders and partners on their respective roles and responsibilities in achieving the SDG goals and targets, and guide the process of mainstreaming them within KNDP and the national framework.
Table 3
Participation of Representatives of Government Entities for the Purpose of SDGs Alignment
GOVERNMENT ENTITYNUMBER OF ATTENDEESALIGNED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL
Ministry of Endowments and Islamic States and Minister of State for 	12	GOALS 1, 2, 5, 11, 14 
Municipal Affairs 	and 15

Source: Progress Report, National Permanent Steering Committee for the Implementation of SDG Agenda 2030, (GSSCPD), 2018 
3. 	https://sdg.iisd.org/events/unleash-sdg-innovation-lab-2018/Further to these activities, a media awareness taskforce was established by the NSCD. An Instagram page was created (SDG Kuwait) for the purpose of promoting all SDGs relevant activities and events, and sharing a number of short movies and documentaries on SDGs. In addition, an event was organized by ATA-HUB (SDGs Innovation Lab Forum) in 20183.

The following figure outlines the objectives that were achieved during this stage of implementation. 
Figure 5
Preliminary Achievements of NSDC

Source: Progress Report, National Permanent Steering Committee for the 
Implementation of SDG Agenda 2030, (GSSCPD), 2018 
THE CONSULTATIVE 
PROCESS IN 
PREPARATION  FOR KUWAIT’S VNR
One of the stated tasks of the NSDC was to oversee the preparation and production of Kuwait’s First Voluntary National Review Report on SDGs (VNR), which is being submitted to the United Nations High Level Political Forum in July 2019. The process has been overseen by GSSCPD, with a full involvement of NSDC and NOSD, and with support from UNDP-Kuwait.
Indeed, an interactive and participatory approach was adopted with a view to implementing this review, where a large number of stakeholders were engaged at different stages of the process and in different national and thematic meetings. In addition, regular coordination mechanisms were devised to enable government, non-government, and private sector stakeholders to provide their input, review progress and discuss goals and targets inter-linkages.
A typical national stakeholders’ meeting would gather all relevant actors and institutions including government, public agencies, the academia, the private sector, organizations of civil society, Kuwait’s Fund for Arab Economic Development, the United Nations and international organizations. The General Secretary of GSSCPD chairs the meetings and moderates the discussions.
The first national stakeholders meeting was carried out late 2018 along an interactive agenda as follows:
» A refresher on the SDGs Agenda 2030 and a presentation of the latest UN handbook for the preparation of VNR, the participatory process and the expectations of the stakeholders’ meeting;
» An all-encompassing thematic structure of the VNR in the development context of Kuwait;
» A general debate and division of tasks and responsibilities among stakeholders with regards to their respective roles and input in the preparation of the VNR.
» An open forum for participants to forge a shared vision of SDGs and share their applicable experience and their respective roles in the SDG implementation process.
The discussions focused on Kuwait’s institutionalization efforts to align its national development plans with the SDGs and devoted a good part to Kuwait’s national development context, challenges and priorities. The shared responsibility of all partners in achieving the SDG Goals was highlighted, referring to the critical role of each and every stakeholder. Participants reported on their respective work, exchanged views with working groups and members of NSDC. Many stakeholders briefly reported on the mandates 
Figure 6
The Road to the First SDGs Voluntary National Review
SETTING A COORDINATION 
Identifying 
Stakeholders
Meetings with 
NOSD and NCSD
SEVERAL NATIONAL STAKEHOLDER’S MEETINGS AND DIVISION OF TASKS
Monitoring progress and follow up
Moving forward with 
VNR preparation
and work of their respective institutions, how different SDGs and targets were part of their ongoing plans and programmes, and committed to contributing to the SDGs targets and goals of relevance to their work.
Several other advocacy and capacity development and stakeholders’ meetings followed this meeting in the first quarter of 2019. They aimed at a) building the policy and technical capacity of members of the NOSD, b) presenting and discussing the process and substance of the VNR to several national stakeholders’ groups including government, non-government and private sector partners, c) gathering comments and feedback from all participants on the process and substance of the VNR, and d) ensuring incorporation of relevant comments into the revised VNR draft (see annex 1).
STATUS AND 
PROGRESS OF THE 
SDGs GOALS AND 
TARGETS
Since this is Kuwait’s first Voluntary National Report on the SDG implementation in the country, four years after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda in September 2015, a deliberate decision has been made to report on all seventeen goals, with particular emphasis on the 2019 Review Goals of Quality Education (SDG4), Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG8), Reducing Inequality (SDG10), Climate Change (SDG13), Promoting Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions (SDG16) and Partnerships (SDG17). The report makes a point of emphasizing the theme of this year’s VNR Review of “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”.
it is critical in this context to note that the 17 sustainable development goals and 169 targets are all structurally and thematically interrelated in a way in which different targets can affect or contribute to one particular goal the same way several goals could be positively or negatively affected by one particular target. For instance, issues of relevance to gender equality have obviously been covered under SDG5, which is fully dedicated to gender equality matters. However, the same gender issues were also of relevance to many other goals and targets including health, education, decent work, social inclusion and others. It is therefore imperative to consider the report in its entirety and as a whole.  Since this is Kuwait’s very first VNR, future VNRs will be used to monitor progress on dedicated goals and targets in the country as per the theme of the Review of the reporting year. 
Over the last four years, the State of Kuwait in collaboration with the United Nations System and with the contribution and involvement of all stakeholders concerned, took bold actions with a view to implementing no less than sixteen mega projects, fully interlinked with respective SDG goals and targets. 
Kuwait’s achievements on each of the seventeen SDGs goals is best illustrated and summarized in the table 4 below. The table has been divided into two parts: a) achievements made regarding the 2019 Five Review Priority Goals together with Goal 17, and b) achievements made regarding the remaining eleven goals.
While many achievements have been recorded during implementation, numerous challenges remained. Primary 

among these are the limited availability of accurate and 
Table 4
SDGs Achievements of Kuwait
2019 VNR PRIORITY GOALS

SDG
DESCRIPTIONSDG 4:  Quality Education

SDG 8:  Decent Work and Economic Growth

SDG 10:  Reducing Inequalities

SDG 13:  Climate Change

SDG 16:  Promoting Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions
The achievement rate on this goal amounted to 74.7%, with 3 indicators calculated according to available data. 

3 indicators calculated according to available data, and the achievement rate amounted to 77.6%.

Achievement under this goal is rather a synthesis of progress made with many components/interest groups of concern, ensuring reduced inequalities and higher inclusiveness in society. This concerns people with disabilities, achieving gender equality, fighting human trafficking, protecting foreign workers, protecting children’s right, upholding the rights of individuals with illegal status, and many others – Details on this goal have been provided in the respective narrative of SDG 10.

43.8% of this goal have been achieved; 4 indicators have been calculated according to available data,

This goal has been achieved up to 73.9% so far, with 7 indicators calculated according to available data.
SDG 17:  Partnership50% of the indicators are of good value, 2 drawn on extensive data; the achievement rate reached 52.9%.
REMAINING ELEVEN GOALS
SDGs% OF ACHIEVEMENT
Source: Working paper on the Efforts of the State of Kuwait on SDGs, National permanent Steering Committee for the implementation of Agenda 2030, 2019

concrete data and the insufficient responsiveness to the request for data. More serious and structural challenges however, and which are being addressed through different institutional instruments, have been illustrated in Figure 7 below:
These challenges notwithstanding, the persistent and sustained efforts made by the State of Kuwait towards achieving the 2030 Agenda over the last four years, have enabled it to rank 105th among 156 countries in 2018, as it achieved 61.6 percent of all SDG goals at the international level and 62.1 percent at the regional level4.

Figure 7
Major Gaps and Challenges Faced while Achieving the 2030 Agenda

4. Source: Working paper on Kuwait’s implementation of SDGs, National SDGs Steering Committee, 2018
Kuwait is a high-income country with insignificant rates of extreme poverty, almost non-existent. The NSDC 2018 Report indicated that Kuwait had reached a 100 percent achievement on SDG 16. Furthermore, data show that Kuwait has significantly surpassed the Poverty line ($1.9 per individual per day)7. Government and different specialized ministries and departments however, have been consistently endeavouring to address both the strategic and basic needs of individuals and community groups, whose living circumstances are rather severe and taxing. Such efforts are also of relevance to other SDG goals and targets particularly SDG 8 and SDG 10 respectively, concerning enabling all individuals to be economically productive as well as reducing inequality and enhancing social inclusion and social resilience as it will be shown below.
Indeed, a few years ago, the Ministry of Social Affairs (MOSA) along with a number of government and nongovernment partners introduced several social policy provisions and implemented all-inclusive social protection programmes. These programmes aimed at improving the living conditions of individuals and groups who are likely to be subject to economic and social vulnerability. For instance, MOSA implemented the Public Assistance Law 12/2011, which ensures the provision of financial or other kind of assistance to families and community members with minimum living conditions standards. The objective of this policy provision is to achieve stability within families and reduce the unnecessary material and social suffering of society members in difficult living conditions. Such groups include, but are not limited to the elderly, widows, divorcees, housewives, families of prisoners, international students, orphans, people with chronic illnesses and others. Additionally, the clauses of law 12/2011 gave the Minister of Social Affairs (MOSA) prerogatives to provide public 
5. Further evidence and facts on this goal will be provided by the planned household survey that will be conducted by CSB, with the support of UNDP, as of 2019 onward.
6. Source: Working paper on Kuwait’s implementation of SDGs, National SDGs Steering Committee, 2018  
7. Central Statistical Bureau

assistance to those who may not meet established criteria, but who have proven that they are in critical situations and in need for assistance to live in dignity.
Furthermore, it has been one of Kuwait Governments’ major priorities to provide full access to basic social services to all residents (Kuwaitis and non-Kuwaitis). This was eventually achieved during the period of 2012 – 2016, when access to basic services such as safe water, electricity, health services, education, transportation and others became near universal, for all residents.
As per data generated, the government of Kuwait’s expenditures on Basic Services (mainly education, health services and social protection) reached 3,578.3 million Kuwaiti Dinars (KD) in 2016, up from 2,975.5 million DK in 2012. This represents around 41% of Kuwait’s annual total expenditures. 
MOSA also issued licenses and provided support for NGOs and CSOs with a humanitarian mission, to enhance their roles in eliminating the persistent drivers of relative poverty at the community level. 
For instance, “Bayt Al Zakat” is a government independent entity, which was established in 1982 with an independent fund and, which is under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Table 5
Figure 8
Percentage of Residents of Kuwait Having Access to Basic Services (CBS)

Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition 
Awqaf and Public Affairs. It aims at supporting vulnerable groups such as widows, the elderly, low income families, families of prisoners and orphans. The main strategic objectives of “Bayt Al Zakat” fall under the wide umbrella of enhancing social protection nets and encouraging humanitarian work while partnering with relevant stakeholders.

Percentage of Government expenditures on Basic Services of Total Expenditures
% of Government Expenditure on Basic Services from the Total amount of Expenditures
YEAREDUCATIONHEALTHSOCIAL PROTECTIONTOTAL

Kuwait Red Crescent Society distributing relief aid to Rohingya refugees in Cox’s Bazar city, Bangladesh (Photo by Hamed S. Alamiri).

The example of this support is provided for many local NGOs working in the country such as Kuwait Red Crescent, which is also providing support within the country and abroad. As a result, government support has enabled many NGOs and CSOs to achieve poverty reduction outcomes as per the following evidence, both in Kuwait and abroad:
In relation to target 1.4, the Family Care Management Unit at MOSA introduced additional services to its own programmes, which are aimed at alleviating the suffering of needy families, eventually leaving no one behind. The details of these services have been reflected in Annex 2.
Of relevance to this year’s theme “empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality”, it is worth noting that MOSA’s assistance has not been limited to financial support. It also comprises capacity development programme components to ensure that groups who are subject to vulnerability are being empowered and given the means to be autonomous and economically productive. For instance, 
Table 6
Achievements of the Ministry of Social Affairs under SDG 1
Provide support to 2,030 families in needProvide support to 316,701 poor familiesLaunch and implement 66 projects for individuals and families in needLaunch and implement 
2,018 projects for the poorIN KUWAIT	ABROAD

Employ 14,518 youths that were initially unemployed

Source: Role of Stakeholders in achieving SDGs, MOSA, 2018.

Table 7
Challenges Faced and Remedial Actions of Relevance to SDG 1, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs
CHALLENGEREMEDIAL ACTIONOutdated regulations for disbursement of aid
The rules and regulations regarding CSOs and NGOs operating for the public benefit contain gaps and are somehow outdated
Budget constraints and limited marketing outlets
Private Sector is still somewhat unattractive
Participation of NGOs and CSOs does not meet the required standards
New administrative decisions were issued.
Regulation of the Disbursement of Public Aid, no. (3695 / a) of 2016; Rules of Exchange of Public Aid no. (3696 / a) for the year 2016.
Rules and regulations governing the work of CSOs and NGOs are being revised in order to enable civil society partners deliver on their commitments and meet their goals of public benefit
Opening comprehensive marketing outlets (including online markets);
Cooperating with unions, foreign embassies, and the airport
Coordinating with the Planning and Development sector;
Coordinating with the Department of supply and stores 
Working with stakeholders to encourage youth to work in the private sector and improve the benefits provided
CSOs and NGOs are technically and otherwise encouraged and supported to enhance their work, especially in terms of rehabilitation and providing job opportunities


Source: Role of Stakeholders in achieving SDGs, MOSA, 2018.
MOSA provides psychosocial and physical support where needed, supports skills development through personalized programmes, provides practical experiences and exposure to knowledge and skills to a range of beneficiaries through participatory skills enhancement activities, and supports enrolment in schools and universities and vocational trainings of beneficiaries in need. 
Challenges and Remedial Actions
Kuwait has been facing several challenges though in implementing its support interventions in this area, which are aimed at fully achieving SDG 1. To that end, government devised concrete remedial measures to address these challenges. The table below is a summary of the challenges faced and the remedial actions and strategies that have been devised. 


Figure 9
Percentage of Agricultural Land Dedicated for Sustainable Productive Agriculture

   % of Area Dedicated for Sustainable Agriculture    % of Area not Dedicated for Sustainable Use
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB),  1st edition
20% of them were obese. Obesity was more common among males than females aged 9 to 17 years, which showed the high rates of obesity and weight gain in terms of age. Obesity rates and overweight among Kuwaiti adults were 44% and 34%, respectively in 2016 (KNNS 2016).  More recently, in 2018, a study assessing the prevalence of obesity and overweight among adolescents revealed that among the 591 adolescents surveyed, 54.3% were either obese or overweight, and that prevalence was higher among males than females. Programmes aimed at addressing this issue are being currently considered and their implementation and impact will eventually be integrated under this goal in future reporting.
Of relevance to food security, it is worth mentioning that a special area was dedicated for productive and sustainable agriculture during the period 2012 – 2016. The size of that area remained stable and consisted of around 96% of the total area dedicated for agriculture. (CSB)t
Because Kuwait lacks sufficient natural freshwater resources or arable lands, the government recognizes the need to bring in dry land urban agriculture and adequate technologies as well as other necessary resources and skilled labour to enhance its food production.
Nonetheless, PAFN implements a number of activities and interventions to prevent malnutrition and to ensure wholesome practices and promote active and healthy lifestyles. For instance, their efforts in partnership with six local companies have succeeded in reducing added sugars in juices with a rate varying between 6 and 17 percent. PAFN is also working hard with relevant authorities to promote healthy and nutritious patterns. 
Most challenges that are being confronted under this heading are the lack of qualified technical staff and the insufficient implementation of guidelines and principles set by the Civil Service Bureau. However tailor-made programmes are being designed and implemented to address these challenges, and will be monitored for impact and efficiency.
The Central Statistical Bureau is issuing data on a monthly and yearly basis, reflecting the Consumer Price Index on a number of basic services, as per the below table.
Table 8
Consumer Price Index per year
YEARCPI
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB),  
1st edition 



» Promote Healthier lifestyles across all community segments;
» Enhance quality health services, particularly the specialized welfare services;
» Develop health mechanisms focusing on prevention of and awareness about the risks of chronic diseases;
» Promote a greater and complementary role and involvement of the private sector in provision of health services;
» Pursue and provide universal healthcare through a combination of projects, primarily the projects of Quality Healthcare Services, Ending Non-Communicable Chronic Diseases, and Enhancing Hospitals’ Capacity, whose completion status is shown in the graph below:
Figure 10
Completion Status of Projects Aimed at Providing Universal Health Coverage
80

	services	chronic diseases	capacity
Source: Executive summary, VNR’s first draft on SDGs, “Human-Centred Sustainable Development-- (GSSCPD), 2018
As a result of the above projects, the Atlas of Sustainable Development Goals has recently estimated that Kuwait is at a completion rate of 86 percent to achieving SDG 3 (Atlas of Sustainable Development 2017, World Bank8).
In addition, the state of Kuwait has issued a number of laws that promote health and healthy lifestyles. For instance, law # 87 of 2017 on sports and law# 82 of 2018 to establish an entity to combat the use of steroids; law# 7 of 2019 to combat the illegal trading of tobacco and law# 14 of 2019 regarding psychological health, to mention but a few.
Most targets of SDG 3 have been fully met in Kuwait. For instance, with reference to target 3.1, the national statistics showed in 2016 that the State of Kuwait had a maternal mortality ratio of 3.4 per 100,000 live births, and had been declining from 8.4 and 11.4 per 100,000 live births in the years 2015 and 2014 respectively. As to skilled birth attendance, it is universal, and up to 100 percent across the country. Regarding target 3.2, Kuwait reached an under-5 mortality rate of 9.3 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2016. This rate is expected to reach 5 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2030. As to the neonatal mortality rate it stood at 4.6 deaths per 1,000 birth lives in 2016. Again, these indicators place Kuwait among the best performing countries worldwide.
In terms of target 3.3, the statistics of the Ministry of Health show a very minimal presence of AIDS in Kuwait, with a reported average of 0.02 per 1,000 persons registered for the year 2015, and no cases of tuberculosis, malaria or any communicable diseases reported since 2012. 
Focusing on target 3.4 however, and as mentioned briefly earlier, PAFN has initiated as of 2016 a set of activities aimed at decreasing the levels of sugar and salt in juices and snacks by 6-17 percent and 3-45 percent respectively, combined with intensive and targeted community awareness campaigns. This was a critical and urgent policy and programme response to disquieting statistics that had shown relative increased mortality rates from noncommunicable diseases, particularly from diabetes, as it is shown in figure 11.
8. 	Source: Executive summary, VNR’s first draft on SDGs, “Human-Centred Sustainable Development-- (GSSCPD), 2018Mortality rates from road and traffic accidents decreased from 12.8 in 2012 to 10.7 in 2016 per 100,000 persons. It is worth noting that deaths due to road accidents had reached its climax in 2015 causing 21.8 deaths per 100,000 persons.
Number of Deaths by Causes of Death  (per 100,000 persons)
25

 Cancer      Diabiets      —  Respiratory chronic diseases Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st editio
With reference to target 3.7, statistics provide evidence that the birth rate among teenagers decreased between the years 2012 and 2016, to reach a rate of 0.02 and 5.97 among teenagers aged 10 – 14 and 15 – 19 respectively, as shown in table below: 
Table 9
Birth Rates Among Teenagers And Young Age Group (per 1,000 Females)
YEARAGE GROUP 14-10AGE GROUP 15-19
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB),  
1st edition 
Figure 12
MOSA & MOH have joined efforts with regards to target 3.8. Both ministries have worked together to provide comprehensive health care services and essential medications and vaccines for all, in coordination with the Rehabilitation Medical Centre (RMC). These services reach the most vulnerable including the elderly, juveniles, persons with unknown parents, and others. Health care services under target 3.8 include a full range of reproductive health, maternal & child health and communicable and non-communicable diseases.
PAFN supported activities under target 3.9, through its various committees and departments by:
» Setting and lifting bans on certain food and activating regulations on trading and receiving food within the country;
» Circulating the required specifications for food trading, which are in concurrence with the standards issued by GSO and Codex Alimentarius; and
» Activating the GCC’s early food warning system. 
Statistics show that no mortality cases have been registered due to air pollution, unsafe water, or contaminated solid waste systems in the last 6 years. However, the mortality rate from unintended poisoning registered 1.1 deaths per 1,000 persons in 2013 and increased to 1.6 per 1,000 persons in 2016.
As to the rate of medical personnel and health care providers in Kuwait, it has marked a net increase from 8.77 workers in 2013 to 10.10 workers per 1,000 persons in 2016, with an associated increase in the numbers of pharmacists and nurses as per the graph below (Target 3.c).

Nurses
Healthcare Providers per Major 
(per 1,000)	Pharmacists
Dentists
 2016
Physicians
 2013
	0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition



A recent national report indicated an illiteracy rate of less than 2 percent in 2015, with high enrolment rate of 80, 97, 94 and 82 percent in kindergarten, primary education, intermediate education and secondary education respectively (as shown in figure 13)9.
The same report describes the different projects that are being implemented under the Creative Human Capital pillar - one of the seven pillars of Vision 2035 – including those that aim at ensuring higher quality education. To that end, the Ministry of Education (MOE) is presently working on revisiting school curricula, enhancing school environment, improving school administrations’ competencies to better use computers and IT during the teaching process. It is also working on improving teacher’s competencies to develop new teaching methods and provide students with the needed creative thinking and problem-solving skills.
Figure 14
Kuwait University and the Public Authority for Applied Education and Training (PAAET) are equally working on enhancing the capacities of the higher education institutions to better cater for the growing demand among young males, and young females in particular. For that, KU and the PAAET provide more space and diversifying university specialties and majors in accordance with the evolving needs and increased specialization of the labour market. The outcome of this investment is expected to better match education outcomes with the evolving needs of the labour market and in the process, provide better employment opportunities.
Percentage of School Enrolment in School Year 2016-2017 per Nationality and Sex
   Kuwaiti Female
   Non-Kuwaiti Female
   Kuwaiti Male
   Non-Kuwaiti Male
	8	7	7
	44	41  45	40  45	41
	Primary	Intermediate	Secondary
Source: CSB (2017). Annual Bulletin of Education Statistics 2016-2017. Central Statistical Bureau.
9. 	The National Report on Sustainable Development Goals, 2018 According to the 2016/2017 Education Statistics published by the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), a total of 329,920 Kuwaiti students and a total of 52,897 non-Kuwaiti students were enrolled in all the educational levels, over a total of 622 schools and 196 kindergartens:

Activities to boost students’ creativity, a School in Kuwait, 2019.
Kuwait is endeavouring to meet all SDG 4 targets, particularly target 4.2, ensuring that “all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood development, care and pre-primary education so that they are ready for primary education”. According to CSB, Kuwait reached an enrolment rate of 94 percent among children under 5 in the academic year 2016-2017, with a higher rate among girls in comparison with boys (96.9 to 91.6 percent). Moreover, under this specific target, MOSA ensures that specialized tutors are recruited to support persons with learning difficulties, and provides educational welfare for persons with unknown parents at fostering homes, by enrolling them into public schools affiliated to MOE. 
MOSA further supports the implementation of numerous specialized technical and vocational workshops targeting elderly, juveniles, and persons with unknown parents, such as art, computer literacy, etc. This directly contributes to target 4.5, which is aimed at “eliminating gender disparities in education and ensuring equal access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and children in vulnerable situations”.
Furthermore, under target 4.a. which seeks to build and upgrade education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all, available data shows that 100 percent of the schools in Kuwait have 
10. Source: Executive summary, VNR’s first draft on SDGs, “Human-Centred 
Sustainable Development-- (GSSCPD), 2018  
the Academic year 2017-2018. 
48.1, which is below world average.
MOE in collaboration with the World Bank and the National Centre for Educational Development (NCED) previously implemented an Integrated Educational Reform Program, which ended in 2015 with significant achievements. Along the same line, MOE has recently established an SDG4 gapmapping tool and is coordinating with several stakeholders and strategic partners with a view to furthering the educational sector and bridging all possible remaining gaps. According to the International Association for Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA), and in particular its “Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study” (TIMSS), which is an international assessment of mathematics and science knowledge among students around the world, the state of Kuwait’s rank has been falling back since 2007. The results of the TIMSS ranked Kuwait 34 out of 36 (4th grade mathematics), 32 out of 36 (4th grade science), and 34 out of 36 (8th grade mathematics) in 2007. This ranking fell back to read 48 out of 50 (4th grade mathematics), 49 out of 50 (4th grade science) and 44 out of 49 (8th grade mathematics) and continued to fall back to rank the last in 4th grade mathematics and science, and 33 out of 39 (8th grade mathematics).
Considering the above, Kuwait took the challenge of the gap in quality education rather seriously. Accordingly, it decided to address it head on through its NDP. One of the projects that are being implemented is “Quality Education Programme”, which aims at enhancing quality education, by developing the educational curricula, enhancing the schools’ environment, and enhancing teacher’s qualifications in terms of developing and adopting new teaching methods. The project has not yet been finalized. It will therefore be assessed for impact upon its conclusion10. 



Occupation, the Convention on the Rights of the Child (with reservations) and other regional and international instruments inherently upholding gender equality and girls’ and women’s empowerment (see annexes 3 and 4).
Over the past couple of decades, significant advances have been made in enhancing the status of Kuwaiti women. Health indicators, including female life expectancy and maternal mortality (as well as under-five mortality), have notably improved11. Female literacy has risen, as has 
Figure 15
35
female enrolment in primary and secondary education, while presently women make up the majority of university graduates12. In contrast to many other states in the Arab region, Kuwaiti women are strongly represented in the workplace, with a female formal labour force participation rate of just under 50%13. According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report, Kuwait currently ranks among the top 5 performers on gender equality in the Arab region and in the top 10 Arab countries in the UNDP Gender Inequality Index Ranking14.

	Illiterate	Reads 	Elementary	Intermediate	Secondary	Graduate
Source: Public Authority for Civil Information – 2015	and Writes

Figure 16
Participation of Kuwaiti Men and Women in the Labour Market per Age Group in 2015
100
 Male %
 Female %
Source: Public Authority for Civil Information – 2015
11. UN ESCWA. 2015. The Demographic Profile of Kuwait.
12. UN ESCWA. 2016. Against Wind and Tides: A Review of the Status of Women and Gender Equality in the Arab Region (Beijing +20). Beirut: UN ESCWA,
13. World Economic Forum. 2017. Global Gender Gap Report 2017. Geneva: World Economic Forum.
14. It is worth mentioning however, that the Middle East and North Africa has the lowest aggregate ranking on gender parity of all world regions. World Economic Forum, ibid. See also http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII

Figure 16 clearly show that Kuwaiti women are more driven towards achieving their professional and educational growth today and placing it as a higher priority. A corollary to this observation, of relevance to target 5.3, a 2016 data of the Ministry of Justice, which indicated that the number of girls getting married below the age of 15 had been progressively decreasing, and reached zero in 2015 and 2016. The same trend has been observed for married women between the ages of 15 and 19 years where the percentage went down from 20.2 percent in 2012 to 14% in 2016 for both Kuwaitis and non-Kuwaitis.
On violence against women, data from the Ministry of Justice in 2017 showed that its prevalence decreased among both Female Kuwaitis and Non-Kuwaitis. 173 cases were reported in 2017 (for Kuwaitis and Non-Kuwaitis) down from a total of 282 cases in 2014.
In 2005 Kuwait granted for the first time in its history full political rights to women. As a result, women were able to vote and run for office in parliamentary and local elections. Ever since this law was passed, Kuwaiti women have been able to occupy senior executive, legislative and judiciary leadership positions in the country. However, only one woman was elected in the latest parliamentary elections in a 50-member parliament, whereas only two women are currently cabinet ministers. It is important to mention that Women’s political and leadership participation is progressively increasing where more and more women are running for parliamentary elections, and more women are seeking international and local trainings to be more equipped and to build their capacities to play an effective public office role and in society at large. On the other hand, in 2016, more than 55 women held senior positions in public administration. This number had increased from 40 in 2012. 
Kuwait has a number of laws and regulations that protect women against inequality and injustice, specifically when it comes to violence and discrimination. However, men’s involvement in addressing gender inequality and violence against women has not been widely considered in the national strategies and plans. Little research has been conducted to document men’s perceptions and practices related to gender equality in Kuwait. In this context, it is worth mentioning that an International Men and Gender Equality Survey, Middle East and North Africa (IMAGES MENA) was conducted in Kuwait in 2018 with a nationally representative sample of 2000 respondents, divided equally among men and women, across the six governorates of Kuwait. The Survey reveals that a majority of Kuwaiti men still hold patriarchal views with regards to rights and relations between men and women, as they relate to men’s rights and privileges at home. However, the survey also showed that wealthier and higher educated men tend to have more equitable views on this matter.  At the work place more than half of the men are in favour of equal education between girls and boys, however only a third believed in the equal right for men and women to work after marriage. On the other hand, there is significantly less support among both males and females for fixed quotas for women in executive positions or for the same retirement age for both sexes. More than half of male Kuwaitis believe that women should leave politics to men, and the majority of men hold mixed views with regards to the leading abilities among women. As for the legal reform, a national Survey also showed that the majority of women advocate and are strongly in favour for laws that support gender equality. While only a fifth of men and 45 percent of women believe that honour-related crimes should be prosecuted like any murder, around two-thirds of both men and women believe that gender equality has been achieved in the country (More Survey findings could be found in annex 5). 
On land ownership, PAAFR data indicate that 23% of the owners of agricultural land or partners with rights in agricultural land are women. 

Kuwait’s Distinguished Women’s Award (KDWA) This award is granted under the patronage of His Highness the Emir. It is organized by GSSCPD, WRSC, in cooperation with UNDP and UNWOMEN and is given on the 8th of March of every year.
The award honours the role of women in social development. It values women’s role in the private and public sector as well as in the civil society and underscores the achievements of the most distinguished women.




Figure 17
Usage of Desalinated Water and Industry Supply Water

  Household usage       Agriculture, Irrigation and Fishery
  Manifacturing       Electricity Production
  Other economic activities
Source: Environment statistics for 2013, UNSD and UNEP
Statistics show that connection to wastewater networks and treatment facilities (target 6.2) was already universal in 2012 (100 percent of the residents), resulting in a total of 1,718,000 cubic meter/day of treated wastewater in urban areas, using sustainable primary, secondary and tertiary treatment methods, as shown in the graph below:
Figure 18
Percentage of Treated Waste Water/Method

  Primary       Secondary       Tertiary
Source: Atoum, M. (2018). Input to VNR, Environmental Governance Project, EPA and UNDP
Statistics also show that 100 percent of the residents have access to safe and clean drinking water and proper and hygienic wastewater networks, and 87.1 percent of 
Figure 19
Improved Water Efficiency Usage (2012- 2016)

	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
  % of water consumption       % of water efficiency usage
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Burea (CSB), 1st edition
wastewater was already safely treated by the year 2016. As to the percentage of water usage it has decreased from 100 percent in 2012 to 84.9 percent in 2016, and the percentage of change in efficient water use increased from zero in 2012 to 15.1 percent in 2016 as shown in the figure (19) above.
The MOEW is leading various interventions to achieve all SDG 6 targets including:
» Enhancing both the water and wastewater networks to ensure that all people have safe and affordable access on a sustainable basis;
» Undertaking research on water resources and water pollutants;
» Making better use of all treated wastewater;
» Conducting community awareness raising activities starting from schools to impart a more responsible behaviour in consuming and recycling water resources;
» Enforcing law 38/2005 to ensure proper usage of water, where violators receive fines for wasting water; and
» Building water tanks and drilling of wells to ensure longterm water reservation.
According to the joint report “Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, 2017” of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Kuwait ranked first among Arab countries and 6th internationally with reference to drinking water quality.
In 2018, the State of Kuwait ranked 21st in the Water resources & water sources sector when it was 48th in 2016, and ranked 50th in the water and sewage water sector when it was 54th in 2016.



Figure 20
Net Oil-export Revenue Relative to GDP in Four GCC Countries in 2017
45%
40%
35%
30%   Revenue
25%   GDP
20%   Revenue/GDP (right axis)
15%
10%
5%
0%
Note: GCC Countries include Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
Source: Atoum, M. (2018). Input to VNR, Environmental Governance Project, EPA and UNDP
Figure 21
Kuwait’s Crude Oil Production (Note: Unit on Left Axis is Thousand Barrels per Day)


Source: OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin, 2018.
Government is conscious that in order to address this energy consumption level, improvement in energy efficiency would require additional investment in a combined strategy of a) actionable national energy efficiency plans, b) an incentive and cleaner energy sensitization programme and c) subsidy reduction. On that very last segment, government already passed a law in 2016, which went into force in 2017, raising the tariffs for electricity and water consumption.
In addition, and considering the country’s significant solar and wind resources, one of Kuwait’s targets is to increase the share of the renewables in the electricity generating capacity mix from today’s level of 1 percent to 15 percent by the year 2030. For that purpose, a law was passed on the 1st of March 2017, to establish a Kuwaiti Public Shareholding Company for Solar Energy. The law aims at enhancing the capacity of the solar energy and improving its quality.
As to crude oil production, it is estimated to have reached 101.5 billion barrels in 2017 of proven oil reserve, which accounts for 6 percent of the world total and places Kuwait as the 6th largest among world’s oil producers. Furthermore, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC) is planning to increase the production capacity to 4mb/d by the year 2020. It has directed all its efforts towards creating incentives to attract foreign participation, which does not include production sharing and franchising. It is also pursuing international partnership for enhanced oil recovery.
During the 1990 Gulf War, nearly 800 oil wells were set on fire and caused a loss of nearly 5 million barrels per day. The oil-spill resulted in thousands of crude oil lakes, which made it very difficult to access production areas. However, Kuwait was awarded a $3 billion payment from the United Nations Compensation Commission in the year 2003 for the purpose of environmental rehabilitation. The rehabilitation process is overlapping with Agenda 2030 and is expected to last for 25 years.
Kuwait has 3 refinery complexes, one of them – Az Zour refinery, is currently under construction and is expected to be in operation in 2020. This complex is planned to produce low-sulphur fuel oil that will replace the high-sulphur oil, which is currently being used in local power plants. In addition, a Clean Fuel Project will be launched in 2019 with the aim of combining Mina Al-Ahmadi refinery and Mina Abdullah refinery. This will result in a major gain in quantity and a much greener and better quality of the oil produced, thus conforming to the specifications of Euro-4. Improved and upgraded systems will also be implemented to ensure the improvement of conversion capabilities, operational integrity, energy efficiency and safety performance.
The above plans are expected to significantly contribute to the reduction of local emissions of SOx and NOx in addition to the reduction of other pollutants, including the reduction of sulphur content in motor gasoline (from 500ppm to 10ppm) as well as in diesel (5,000ppm to 10ppm). Indeed, Kuwait started processing light grade crude oil as of 2018.
Kuwait accounts for almost 1% of the world’s reserves of natural gas, with 1.7 trillion cubic meters. The major consumption of Natural Gas is used for electricity and water desalination, where government already sees a large potential for reducing the adverse impacts on climate change. The Ministry of Electricity and Water (MOEW) has enforced the minimum requirements for efficient energy use in buildings since 1983 through an energy conservation plan, which was revisited and upgraded in 2010 to ensure more efficiency in new buildings (modifications and upgrades made are summarized in annex 6).
The conservation code has been left for 23 years without revisions or updates. As a result, the buildings sector continues to represent a major source of inefficient consumption of energy. After the revision of the 2010 codes and regulations, enforcements have improved. 
However, the building stocks in Kuwait are rather old, and represent therefore a serious challenge for improving energy consumption.
Three institutions were involved in the modification of the energy conservation codes i.e., the Ministry of Electricity and Water (the primary enforcer of the energy conservation codes), the Municipality of Kuwait and the Ministry of Public Works. Table 10 below summarizes the role of each government entity.
Table 10
Institutions and Their Responsibilities for Enforcing the Energy Conservation Code
INSTITUTION/
GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITYRESPONSIBILITIESMinistry of 
Electricity and 
Water (MEW)

Kuwait 
Municipality 
(KM)
Approval of W/m2 calculations for A/C and lighting.
Approval of all electrical drawings before obtaining building permit from Kuwait Municipality.
Approval of all energy conservation measures. Approval of kW/t for A/C systems and equipment.

Approval relating to compliance with zoning regulations.
Inspecting during construction of insulation materials and glazing application.
Ministry of Public WorksTesting and certification of building materials, including all insulation materials and systems.
Source: Al-Sayed et al. (2003).
A persistent challenge in this sector is represented by the inadequate coordination among the many government institutions concerned. The Higher Energy Committee (HEC) is therefore working on improving the coordination terms. HEC has plans to devise policies for the power sector among participants and to enforce decisions under regulatory frameworks.
Kuwait has the highest level of Carbon Dioxide equivalent (CO2-eq) emissions per capita in the world (21 tonnes/ capita). In 2015 energy-related CO2-eq emissions reached 83 million tons. These emissions are projected to significantly increase in 2035, with an average annual growth rate of 1.1%. This increase is reflected the figure (22).
Figure 22	Figure 23Kuwait’s Crude Oil Production

  Natural Gas       Oil       Non-energy use
Note: Unit on Left Axis is Thousand Barrels per Day.
Source: Xxxxxx
Figure 23 shows the trajectory of greenhouse-gas emissions in the transformation, demand and non-energy use sectors over the Outlook period. The transformation sector is further broken down into electricity generation and oil and gas production and refining. Switching from oil to natural gas and renewable energy in the power sector results in a modest decline in emissions, from 44.6 Mt CO2-eq in 2015 to 41.4 Mt CO2-eq in 2035, although emissions from oil and gas production increase by about 55% in 2015-2035.
Figure 24
Trajectory of Greenhouse-Gas Emissions19
Mt CO2-eq
110

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
 Residential      Non-energy use      Oil and gas production and refining      Industry      Transport      Electric generation
Source: Xxxxxx
Emissions per Capita in Kuwait Compared to Certain Regions in the Business-as-Usual Case20


19. Chapter 2 – Kuwait’s energy outlook to 2035.
20. Chapter 2 – Kuwait’s energy outlook to 2035.Kuwait is firmly moving towards a cleaner and greener energy sector through modernizing its desalination industry. It is introducing efficient technologies such as multiple effect water distillation and reverse osmosis.
The major environmental challenges that face Kuwait and, which will inevitably result in critical impacts on climate change – hotter climate, include the impact of water desalination intakes and brine disposal on marine life; the reduced air quality near desalination units; and the soil and groundwater pollution. However, since the desalination industry is a major and critical industry in the water sector, regulatory and restrictive reforms are being currently considered such as restructuring water tariffs, reducing water-related subsidies, mandating water saving fixtures, penalizing water wastage and others. Future plans in this sector are also likely to include policies for imposing building and appliance standards, clean transportation, efficient desalination, and large-scale deployment of solar and wind generation21. One of Kuwait’s largest and most promising initiatives is the Shagaya Project that is currently under-construction and is planned to be finalized by 2030. The project has 3 main outcomes 1) Creating around 1200 innovative job opportunities for Kuwaiti youth, 2) Securing electrical energy and diversify its sources, and 3) Creating a parallel industrial economy that doesn’t depend mainly on oil. The project is expected to produce 15% of Kuwait’s energy by 2030, through using a number of renewable energy sources like solar, thermal and wind. Al Shagaya Project is an environment friendly initiative that protects the resources of the country and reduce the pressure on traditional power plans especially during the summer. Moreover, the Project will ensure that all equipment and machinery are manufactured locally. Further examples of the proposed development projects are reflected in Annex 7.
For the purpose of moving towards a greener energy, Kuwait released a “White Paper on a Sustainable National Energy Strategy in 2017”. The paper recommended among other things the establishment of a “National Champion” to implement a number of recommended action plans. The “National Champion” is usually a national entity designed for coordinating multiple dimensions of the strategy and for providing a linkage between and across different levels of the government and stakeholder institutions. Furthermore, the “National Champion” can facilitate horizontal coordination among stakeholders at the national and regional level22. The “National Champion” initiative requires support from a national research unit that is qualified to monitor its work. In the case of Kuwait, the Council of Ministers has set up the Higher Energy Committee. 
 
Boosting Renewable Energy
Kuwait has vast solar and wind resources. However, they are not being deployed properly and efficiently. Renewable energy capacity among plants account for less than 1% of the total generating capacity of the country. Even though renewable-energy capacity is expected to increase to 5GW (gigawatt) as per the future plan, this will still not meet the country’s stated goal of 15 percent of energy demand from renewable energy. For that purpose, Kuwait is planning to enhance the usage of renewable energy in different ways as shown in figure 25 below:
Figure 25
Projected Generation Technology as a Percent of Total Installed Capacity in 2035 versus the Current 2015 level23

   2015       2035 Source: Xxxxxx

21. A good illustration is the Kadhmah drinking water new technology which was developed by KISR.
22. The “National Champion” initiative has been successfully adopted by a number of countries like the UAE, Qatar and Nicaragua, and the results were enormously positive.
23. Chapter 3 – Kuwait’s energy outlook to 2035.
In addition a number of policy reforms have been devised to increase the energy efficiency and achieve energyefficiency goals in the country. They have been captured in the table below:
Table 11
Policy reforms to achieve energy-efficiency goals in Kuwait
ENERGY EFFICIENCY MEASURES
Enforce and update building regulations and codes to reduce permissible power for air-conditioning

Enhance the arrangement of windows in buildings to increase efficiency and install photovoltaic building integrated systems

Invest in building retrofits

District cooling

Implement a standardized labelling program for appliances and equipment

Promote energy service companies to work within the sector to market energy efficiency programs to consumers and support consumers in estimating energy savings
ENERGY PRICING REFORMS
Gradually replace universal subsidies with targeted cash transfers or compensation schemes to eligible consumers – rapid and sudden price increases encounter public opposition

Clearly define a price adjustment mechanism for future price movements

Incorporate measure to protect energy-intensive firms in the economy from the inflationary effect of price increases – tied into energy efficiency measures in an industry

Launch a sustained long-term public awareness campaign ahead of energy price reforms

Source: Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research and Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences (2017), “The Future of Kuwait’s Energy System: Mitigating Threats and Seizing Opportunities”, White Paper on a Sustainable National Energy Strategy, University of Oxford, February 2017. 



Kuwaiti Lady started her own project with support SMEs Development Fund, Kuwait 2017. 

As part of the State’s efforts to diversify the economy, government established in 2013 Kuwait Direct Investment Promotion Authority (KDIPA) to attract local and foreign direct investment, develop the industrial sectors, diversify the sources of national income and create employment opportunities. In 2017, a Public Authority of Manpower (PAM) was added, which issued administrative laws organizing the work of the small and medium entrepreneurs, and developed electronic web-page allowing service providers to apply for tenders and bids electronically. 
In order to ensure the provision of decent work for all including women, persons with disabilities and others, PAM conducted a study to identify the best working place and schedule for women, to ensure their protection. Moreover, PAM coordinated with the Public Authority for Disabled Persons to enforce clauses 14 and 15 of law 8/2010, which emphasize the importance of employing persons with disabilities in the private sector, accounting for at least 4 percent of the staff. 
On the other hand, MOSA conducted several vocational and artisan trainings in collaboration with the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs, for women facing poor financial conditions or are below living standards, so that they can support themselves in the long run and have a permanent profession. It established small and medium business incubators through (33) boutiques24, aimed at supporting the marketing and promotion of artisan products. Additionally, consultations, seminars and meetings were also conducted to trade fairs to serve small and professional entrepreneurs (target 8.5).
According to the National Labour Force Survey conducted by the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) in 2015, unemployment rate was 2.2 percent among males and 4.4 percent among females. The rate was slightly higher among Kuwaiti nationals representing 4.7 percent (4.2 percent among males and 5.5 percent among females) compared to 1.8 percent among non-Kuwaitis (0.8 percent among males and 4.2 percent among females). Annex 8 shows Kuwaiti participation in the labour market disaggregated by age.

24. Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor (2018). The role of stakeholders in achieving sustainable development objectives.

an unemployment rate of 2.2 percent. The figure 28 below provides further elaboration of relevance to target 8.5:
Figure 28
Unemployment Rate Disagregated by Sex and Nationality 

Source: National Labour Force Survey 2015 (CSB).

NLFS also revealed that 64.6 percent of the residents were employed in the private sector, 19.3 percent in the public sector, 14.4 percent have/work at a family business and 1.5 percent work at Government owned facilities:
Figure 29
Percentage of employees by sectors


	0%	10%	20%	30%	40%	50%	60%	70%
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018 
However, unemployment rate was higher among youth groups aged 15-24 years and 25-34 years reaching 15.4 and 4.1 respectively in 2016/2017, in comparison with the drop-in unemployment rates among adults (35-44 years) from 1.1 in 2014 to 0.5 in 2016/2017:
Figure 30
Unemployment rate disagregated by Age
 2015
 2014
	0	5	10	15	20
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018.


Several ministerial laws were issued to regulate the conditions of work and protect the rights or workers. For instance, the ministerial law 201/2011 checks forced labour, whereas the ministerial law 189/2010 determines the maximum number of working hours in open/public spaces. Many other legal amendments were also passed such as law# 15/2017 regarding the establishment of companies, law#1/16 regarding the double taxations, and law# 7/2018 pertaining to the agreement with India on the same. PAM equally worked on establishing shelters for the foreign workforce, and now governs domestic work, which was previously affiliated to the Ministry of Interior (target 8.7).
PAM categorized private companies in accordance with national employment rates and International Standard Industrial Classifications (ISIC), and finalized the draft law relevant to modifying the percentage of national employees (target 8.b).
With reference to occupational/work related injuries, whether fatal or not, statistics show that the number of work-related injuries increased from 2,013 in 2012 to 2,419 in 2016 as per the figure (31) (target 8.8):
Figure 31
Number of Work Injuries in Kuwait
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018.
Furthermore, tourism has been identified as one of Kuwait’s untapped resource to enhance economic growth, and has been referred to in various chapters of the KNDP. In February 2018, the Emir of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, launched the newly designed “Sheikh Abdullah Al-Salem Cultural Centre, which together with the “Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Cultural Centre” launched back in 2016, constitute Kuwait’s new cultural district. This district, aims at assisting Kuwaiti, non-Kuwaitis and tourists in exploring Kuwait’s past, cultivating its present and valuing its future potentials. This gives the state of Kuwait the opportunity to lead a social and creative hub for the Kuwaitis and the region. The cultural district serves as a multidisciplinary public space, entertaining, educating and inspiring the people of Kuwait, and offering a large pool of events and activities targeting all generations and segments of the community. It provides space for dialogue to share, showcase and exchange knowledge, experience and skills.
Table 12
As to the number of branches of commercial banks, it increased from 400 in 2013 to 432 in 2016. The average number of branches of commercial banks amounted to 13.5 per 100,000 persons (15 years & older) in 2016 whereas the number of Automated Teller Machine (ATM) increased to 62.1 per 100,000 persons (15 years & older). More details are provided in the table below (target 8.10):
Kuwait ranked 7th out of 137 countries according to the Global Competitiveness Index 2017-2018 edition, with respect to government debt under pillar 3 as its debt amounted to 18.6 percent of the GDP.  It ranked 28th with respect to gross national savings, which amount to 28.8 percent of the GDP.
Recently, the Ministry of Social Affairs (MOSA) signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Labour Organization (ILO) for a period of 3 years, which 

Number of Commercial Banks and ATMs in Kuwait (2012-2016)
YEARPOPULATION 
SIZE (15 YEARS 
& OLDER)# OF 
COMMERCIAL 
BANK BRANCHES# OF COMMERCIAL 
BANK BRANCHES PER 
100,000 PERSONS 
(15 YEARS & OLDER)# OF ATMS# OF ATMS PER 
100,000 PERSONS 
(15 YEARS & OLDER)
revolves around the “Kuwait National Decent Work Programme”. This Programme is a translation of the priorities, policies and strategies of Kuwait in line with Vision 2035 and Agenda 2030. The programme priorities lie in a) empowering foreign workers (both males and females), b) enhancing the operations of foreign manpower, and c) promoting social dialogue and the tertiary cooperation. The programme fully integrates the principles of gender equality, sustainable environment and impartiality.

Disaster Risk Reduction – The state of Kuwait
In support to the State of Kuwait’s efforts to achieving Goal 8, the Disaster Risk Reduction Unit has coordinated various efforts as follows:
» Developing new export related industries to support income and GDP, through enhancing the cooperation between international investors (who have their own markets and products – target 8.1)
» Importing products and technologies that use raw material and develop it, that can be marketed globally with double the price of the raw material (target 8.2)
» Use high-tech production lines where only automatic operation is needed, to avoid any occupational risk or disaster (target 8.8)
» Resorting to industrial loans from the Industrial Banks and other commercial banks (target 8.10)


Increasing industrial contribution to GDP and generating employment constitute a significant evaluation criterion for the selection of industrial projects. In that context, PAI has also designed and implemented a number of training programs for youth in various industrial disciplines, in order to qualify them and encourage them to work in the manufacturing sector. This remains rather challenging and may require further boosting since relevant CSB statistics show a relative decrease in employment in the manufacturing sector when it had relatively increased in general terms between 2014 and 2016, as per the table (13) below.
Kuwait issued law 98/2013 establishing the National Fund for SME Development (KSMEF). PAI allocated then 10 percent of its developed lands to the project, which enhanced the inter-linkages amongst the various sectors (target 9.3). This Fund offered several advantages as follows:
» Tax and customs exemption for projects
» Supporting exports and raw materials according to the law.
» Provision of needed services to start and address operational and production problem. 
» Provision of loans with low interest rate. 
» Training, technical support and provision of advisory services in all areas for various projects.
Table 13
» Possibility to maintain the government function for 3 - 10 years, including during the period of the project failure
» The possibility of providing ideas and feasibility studies in the future
The state of Kuwait is currently measuring the air quality in the south region, by using a mobile plant to monitor air. Kuwait is also constantly monitoring gas emission through the establishment of monitoring and control systems that are linked to the environmental data management system, along the path of these data with the General Environment Agency. All industrial enterprises are now requested by law, to conduct an environmental impact assessment (EIA) to reduce their environmental impacts, including emissions of gaseous pollutants, and others if any (target 9.4).
Kuwait has plans to focus on localizing industries with industrial potential as this would contribute to the promotion of small and medium enterprises and provide industries with the required inputs and services, thus enhancing the value chain principle. Sectors such as petrochemical industries, plastics and polymers industries, pharmaceutical and food Industry represent lead potential sectors.
Percentage of Employees in the Manufacturing Sector (2014-2016)
YEARTOTAL EMPLOYEESEMPLOYEES IN MANUFACTURINGPERCENTAGE	2014	1,772,035	210,633	11.9

Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition.Other stakeholders in Kuwait also invest in research and development, such as the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Education (MoE), Ministry of Oil (MOO), and the Public Authority for Agriculture and Fish Resources (PAAFR). Available statistics show that the total amount of investments under this component amounted to a little over 25 million KD between 2014 and 2016 (target 9.5).
PAI has plans to establish a technological complex in AlShadadi industrial area. The aim is to encourage young innovators to venture in industrial technology and related applications in fields such as the petrochemical sector, renewable energy and water resources, with clear benefit in terms of scientific research outputs inside and outside Kuwait. This is expected to contribute to establishing and delivering technology innovation products in a commercial way and would achieve profitability for the state, investors and innovators, through incubation, development and marketing in local and regional markets (target 9.5 & 9.b).
To ensure innovation, the Supreme Council of Planning and Development (SCPD) has created Kuwait Sustainable Development Award 2018 (KSDA) to recognize and promote sustainable business practices. Participants in this award could be from the private and government sectors’ companies, organizations and NGOs that contribute to KNDP and SGD targets. The award has seven different categories, under which the same project can be registered for, as per the below overview:

01
Community Engagement & Social Impact Award Recognize the orgaization with the biggest positive impact in Kuwait.
05
Innovation Award
Recognize the organization that invests in materializing new ideas and in knowledge creation.

02
Human Capital Advancement Award Recognize the organization, which invests in developing its people.
03
Positive Environemntal impact Award Recognize the organization that contributes to environmental protection.
04
Responsible Product and Services Award Recognize the organization that makes a difference through its products and services.
06
Strategy and Sustainable Growth Award
Recognize the organization that leads in governance and excels based on a sustainable strategy model.
07
Promotion of Transperancy Award
Recognize the organization that promotes transperancy through the application of international guidelines.
08
Leadership Award
Recognize the organization that leads in governance and has top management commitment on sustainable development directions.



Figure 32
A Sample of Amended Laws towards Ensuring Equality and Inclusiveness

Source: Human Rights Commission, VNR Working Team, 21st Session
Support was also provided to women living in difficult economic and social conditions through the “Development of the Crafts and Economic Skills of Kuwaiti Women” Project. This project aims at enhancing the economic participation of women through vocational training, marketing exhibitions, and media. 
Kuwait incorporated these principles in the educational curricula of schools and universities with the clear objective of ensuring their full adaptation and adoption in the daily lives of the upcoming generations. Several training sessions were carried out for teachers and professionals of education to enlist their full support and ensure a proper integration of the Human Rights principles in the educational system. In addition, the country established a number of national mechanisms to enhance and protect human rights and equality foundations across the board. Figure 33 describes the institutions and commissions established for that purpose along with their mandates.
 
Inclusiveness of People with Disabilities
The government of Kuwait dedicates a financial package to all persons with disability under the age of 18, together with a monetary aid to those who provide them with care. As for those who are 18 years old and above, a monthly allocation is provided to them. The government also offers financial grants (between $ 17,000 and $ 34,000 a year), residential loans, reduction of working hours and reduction of working years prior to retirement for people with disabilities and those who provide them with care. In addition to the financial support, government provides professional capacity development to persons with disability in terms of hearing, visual, movement and mental support between the ages of 18 and 45, in order to facilitate their social inclusion. Specialized programmes are tailored to meet the nature of disability, in a way in which to enable the individuals concerned enter the labour market where possible. In 2012, 151 such trainees were targeted, out of which 81 were females. 
A specialized Centre, which falls under Social Care, has been established in 2014 for early intervention and provision of specialized services for children with disabilities, which include medical supervision and follow up, treatment, recreational services, integration, and psychosocial support. In addition, the government conducts medical 
Institutions and Commissions Established to Increase Inclusion Along with their Mandates
Public Authority for Manpower
Supervises manpower in the private and oil sectors. Sets up procedures for the establishment of trade unions and employers‘ associations.
 Department for Shelters of Expat Labour 
Support services and decent treatment are provided without any discrimination to foreign workers, individuals with illegal status and others who have been subject to violence and/ or conflict with their employers.employers‘ associations.
Public Authority for the Disabled 
Ensures proper living conditions for persons with disabilities. Works with children with disabilities, builds their capacities and ensures their integration in the community. 
Central Agency for Illegal Residents 
Aaddresses the status of illegal residents
Supreme Council for Planning & Development Prepares the Future Vision and defines strategic goals for the country along with the development plans; Suggests policies and systems.
Public Anti-Corruption Authority 
An independent public authority that works for combatting corruption and reducing the effect of such actions on the efforts of the government towards enhancing human rights
Source: Human Rights Commission, VNR Working Team, 21st Session
screening for heredity factors and echography for foetuses for the purpose of reducing the prevalence of disabilities in the country. This centre is considered to be a pilot project, where the government is planning to implement other centres in different regions and different governorates of the country.
It is important to mention that the government of Kuwait has law 8/2010 in vigour, regarding people with disabilities. The mandate of the law covers both Kuwaitis and nonKuwaitis, and it ensures the provision of education, health care, and functional rights (including having a decent job). In addition, as some articles of the above-mentioned law are still under discussion, the Public Authority of People with Disabilities provides a number of services including an official certificate proving the disability, a card to be used for Bayt Al Zakat and many other social and financial services. 
Table 14
People with Disabilities Who Have Benefited from the Services in 2010

Children under the age of 18 who are under the patronage of the public authority
Students suffering from learning difficulties 
Persons with intermediate and severe disabilities 

Persons with intermediate and severe disabilities (Unemployed) 
9,771

19,720

8,009
Women providing care for persons with disability (Unemployed)4,020
 Source: National Report, submitted under Section 5 of the Human Rights 
Commission Resolution, 2010 
Inclusiveness from a Gender Perspective
A number of policies and actions were implemented to ensure gender equality in many sectors. This section has been discussed in detail under SDG5. However, considering its relevance to inclusiveness, people’s empowerment and equality, it is worth mentioning that through law 6/2010, full gender equality was institutionalized in the workplace where men and women are to receive equal payment for equal work. Furthermore, employers are mandated to provide lactating working mothers with adequate time for breastfeeding, to be counted as working hours; to provide the accompanied infants with nursery service; and to ensure that mothers receive due pension entitlements if they are obliged to resign from the job due to marriage liabilities (within one year of marriage). The law also mandates employers to provide safe transportation for women working on night shifts. Finally, the amended decree number 87/2009 gave women the right to apply for judicial positions and other jobs at the ministry of Interior, which was not possible previously.
 
Inclusiveness in Fighting Human Trafficking 
Kuwait follows a strict policy regarding human trafficking implying that anyone who is proven to have committed such an act or to have smuggled migrants could face a severe sentence, including up to 15 years in prison and a penalty of no less than 15,000 KD. As For the victims of trafficking and smuggling, dedicated shelter services are offered under the supervision of the Department of Foreign Workers in the Ministry of Interior in cooperation with the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Social Affairs. A typical shelter consists of a number of social workers, psychologists and legal professionals in addition to health care providers. In 2013, the number of persons benefiting from this service reached 1,970 sheltered workers.
 
Inclusiveness in Protecting Foreign and Domestic Workers
A series of legal provisions and laws have been passed to protect and uphold the rights of foreign workers. For instance, the law 6/2010 establishes a minimum wage that is reviewed and updated every 5 years. This wage cannot be reduced even if both parties consent to the reduction. It is mandated that the employer pays the salary of the worker even during a break down of the establishment or when work cannot be processed due to conditions out of the control of the worker. It is mandatory that employers ensure health and safety in the workplace and compensate workers for any occupational accidents. For the purpose of facilitating the report of any violation a hotline has been created, through which workers can report any abuse or harm they are being subject to from the employers. All complaints are transferred to the Department of “Workplace Investigation” where they are inspected and investigated for appropriate legal action as the case may be.
The work of domestic foreign workers has also been regulated under the law 40/1992, which organized the business of private recruitment of workers. Government set stringent criteria for the licensing of recruitment offices in order to protect the rights of foreign workers, check any possible abuse and bring offenders to task; considering all parties concerned including the worker, the employer and the recruitment office. Contracts signed with the workers should uphold their rights in terms of working hours, weekly leave, inability to deploy domestic workers to a third party, provision of food, shelter and clothing, prohibition of employing domestic workers in anything that jeopardises their dignity, prohibition of holding the worker’s passport with the employer, and others.  
For the purpose of protecting workers from exploitation, the Ministry of Interior has established a department for domestic workers, where it is mandated to conduct regular inspections in the recruitment offices.  Furthermore, a section was assigned for receiving complaints from Embassies. Finally, shelters have also been established for domestic workers who have legal issues with their employers and equipped with the needed facilities, medical clinics, and psychosocial support and see to it that the workers receive their full rights.
25. International Organization for Migration: “Migration Governance Situation”, Final Report, Kuwait, 2017.The International Organization for Migration (IOM) report, dated 2017 provides a comprehensive assessment of the migration situation in Kuwait along the six areas of Migration Governance Indicators (MGI). These areas are: the rights of migrants, the overall government approach to migration, partnerships, the social and economic wellbeing of migrants, dimensions of mobility during crises, and safe and orderly migration25. The report acknowledges the many achievements primarily regarding the protection of the rights of foreign labour. It also highlights some of the areas that still require further attention to improve the overall governance of migration. Useful details of this assessment have been captured in Annex 9.
 
Inclusiveness in Terms of Children’s Rights
The State of Kuwait is keen on protecting the rights of children and childhood through a number of policies and measures that ensure the protection of the children, provide them with a name and legal papers, suitable conditions for proper upbringing and proper education, and which ensure that each child fully receive their legal rights. The National Development plan of 2015 – 2020, focused on developing health, social and cultural services for all children, build their capacities and set a mechanism to identify cases of violence early in time. 
It mandates parents and guardians (including teachers) to refrain from using physical or moral violence in punishments, and encourages them to adopt a calm and informative approach. 
The legislators prohibited the recruitment of children in military work or involve them in armed conflicts. It is as well forbidden to enrol children in military and police institutions. 
 
Inclusiveness in Terms of the Elderly
Kuwait provides a series of services for the elderly, to ensure that they are living a dignified and healthy life. A sample of services provided are as follows:
1. Accommodation and Shelter: The elderly fully resides in these centres where all services needed are available;
2. Day Care:  The elderly stays at the centre during the day and is provided with all needed services. This service is provided to the elderly who live within their families;
3. Mobile Care: which is the most common service, where free of charge services are provided, such as health care, psychosocial support, quasi family support, provision of equipment and financial aid and others;
4. Subsequent Care: A follow-up system for all cases left in the custody of institutions in need of advice and guidance;
5. Legal Care: Provides care to the elderly under the mandatory legal umbrella, which includes protection of the elderly against exploitation and any unethical actions. 
6. Launching a “Priority Card” for the elderly (65+), which will facilitate for the all transactions, provide them with allocated parking spots, and exempting them from the fees of some services. Total number of beneficiaries from this service exceeded 270 (87 Male, 188 Female) as of December 2018.
With reference to the youth, the state of Kuwait formulated youth policies in 2017, to address the varying needs of youth. As for the older persons, the government provides old-age pensions and other benefits, including health care, which is free of charge for all Kuwaiti citizens. Government policies requires children and immediate family members of the elderly to be responsible for their care. In this regard, the state of Kuwait has issued several laws (08/2010 – 114/2014 18/2016) and raised awareness on the National Health Strategy for the care of older adults.
 
Inclusiveness in Terms of Residents with Illegal Status
Kuwait has long been home for a community of residents with illegal status. As such, they are not acknowledged as Kuwaiti nationals, yet hold no other legal papers. As a result of this unsettled status, this community has experienced a series of social and economic challenges, which limited their ability to fully develop or fully integrate into Kuwaiti society. However, ever since 1986, government has been issuing and implementing policies and laws that aim at increasing the inclusion of this community in Kuwaiti society. 
In 1986 the “Checking and Registering the Country’s Population to Issue a Review Card” Project reviewed and amended the status of 16,618 individuals out of a population of 220,000 of individuals with an illegal status. In 2010, the institutional roadmap towards improving the legal status of this community included a number of principles that protect their human rights in all its aspects. The objectives of this roadmap are as follows:
1. Provide basic social services including health and education for all; 
2. Update the security status of all individuals of this population with a view to providing adequate protection to them and to the country;
3. Facilitate further integration of individuals based on length of stay, kinship and community involvement;
4. Address urgent cases as a matter of urgency.
A number of activities and further interventions have been done for this community (see Annex 10).



Nonetheless, with reference to ensuring “access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services & upgrading slums” (target 11.1), it is useful to note that the State of Kuwait is free of slums. All urban dwellers live in houses and enjoy free access to quality social services including healthcare, education, public water, wastewater and electric networks and others.  
The Public Authority for Housing Welfare (PAHW), which was established in accordance with Law (47) of 1993 to provide different housing welfare alternatives for eligible citizens, is an independent public authority with the aim of implementing government-housing policies. PAHW’s strategy and projects introduce a higher level of publicprivate interaction and partnership, encouraging real estate developers to further interact with its plans and projects28. Table 15 below shows the status of PAHW’s housing projects in 2016.
In terms of accessing safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all (target 11.2), Kuwait Public Transportation cooperation (KPTC) provides extensive public transport services, which also cover transportation from the mainland to Kuwaiti islands. However, though public transportation system is available and affordable, Kuwaiti citizens commonly use their own transportation (private cars). This urban pattern causes significant congestion, pollution and often poses challenges to mobility.
Table 15
The Status of PAHW’s Housing Projects in 2016
Several urban planning options were being considered including improvement and expansion of existing circular roads, further development of sub-ways and railways and improvement of the traffic light system. However, the state of Kuwait has recently developed a comprehensive National Traffic and Transport Strategy (2010-2020) with support from the UN. This strategy has been adopted by the Ministerial Cabinet in Law No. 1426 of 2010 for implementation by all concerned sectors. The Law 115 bases the strategy on restructuring the transport sector through the establishment of the Public Authority for Road & Transportation (PART) for Year 2014. The transportation strategy includes steps to be taken at an educational level. For example, Kuwait University is considering establishing a new department offering a Bachelor Degree on Traffic engineering and road safety that can contribute both in supplying graduates familiar with Kuwait roads requirements as well as establishing new traffic codes that respond to expanding urban structure of Kuwait. Furthermore, the strategy emphasizes the need to raise awareness of non-permanent residents of Kuwait as they come from different cultural backgrounds, which makes them apply what they used to practice back in their countries. Moreover, the strategy includes developing the metropolitan system to make it include new train and subway lines and further expansions of the public and private bus services. 

STATUSHOUSESAPARTMENTSPLOTSTOTAL UNITSELIGIBLE 
POPULATIONS
TBD = To be determined
28. The Public Authority for Housing Welfare can be found on the following link: https://www.pahw.gov.kw/Home_en

Proportion of Motor Vehicles in-use in Kuwait (December 2014)

	0	20	40	60	80	100
Source: GSSCPD (2016). Kuwait National Report to the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development 2016 (HABITAT III).

As the new law takes its course to implementation, the traffic wardens continue monitoring both the drivers’ license validity and the cars’ conditions. Non-Kuwaitis apply the traffic law with particular vigilance, since some of the measures that apply to the violation of the code of the road can lead to deportation, including passing red traffic lights29.
Kuwait is aware of the importance of finding alternative and renewable sources of energy to protect the environment from carbon emissions that contribute to global warming. However, such a drastic change would require time and 
Figure 35
Percentage of Solid Waste Production in Kuwait

	0	3	6	9	12	15
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018
experienced/qualified workforce to be fully implemented (target 11.6). Statistics of the CSB show a decrease in the percentage of municipal solid waste from 12.51% in 2012 to 11.09% in 2016 as per the figure (35):
As for the quality of the air, air pollution in Kuwait originates from different sources including oil refineries, electrical power stations, water desalination, cement factory, petrochemical industry, iron & steel factory, small & medium enterprises located in industrial zones, vehicles, bakery & food industries, residential areas, and trans-boundary pollutions. In 2014, Kuwait passed Law No. 42 for Environment Protection, which was reviewed and amended by Law No 99 in 2015. Clauses nos. 113, 114 and 115 of the Law establish a mechanism to monitor the implementation of environmental laws and investigate violations and complaints, in both the public and private sectors. Provisions are made to create environmental awareness among the public, answer public enquiries and organize group meetings at the community level. KEPA has been monitoring air pollution through 15 monitoring sites and 3 mobile laboratories since 198430.The Data of the Environmental Performance Index (EPI) indicated in 2018 a quantum leap of 46% in the Environmental status of the State of Kuwait. Internationally speaking, Kuwait’s EPI ranked 61th in 2018 among 180 countries. In comparison, Kuwait’s EPI ranked 113 in 2016.
29. Kuwait’s National Report to the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development.  2016, General Secretariat of the Supreme Council for Planning and Development
30. Atoum, M. (2018). Input to VNR, Environmental Governance Project, KEPA and UNDP




Omniya, first private recycling project for plastic water bottles in Kuwait, an innovative small factory established by two lady entrepreneurs.
compliance with the lists of the Rotterdam Convention. Simultaneously, Kuwait is presently developing a new project that would allow it to measure mercury emissions in the air, and to ensure proper compliance to the clauses of the Minamata Convention. 
One of the issues of concern resulting from the sustained urban sprawl and population growth is the ensuing amount of solid waste that will most definitely be increasing as a result. This has prompted Kuwait to apply several policies and procedures to lessen the production of solid and hazardous waste and to ensure its recycling, re-usage and orderly disposal in fulfilment to its pledge to the Basel Convention. Accordingly, the Kuwait Environment Public Authority (KEPA) has put into action a project that aims at assessing the solid waste management situation and its compliance with the legal framework, from the quantity of waste produced, the waste collection process/ method, the waste transport and routs, all the way to waste treatment and disposal system. As mentioned above, the state of Kuwait is in the process of developing a National Solid Waste Strategy along with its plan of Action and monitoring framework with an implementation period of 30 years (target 12.4). 
Furthermore, in 2009, KEPA established an environmental database known as the Environmental Monitoring Information System for Kuwait (eMISK) with the aim of developing the authority’s capacities in monitoring national environmental sites and activities, supporting it in evidence-based decision-making and addressing environmental problems. The system uses the geographic information system (GIS) and remote sensors to better support evidence-based decisions. 
Since 2013, Kuwait has been treating all its medical waste with a rate of 100%. It has achieved this target by closing down 10 incineration facilities as they lacked the required criteria and their emissions were not controlled. Instead, KEPA established three environmentally sound incinerators away from residential area with gas treatment systems (in compliance with specific medical criteria) in order to treat hazardous medical waste. The figure (36) below show the production of medical hazardous waste since 2012 and the increase in the percentage of treated medical hazardous waste to reach 100%, already as of 2013 and beyond.
Figure 36
% of treated medical Hazardous waste

	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition.

With respect to recycling at the national level, statistics show that the rate of recycling industrial waste witnessed some fluctuations between 2012 and 2014 but stabilized afterwards to reach 12.9% in 2016, as per the below figure (37)36 (target 12.5):
Figure 37
Percentage of recycled Construction waste

	0	5	10	15	20	25	30
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition 
Table 17
Additionally, Kuwait discarded 90 generators that contain Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs), which is a hazardous oil liquid or solid material that could cause severe health problems, and that can be found in the printed boards of the generators, as these generators did not possess the proper disposal mechanism in compliance with the Basel Convention conditions. Yet, several PCB operated generators are to be exported and exchanged with ones operating on regular oil.
In order to fully achieve Goal 12, it was critical to work in collaboration with and full consent of the community. This implied that the community had access to information related to sustainable development and was willing to adopt a cleaner lifestyle in order to sustain the production of waste, recycling and re-usage of waste, treatment of gas emissions, etc. The table below37 shows the commitment of the State to reaching out to the community, explains how people are getting access to sustainable development related information on universal citizenship and sustainable development and reveals areas where further awareness and outreach are still required (target 12.8): 

Universal Citizenship•••Sustainable •••Fields in which People Get Access to Information on Universal Citizenship and Sustainable Development (including Climate Change)

TOPIC
FIELD
EDUCATIONAL 
AND NATIONAL POLICIESEDUCATIONAL CURRICULATRAINING FOR TEACHERSSTUDENT EVALUATIONdevelopment (including Climate Change)

Source: http://treaties.un.org 
36. What is available for the state of Kuwait in terms of recycled solid waste is construction waste only; Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018
37. Source: Kuwait University – The Sustainable Development education is only under higher education



Table 18
Emissions per capita in 2016 
(Metric Tons)
19.57Change in Rainfall from 2031 – 2050 
Between 0% - 15%Change in the Temperature from 2031 – 2050
Between 0.6 °C – 1.2 °CEmissions of CO2-eq in 2016
(Metric Tons)
86,020 Gg CO2-eqivalentChange in Rainfall from 2051 – 2070 
Between 5% - 25%Change in the Temperature from 
– 2070  
Between 1.1 °C – 1.8 °CAnnual increase of CO2-eq since 1994
4%Change in Rainfall from 2071 – 2100 
Between 5% - 30%Change in the Temperature from 
– 2100 
Between 1.8 °C – 2.4 °CData and Statistics – Scenarios for Rainfall and Temperature Changes
EMISSIONSRATIFIEDPUT INTO ACTION
Source: Kuwait’s second national communication report on climate change – (KEPA – Climate Change Section). 

Effects of climate change can be enormous in the Arab world and in the Gulf particularly that many Gulf countries, including Kuwait, depend almost solely on oil generation.
Kuwait has been facing a number of consequences as a result of climate change including desertification, increase in sea levels, increase in temperatures and a loss of biodiversity. Moreover, Kuwait is considered a country with high vulnerability to oil-related measures that may be implemented by developed countries, considering Kuwait’s economic dependence on oil. For instance, climate change can directly affect sea levels, which in turn will have a massive effect on fisheries, aquacultures and coral reefs. In addition, such a change could have an effect on the air quality in the country, where any minor change in the climate could cause a major increase in air pollution, especially due to the geographical location of the country. In turn, these changes, specifically those occurring in the air or on the means of livelihood, will have a major consequence on the quality of life, health and wellbeing of the people of Kuwait, directly and indirectly. It is estimated that intermediate (upward) changes in temperature that are likely to take place over the coming years could cause up to 30 percent increase in rainfall and up to 2.4 °C increase in temperature degrees. 
Kuwait has already submitted the first and second National Communication Reports on Climate Change. The reports included a baseline study on the main sectors generating greenhouse gases in the year 2000 and the set of efforts that need be made to decrease these levels by 2035. As per the Second National Communication Report, Kuwait’s emissions of greenhouse gases increase annually at a rate of 4%39.
It’s worth mentioning that a number of positive measures have been taken, leading to actions and achievements that have already been made and reported by KEPA. These actions and achievements are detailed as follows:
» The state of Kuwait is one of the first Arab countries to have established fixed stations to measure and monitor air pollution. This started in 1983. The network began to develop and increase until it reached 15 fixed stations in 2019, distributed among all residential, urban, commercial and industrial areas. In addition, the state 

39. Source: Atoum, M. (2018). Input to VNR, Environmental Governance Project, KEPA and UNDP 

 Figure 39 Projects Proposed


Source: Role of Stakeholders in achieving SDGs, MOSA, 2018.
has 4 mobile laboratories to attend to urgent cases, complaints and to conduct field studies. Moreover, the Kuwait Oil Company (KOC), in collaboration with KEPA, has installed and operated 13 stations to monitor the quality of air in areas close to oil fields and some residential areas. 
» KEPA, in close collaboration with the public and private industrial sectors, is conducting regular and constant follow up and monitoring on the pollutant emissions from industrial sources and other actions. Within two years, it was able to bind industrial companies to implementing environmental programs through establishing the Environmental Compliance Fund in collaboration with the World Bank. In addition, all projects must now acquire the approval of relevant authorities and KEPA, based on the results of the Environmental Impact Assessment Study (EIA).
» KEPA prepared, trained and led Kuwait’s Delegation to negotiate the UN conventions on climate change. The delegation consisted of specialists from all relevant ministries to ensure that the international, economic and developmental highest interest of the country is preserved.
» In spite of the many challenges, KEPA was constantly prepared to implement and conduct mitigating interventions to address and overcome those challenges. For instance, urbanization, air polluting industries, traffic jams and production of energy using fossil fuels, are all considered to be major causes of air pollution. Likewise, some residential and industrial areas can suffer from a very high level of air pollutions (gases or particles) which have exceeded permissible limits set by the KEPA.
In light of the above challenges, the government has proposed 8 complementary projects (figures 40) under the larger umbrella of Clean Development Mechanisms with the purpose of reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases. Furthermore, national technical teams were trained to be able to efficiently monitor and assess air pollutants and to be able to evaluate the criteria to select stations of the monitoring and assessment of air quality through active participation. In 2018, the State of Kuwait significantly ranked 70th when it was 172th in 2016 under the air quality sector. That Clearfield the Kuwait Environment Public Authority efforts into correcting the data used and communicated with in charge institutions/organizations for calculating associated indicators such as, Yale and Colombia Universities to accredited accurate data.
For the purpose of creating a positive and comprehensive awareness targeting the public opinion about air pollution for an efficient change, scientific collaboration took place between all relevant ministries and relevant authorities. Moreover, data and information were made available to decision makers encouraging them to invest in developmental programs and set strategies and policies that put an end to air pollution and address its effects.
Work is presently being done on a comprehensive database that would include:
1. Detailed data on all aspects of climate change in Kuwait;
2. Information on the effect of climate change on the work of relevant ministries and government entities;
3. Information on the importance of activating the role of relevant stakeholders and involving them in a national strategy for climate change – including national plans that work towards achieving Kuwait Vision 2035;
4. Information on the importance of national plans that can mitigate the negative effects of Climate Change;
Table 19
EMISSIONSSOURCECO1NOPM10 & PM2.5SO2VOCsThe Main Sources of Various Emissions
5. Information on the importance of establishing developmental plans with reduced emissions. 
KEPA has collaborated with the World Bank to conduct a; Pollutants Load Assessment (PLA) study that estimates annual pollutant emissions from different sources. Table 19 below, summarises the results of the study.
On progress made regarding policies, strategies and national plans, Kuwait has made a number of achievements. Primarily, it officially submitted in 2012, the First Communication Report on Climate Change to the UN convention, with the support of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF). It also submitted in 2015, the country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) reflecting the country’s commitment to the Paris Agreement on climate change. 
In 2018, KEPA prepared the second Communication Report on Climate Change. With the collaboration of relevant stakeholders, it also finalised the National Adaptation and Action Plan (NAP) in March 2019. The table (22) summarizes the international agreements that Kuwait has ratified.



Table 20
International Agreements Ratified by Kuwait
#CO1NO



Nonetheless, Kuwait’s environment pollution indicators show that the level of pollution is still generally low; whereas that of wastewater is significantly alarming, since scientific evidence shows that it contains hazardous chemical and biological pollutants, which could leave the marine and human life in danger, especially that the country depends largely on the consumption of fish for food and on sea recreational activities. Similarly, water quality-related indicators in the marine environment is considered to be average, as it is related to the increase in the presence of algae and increase in pollutants, which in turn causes a decrease in fish reproduction, eventually leading to a decrease in the fish stock. Fish stock is considered a vital element for food security and one of the few renewable resources in Kuwait. The highest rate of fishing was already reported in 1995, marking around 8,400 tons, 6,900 tons of which are finfish. After that, a significant decrease was marked to reach a total of 4,200 tons in 2014, 2,700 tons of which were finfish. Due to the growing population and the increasing demand, Kuwait currently imports 85% of its fish market42. The decrease in fish stock amounted to 50% during the past 30 years, with variance from one kind of fish to the other. It even marked a 90% decrease in the stock of Tenualosa ilisha and Pampus Argenteus, found in rivers in 200743.  Whereas the decrease in the stock of shrimps ranged between 1,500 and 2,500 tons during the past 20 years44. This decrease of fish stock is a combined result of overfishing, high salinity levels and destruction of fish habitat, as well as pollution and climate change. According to statistics from the Public Authority of Agriculture & fishery, the percentage of sustainable fishery biodiversity stood at a mere 25% in 2016. In 2018, the State of Kuwait ranked 31th in the fisheries sector when it was 79th in 2016. In the same year, it ranked 51th in the biodiversity & types sector when it ranked 69th in 2016. 
KEPA developed a National Biodiversity Strategy 2011-2020 that is aimed at protecting biodiversity in natural, artificial and agricultural ecosystems in Kuwait. The strategy also aims at promoting the sustainable use of these resources among the current generations and the ones to come. Efforts are currently being made at the national level to create extensive awareness among all parties concerned regarding the importance of this strategy and to enlist their support in the fulfilment of all its clauses, each according to their field of expertise and scope of responsibility. Kuwait also issued in 2014 a new law to promote environmental protection throughout the various development sectors. The law is considered to be a turning point in Kuwait’s environmental governance. It provides KEPA with the power to identify the executive list, take necessary measures towards the sectoral ministries, and achieve environment protection and proper fishery in order to ensure sustainable fish stock. Under this law, KEPA requires all sectoral ministries to abide by the clauses, especially clauses 16, 100, 101, 105, and 10845.
Furthermore, Kuwait has established two marine reserves accounting for 526 square kilometre or 4.4 percent of a total of 11,896 square kilometre of marine areas. Additionally, KEPA started in 2018, the planting of 1,000 Crimea seeds with the aim of rehabilitating the coastal areas of Kuwait and increasing biodiversity, especially the marine one (target 14.5).
In the year 2009, KEPA established a prestigious project eMISK (Environmental Monitoring Information System of Kuwait) which aims to build a comprehensive Environmental Geo-database and establish two web portals one for Public (www.beatona.net) and another for Stakeholders and the Departments within KEPA. The system uses the geographic information system (GIS) and remote sensing technology. The aim of the project is to publish the Environmental data/Information to raise the awareness among the Kuwaiti society and to support in evidence-based decision-making.
The State of Kuwait is currently working in collaboration with several international agencies to conduct a marine related survey (eMISK Marine), whose results would feed into the development of national strategies governing sustainable marine resources, and would include the development of a marine environment management plan. Similarly, the strategy includes enhancing the marine ecosystem through the establishment of a water-level prediction and protection centre, which would monitor sea level and notify any significant change and actions to be taken in case of an emergency.

42. KISR, the Collapse of Kuwait’s Fishery Stock: Analysis, data needs and remedial management actions.
43. Sheppard et al. 2010b
44. Ye, Al-Husaini & Al-Baz 2001; Chen et al. 2012; Al-Husaini et al. 2015.
45. More information on the terms of these clauses can be found on: http://www.law.gov.kw/MainTabsPage.aspx?val=AL1

fulfilment of clause 65 of law 42/2014, which states:
The Authority shall prepare and follow up the implementation of the National Marine Environment Management Plan with a timetable for the stages of implementation and the responsibilities of the concerned authorities towards them and the requirements of their implementation46.
The plan aims at:
» Identifying the environmental goals related to marine environment in Kuwait, to be able to meet its legal obligations nationally, regionally and internationally.
» Identifying the necessary actions and activities to achieve these goals.
» Integrating comprehensively the required procedures and coordination to meet the goals.
Furthermore, KEPA started establishing a national environment management plan for Joun Kuwait in June 2016 as per clause 108 of law 42/2014.
Figure (40) shows the Framework of Kuwait National Marine Environment Management Plan47:
46. Clause 65 of law 42/2014 - Kuwait
47. The red stars refer to the steps that have already been implemented, whereas the yellow ones refer to those that being currently implemented
Figure 40	
Framework of the Kuwait National Marine Environment Management Plan

Source: Environment Public Authority (KEPA) – EPA’s Procedures for the development of the national marine environment management plan.



Table 21
Data and Statistics – Wild Reserves

	Number of Wild Reserves	Areas of Wild Reserves 	% of Wild Reserves from the Total 
10	(KM2)	area of the country 1,574.01	8.68%

# of legal and documented cases of 	# of illegal and documented cases of 	% of illegal animal crossings into animal crossings into Kuwait in 2017	animal crossings into Kuwait in 2017	Kuwait in 2017
	214	6	2.7%

	Areas of degraded land in Kuwait 	% of degraded land from total land area 	Average annual local expenditure on 
	(KM2)	in Kuwait	biodiversity from 2006 – 2015 in KD
	11,330	63.5%	1.6 Million
CREATION OF WILD NATURAL RESERVESDETERIORATION OF LANDSource: Atoum, M. (2018). Input to VNR, Environmental Governance Project, KEPA and UNDP.

Kuwait’s wild ecosystems underwent severe dry periods for almost 10 years, which had a major effect on its structure. The total desert area that was open for grazing and camping in 1999 consisted of 75% of the total land. However, this area was reduced down to only 51% in 2014. Likewise, a number of adverse effects evolved as follows:
1. Loss of agriculture soil due to the nature of the arid country’s soil salinity and increased levels of groundwater salinity used in irrigation;
2. Major desert soil erosions, which occurred under the effect of strong wind and floods and caused the loss of organic material;
3. Loss of grazing plants and increase in thorny plants that have no grazing value, due to overgrazing;
4. Soil pollution resulting from crude oils in different areas in the south and north eastern part of Kuwait; loss of top soil due to heavy wind leading to sand storms.
5. Deterioration in the natural characteristics of the soil (hardening and compression); and
6. Deformation and changes in the topographical and hydrological aspects of the land.
Kuwait is committed to preserving its ecosystem and to salvaging the environmental, social and economic values it brings. For that Kuwait has signed a number of international conventions and agreements as follows:
» The International Convention on International Trades on Endangered Species (CITES) in 1973 which was put into action in 2002;
» The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in June 1992, which came into action in 2002;
» The Convention on Combatting Desertification (UNCCD) in 1995 and it came into action in September 1997; Kuwait’s National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat Desertification was prepared in 2016 by the National Committee for Combating Desertification.
» The Convention on Protecting Wildlife and its Natural Habitat in 2002;
KEPA has conducted a national strategy on biodiversity for 2011 – 2020. The strategy aims at protecting biodiversity in all its forms, encouraging sustainable use and promoting awareness among all stakeholders regarding the importance of preserving biodiversity and enhancing their participation in implementing this strategy. This strategy aims at creating a framework to implement coherent and comprehensive policies towards protecting biodiversity and the sustainable use of bio-resources. In light of this strategy, the Aichi Targets were reviewed, each target analysed in Kuwait’s particular context in order to identify challenges and gaps and devise remedial actions. Moreover, Kuwait’s National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat Desertification was prepared in 2016 by the National Committee for Combating Desertification.
Kuwait issued a new environmental protection law No. 42 for the year 2014, amended by law No. 99 for the year 2015, which represents a crucial starting point towards achieving Kuwait Vision 2035. The law identifies grazing areas according to specific and relevant criteria, and holds relevant stakeholders responsible for updating grazing areas every 10 years, and for prohibiting grazing in natural islands and reserves.
The law protects endangered species and prohibits its trafficking in compliance with CITES and other relevant agreements. It also institutes penalties against offenders up to 3 years of prison, and a fine up to 5,000 KD.
As for the Sustainable Land Management (SLM), the law tackles the matter of managing natural grazing lands and organizing the grazing process. Article 41 binds all stakeholders to using land in a sustainable manner and to ensuring development and protection of vegetation. In addition, new articles in relation to land degradation were adopted, the articles aimed at protection the land environment, application of chemical & hazardous waste management measures, and protection of terrestrial and agricultural lands from pollution. To support enforcing these articles, penalties in the The Jurisdiction law were adopted. 
Current and Ongoing Projects
Aims at stopping land 
	Inland 	deterioration and 
	Degradation 	loss of biodiversity. 
	Neutrality (LDN) 	Reverse and Restore  
	(2016-2040)	degradedareas by 
2040 from 72 percent till 30-40 percent.
                   Develop models to be Development of 	able to forecast sand dust and sand 	and dust storms up to 
storm forecasting 	72 hours’ storms before models	they strike.
    The 	Define nature of dust relationship 	storms, determine its 
	between the level 	source, evaluate its 
of dust falling and 	social, economic and the physiological 	environmental effects and aspects of 	develop a geophysical 
	Kuwait	database on these storms.
Source: Input by KEPA and UNDP for the VNR, Environment Governance Project.
Furthermore, Kuwait in collaboration with the USGS, is implementing an environmental project (eMISK terrestrial) that aims at rehabilitating some of the wild areas in the country. This includes establishing a database on the wild areas and the trainings to be done. Likewise, the government of Kuwait is implementing a project aimed at stopping the deterioration of land and the loss of biodiversity.
KEPA is conducting a comprehensive evaluation of invasive species, which includes listing the challenges and main steps to be taken to ensure that those species cannot cross into the country. 
Considering the government of Kuwait’s acknowledgement of the importance of preserving natural areas as a habitat to a large group of species, 10 wild natural reserves have been recently established. 
Among the many partnerships that have been mentioned above, Kuwait is collaborating with the International Union for Conservation of Nature to develop a long-term plan with a view to conducting studies and defining biodiversity. Additionally, technical trainings would be provided on categorizing biodiversity and all the elements that are related to it. Furthermore, a database on the national biodiversity would be established and would be linked to relevant research centres and international stakeholders.
The government of Kuwait has recently signed an agreement with the National Parks Board of Singapore. The agreement aims at sharing experiences and strengthening collaboration and strategic planning on land, life on land and managing violations. 
A few recommendations are being currently contemplated by competent authorities with a view to achieving Goal 15 in an Efficient Way
1. Define biodiversity important sites in Kuwait and document their areas;
2. Commission a research project to establish baseline for land degradation areas in Kuwait, mainly through assessing land cover, land productivity and carbon stock;
3. Update the red list data – for that Kuwait has contracted IUCN to undertake this activity;
4. Conduct Qualitative Assessments and reporting.
Figure 42
Future/ Planned Projects
Implemented under 
  Setting the 	the UNCCD with National Plan to 	stakeholders under the manage drought 	supervision of KEPA. in Kuwait 
(2018 - 2019)
Train national teams, 
	Environmental 	set a database, 
	Survey and 	update standards and 
	Rehabilitation of 	requirements, oversee 
	Key Wild Areas in 	urgent changes and 
	Kuwait	attend to it and many 
other activities within 5 years. 
Source: Input by KEPA and UNDP for the VNR, Environment Governance Project.




“
The Kuwait Public Policy Centre (KPPC) is an innovative platform. It equips policymakers and other stakeholders with evidence-based policy advice for informed decisions. It provides strategic tools and tackles policy making gaps through thematic policy papers. It aims at building solid partnerships with other centres of excellence, research/academic institutions, civil society organizations, and other locally, regionally and internationally renowned institutions. In this capacity, it is expected to play a strategic role in informing the policies related to the 7 pillars of Kuwait’s Vision 2035. One of KPPC’s recent achievements is the design of a customized macroeconomic model, which provides a robust structure for forecasting and testing 

economic scenarios.”
» International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD 1968).
» International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR 1996).
» International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR 1996).
» Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT 1996) . 
At the National Level
Data from the Ministry of Justice shows a declining trend of murder rates from 122 cases in 2014 to 65 cases in 2016, less among Kuwaiti nationals than among non-nationals, and higher among men and adults than among women and younger generations.
Data from the Ministry of Interior brings evidence that less than 0.1% of the total population were subjected to one of the three forms of violence (physical, psychological and/or sexual) in 2016, when physical violence was considered to be relatively the most common among the recorded cases as shown in the table (22).
When it comes to Human Trafficking, only partial data was provided by the Ministry of Justice between 2013 and 2016. 13 cases of trafficking were recorded (Data is provided for every 100,000) all of which were non-Kuwaiti females. 
Table 22
Percentage of Total Residents That Have Been Subject to Any Form of Violence in 2016
FORM OF VIOLENCE%	Physical Violence	0.05%

More than one from the 	--above listed

Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 
1st edition 

Data is not available regarding people aged between 18 and 29 who may have been subject to sexual violence under the age of 18. However, data is available for under 18 sexual violence victims among Kuwaitis and Non-Kuwaitis – as reflected in table 23 below.
Table 23
The table (23) below clearly shows that while females may have been more subject to sexual violence, such cases have followed a declining trend.
Males and Females Under the Age of 18 That Have Been Subject to Sexual Violence Anytime in the 
Course of the Years 2013 -2016
SEX2013201420152016Male30244318Female14302316Total44546634Male31463127Female34394133Total65857260Male61707445Female48696449Total10913913894NATIONALITYAGE GROUP	Kuwaiti	Juvenile
	Non-Kuwaiti	Juvenile
Total (Kuwait 
                       Juvenile – Non-Kuwaiti)
Source: First national SDGs report (GSSPC), 2016.
Table 24
Persons Kept in Custody According to Nationality from 2013 till 2016
YEARKUWAITINON-KUWAITITOTAL (KUWAITI & NON-KUWAITI)
49. Custody concerns individuals who are detained on accusations, awaiting trial.As to prisoners kept in custody49, data from the Ministry of Justice showed 1,572 individuals in 2016 up from 1,361 individual in 2013.

Kuwait is fully committed to transparency in government transactions and in checking and fighting corruption and bribery. For that purpose, a law (#2/2016) was passed establishing the Public Anti-Corruption Authority (PACA). Prior to that, only partial data were available from the Ministry of Justice recording up to 15 cases of bribery between 2013 and 2016. Kuwait Integrity and AntiCorruption Strategy (KIACS) is led by PACA (NAZAHA). It aims at promoting values of integrity and anti-corruption in the public and private sectors. The efficiency and the effectiveness of the strategy have been enhanced to fight and prevent all sorts of corruption. This new strategy includes around 60 initiatives to enhance the integrity and promote the advocacy and coordination among all anticorruption stakeholders at the national level. KIAC consists of 4 main pillars as per the below: PILLAR 1: Public Sector
PILLAR 2: Private Sector
PILLAR 3: Public (society/ community)
PILLAR 4: Anti-Corruption and Integrity Authorities
Kuwait fulfils the terms of the UN Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC). The anti-corruption and wealth disclosure decree criminalizes the manipulation of public tenders and auctions, bribery, counterfeiting, forgery, and graft. This decree includes articles on financial disclosure and money laundering, and it provides criminal penalties of up to seven years in prison for these corrupt practices. Under the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism Law, organized criminal groups and non-governmental organizations convicted of money-laundering can be sent to prison for up to 20 years. Kuwait has ratified the UN Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) and is a signatory of the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 
The annual budgets of government entities are regularly reviewed by Parliament and are subject to regular audits by relevant bodies such as the Audit Bureau, the Financial Control Authority and others.
“
“Nudge” is an innovative initiative of KPPC.  It is a behavioural lab where proposed public policies are tested before implementation, using randomized control trials. It is designed to tackle developmental and public policy challenges that have behavioural roots. Kuwait is among the first few countries in the region to establish a “Nudge” Unit”.
Nazaha has developed its institutional framework, which will enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of its operations and promote the public trust in its operations. This development included enhancement of the prevention activities, and development of a comprehensive internal strategy to focus its efforts and advocate with relevant entities in the country (i.e. Financial Crime Unit). This will directly contribute to the achievement of its strategic objectives including fighting financial crimes and coordinating with other relevant entities.
Furthermore, Kuwait has issued law 13/2018 – Prohibition of Conflict of Interest – mainly at the workplace, along with a number of articles and decrees. The purpose of this law is to ensure transparency at work and fight any corruptive practices50. Table (25) provides information on the major headings of the national budget of Kuwait between 2012 and 2016. 
50. Al-Anbaa daily-online issue – Conflict of Interest Law, 7 October 2018, available at : https://www.alanba.com.kw/ar/ kuwait-news/860199/07-10-2018With reference to Human Rights, government asserts that birth registration is universal and that 100% of all births have been officially registered in the government. In addition, the country is host to a number of independent Human Rights Organizations, operating in compliance with the Paris Agreement.  
Of relevance to target 16.10, Government of Kuwait is presently considering passing a Right to Access Information Act. Such an act would ensure that everyone’s right of accessing correct and accurate information is upheld and protected. The Act would also have provisions for penalties (up to 1-year imprisonment) against those who refrain from providing information or who provide misleading and incorrect information. The Act encourages all stakeholders to facilitate access to information and to ensure that requested data is available51. 
Table 25
In 2016, Kuwait has also established “Kuwait Public Policy Centre”, under the General Secretariat for the supreme council for planning and development, the centre aims to integrate policy research into policy making processes and mechanisms, this will enable the government to formulate more effective policies and strategies that is based on scientific evidence and inform decision making. 

Distribution of Kuwait’s National Budget by Main Headings between 2012 and 2016 

CATEGORY
2012/20132013/20142014/20152015/201619.15%16.61%18.63%20.60%9.84%10.95%9.79%11.00%14.37%16.23%14.97%16.84%6.54%7.44%7.36%8.94%10.95%11.89%13.03%12.89%7.87%7.50%6.23%5.91%2.61%2.86%2.71%3.18%20.8 2%18.73%20.27%12.10%0.58%0.68%0.56%0.61%2.38%2.07%1.21%1.38%2.22%2.98%2.60%3.54%1.36%1.48%1.95%2.51%1.3%0.57%0.70%0.51%100%100%100%100%51. Draft access to information law, available at: https://www.alaan.cc/article/325036/



It is conventional wisdom that sustainable development worldwide and countries’ commitments to the SDG 2030 Agenda can best be realized when all parties enhance their collaboration and partnership and, in the process, further global solidarity. 
The state of Kuwait has always expressed commitment to fostering human rights and advancing global and sustainable human wellbeing. To that end, it has long earmarked special resources in support for regional and international development across countries and continents.
Indeed, since 2006 Kuwait’s ODA and international support for development sectors of particular relevance to many SDGs and targets has witnessed a significant growth. Since its establishment Kuwait’s Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED, known as Kuwait Fund) and the Government of Kuwait dedicated 956 loans amounting to KD 6,124 million to 106 countries (16 Arab countries, 42 
African countries, 19 in South-east Asia and the Pacific, 17 
Figure 43
in Central Asia and Europe, and 12 in Latin America and the Caribbean). The total contribution of the Kuwait Fund and the State of Kuwait during the period 2012-2018 is highlighted in the figure 43 below:
This support was delivered through five different funding mechanisms as follows:
1. Loans granted from the Kuwait Fund to the various countries
2. Grants and Technical Assistance/expertise
3. Grants contributed on behalf of the State of Kuwait into the resources of several regional and global initiatives and funds.
4. Direct contribution from the State of Kuwait overseen by Kuwait Fund
5. Direct contributions to national projects and initiatives

Amount of loans granted by the Kuwait Fund (2012-2018)

	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018
Source: KFAED (2017). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development - KFAED (2018). The Yearly Report 2017/2018. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
“
“… Kuwait has provided development aid to developing and least developed countries through its various institutions, most notably through the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. Indeed, Kuwait’s overall contribution in the form of overseas development aid (ODA) stood at an average of 2.1 per cent of its GDP which is almost threefold the agreed Monterrey Consensus target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income.


The loans and grants provided by Kuwait over the indicated period can be grouped by year and number of recipient countries under different SDGs as follows:
Table 26
Number of countries receiving loans from Kuwait Fund and the targeted SDGs
YEARRECIPIENT COUNTRIES SDG GOALS TARGETED
Source: KFAED (2018). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab 
Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development - KFAED (2018). The Yearly Report: The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
As to the grants and technical assistance/expertise provided since its establishment, they amounted to KD 264 million through a total of 286 grants and technical assistance. The period from 2012-2018 is shown as per figure 44 below:
Figure 44
Amount of Grants & Technical Assistance  (2012-2018)

	0	20,000,000	40,000,000	60,000,000	80,000,000	100,000,000
Source: KFAED (2017). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab 
Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development - KFAED (2018). The Yearly Report 2017/2018. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
KFAED grants were aimed at achieving development objectives of relevance to the SDG Goals as indicated in the table below:
Table 27
Number of Countries Receiving Grants and Technical Assistance from Kuwait Fund and the Targeted SDGs
YEARRECIPIENT COUNTRIES ORGANIZATIONS/GLOBAL INITIATIVESSDG GOALS TARGETED
Source: KFAED (2018). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. KFAED (2018). The Yearly Report: Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development
The grants, which the State of Kuwait provided during the same period to several regional and global initiatives and funds, amounted to KD 2,014 million since its establishment, and the amount from 2013-2017 disaggregated by year is shown in the figure (45).
Furthermore, the direct contributions from Kuwait Fund to national projects and initiatives amounted to 464,667,443 KD (the equivalent of US$1.53 billion) and covered 3 different projects and initiatives: Training for Newly Graduated Kuwaiti Engineers and Architects (from 2003-2017), supporting the Public Authority for Housing Welfare (from 2012-2017) and encouraging local suppliers, contractors and consultants implementing the projects supported by Kuwait Fund (2012-2017), as per figure 46 below, page 95.
Figure 45
Amount of KF contribution on behlaf of state of Kuwait to Global Initatives (in Million KD)

	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017
Source: KFAED (2017). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
Furthermore, the direct contributions from Kuwait Fund to national projects and initiatives amounted to 464,667,443 KD (the equivalent of US$1.53 billion) and covered 3 different projects and initiatives: Training for Newly Graduated Kuwaiti Engineers and Architects (from 2003-2017), supporting the Public Authority for Housing Welfare (from 2012-2017) and encouraging local suppliers, contractors and consultants implementing the projects supported by Kuwait Fund (2012-2017), as per figure 46 below:
The Training for Newly Graduated Kuwaiti Engineers and Architects was established to support the efforts on Human development in the country through a comprehensive training programme seeking to give the new graduates the required skills that would enable them meet the needs of the local market and the private sector in particular52. 
In its 2018 annual report, the Kuwait Fund reported providing 23 loans and 10 grants and technical assistance for 20 countries and 7 countries and 3 organizations/ associations respectively53, amounting for KD 278 million and KD 7,300 million respectively.
Figure 46
It is worth mentioning that Kuwait’s ODA increased between 2012 and 2017 at a time when Government revenues were rather dwindling, as it is shown in Figure 47 below:
Figure 47
Total Government revenues per GDP, and by source

 Total Government revenue per GDP     Total oil revenues      Total non-oil revenues
Amount of Kuwait Fund’s contribution to national projects and initiatives (in KD)
Encouraging local suppliers, contractors and consultants implementing the Kuwait Fund related projects 
Supporting the Public Authority for Housing Welfare 
Training for Newly Graduated Kuwaiti 
Engineers and Architects
	0	50,000,000	100,000,000	150,000,000	200,000,000	250,000,000	300,000,000	350,000,000
Source: KFAED (2017). Loans & Grants and Technical Assistance for Arab Countries. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
52. Kuwait Fund – Training Programme for Kuwaiti New Graduated Engineers and Architects
53. KFAED (2018). The Yearly Report 2017/2018. The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic DevelopmentSource: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018.
In fact, due to market fluctuations in the price of oil between 2012-2016, Kuwait’s GDP decreased from 64.8% in 2012 to 39.5% in 2016. However, the percentage of local budget financed through local taxes increased gradually from 0.8% in 2012 to 2.4% in 2016, marking 0.9%, 1.1% and 1.9% in 2013, 2014 and 2015 respectively (target 17.1).
According to data provided by the Kuwait Central Bank, the percentage of direct investments abroad from the total government revenues marked its highest level in 2013 with a total of 4,721 million KD (the equivalent of US$15.57 billion) and a percentage of 14.8%, as per figure 48. Furthermore, the statistics from Kuwait Central Bank shows an increase in the percentage of remittances per countries GDP from 8.8% in 2012 to 13.6% in 2016.
According to the Communication & Information Technology Regulatory Authority (CITRA), the percentage of residents consuming internet marked an increase from 71% to 78% in 2012 and 2017 respectively, as shown in figure 49. 
With reference to partnerships, it is significant to highlight the continuous cooperation and partnership between the European Union (EU) and the Gulf Countries 

Figure 48
% of direct investments abroad from the total government revenues

	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition, 2018.
Figure 49
Percentage of people consuming internet in Kuwait (2012-2017)
100

	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017
Source: SDGs Indicators, 2012-2016, Central Statistical Bureau (CSB), 1st edition.
N.B. There were no data available on the consumption in 2015 and 2016.
Cooperation (GCC) where Kuwait assumes one of the lead roles and responsibility. A Cooperation Agreement (CA), which governs the aforementioned partnership, goes back to 1988 and aims at strengthening stability in this region of strategic importance and facilitating political partnership, trade and economic relations. It also aims at broadening economic and technical cooperation as well as cooperation in the fields of energy, industry, trade, services, agriculture, fisheries, investment, science, technology and environment54.
Under this Cooperation Agreement framework, an annual Joint Council/Ministerial Meetings between EU and GCC foreign ministers was established, as well as a Joint Cooperation Committee between senior officials. In addition, working groups have been established in the fields of industrial cooperation, energy and environment and in 1996, decentralized cooperation was added to the agenda. Since 2003, there has been a regular Economic Dialogue, where topics such as unified trade policy, the fiscal aspects of a single currency, and the move from the customs union to a single market have been covered3.

54. The EU & The Gulf – Delegation of EU to Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and Qatar – December 2014.
Table 28
Highlights of Cooperation Levels with the EU and GCC
CHARACTERISTICSEUROPEAN UNIONGULF COUNTRIES COOPERATION
Source: Khader, B. (2014). The European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council in a Changing Environment. IEMed. Mediterranean Yearbook.

Figures 50 and 51 show the imports and exports of the EU trade with GCC in 2013.
Figure 50	Figure 51
European Union Trade with GCC - Imports 	European Union Trade with GCC - Exports 

  Mineral, fuels, lubricants and related material     	  Mineral, fuels, lubricants and related material     
  Chemicals and related products	  Chemicals and related products
  Manufactured goods classified chiefly by material     	  Manufactured goods classified chiefly by material     
  Machinery and Transport Equipment	  Machinery and Transport Equipment
  Other	  Other
  Miscellaneous manufactured articles
  Food and live animals
  Commodities and transactions
Source: Khader, B. (2014). The European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council in a Changing Environment. IEMed. Mediterranean Yearbook.

Under partnerships and inter & intra coordination, it is useful to note the achievements of the Kuwait Public Policy Centre, as a regional and international stakeholder. A summary of KPPC activities is addressed below55:
» In collaboration with UNDP, KPPC organized the launching of the Global Report on "Linking the Oil and Gas Industry to Sustainable Development Goals: Atlas" during a panel discussion entitled "How can the oil and gas industry support the achievement of sustainable development goals and the 2030 Agenda more effectively?"
» Developed strategic cooperation and memoranda of understanding with regional and international policy centres.  Recognizing the importance of benefiting from local, regional and global universities, the Centre has established partnerships and memoranda of understanding with several parties with a view to playing an active role in priority policy areas and to produce evidence-based scientific studies and papers. Examples of such partnerships are as follows:
1. University of Ottawa (Centre for Governance) in cooperation with the Canadian Embassy in Kuwait
2. Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of 
Sciences (KFAS) through which the Policy Centre can cooperate with other universities around the world
3. American University of Beirut - Issam Fares Institute for Public Policy and International Affairs
4. Kuwait University
5. National School of Public Administration (France) École Nationale D'Administration (ENA)
55. Report on the Achievement of Kuwait Public Policy Centre (KPPC) 2017-2018.
When it comes to data and indicators, it has been acknowledged that the availability of statistics and data is rather limited, which represents a challenge in terms of reporting progress on performance of all SDGs indicators, particularly across Tier I and II. However, GSSCPD together with CSB are considering plans to address this issue at the policy, institutional and information sharing and dissemination level in a way in which, authoritative, reliable, robust and regular data would be generated and used for targeting, tracking and monitoring different goals and targets over the coming years.

according to their mandates, institutional affiliation, past experiences, relevant expertise, current and future plans and programmes and available human and other resources.
As a result of this sustained momentum, and of the Government commitment to the transformative breadth and scope of Agenda 2030 and its ultimate purpose of leaving no one behind, concrete, significant and commendable achievements have been made and recorded over the last four years, most of which have been reported in the present VNR. Plans are in place to further continue enhancing the policy, substantive, advocacy, technical and tracking capacity of the institutional instruments that have been devised for steering the SDGs implementation, including through the NSDC and NOSD. It is expected that this sustained investment will enhance Government capacity to steer the implementation of the goals and targets of relevance to Kuwait, identify emerging challenges, coordinate the design and enactment of the required corrective actions, and monitor progress and assess impact.  
The State of Kuwait is committed to all inclusive, rights-based, equal-opportunity and dignifying human development and to economic, social and environmental sustainability. It is also committed and has always upheld its commitment to national, regional and world peace and human dignity and to global partnership and international solidarity. It is on that basis that it has endorsed the terms and scope of the five critical SDGs dimensions of People, Prosperity, Planet, Peace and Partnership. 
The present report, which is Kuwait’s first voluntary national review report, carries significant evidence to this commitment and attests to the determination of the Leadership of the country and to the vision, policy, strategic, institutional framework and participatory endeavours of Government in the short, medium and long-run, to bring about the highest dividend of human development for All, and make both the SDG Agenda 2030 and Kuwait Vision 
2035 a reality. 
