1 Introduction
2019 is a special year for the Principality of Liechtenstein: we are celebrating our country’s 300th anniversary. It also gives us the opportunity to reflect upon progress made to date by Liechtenstein and its people and how they handle natural resources.
Many factors have contributed to Liechtenstein continuing to exist as a sovereign state 300 years after it was founded. That is anything but a matter of course for a small country that has had no armed forces of its own since 1868. More than most countries, Liechtenstein has been and is reliant on good neighbourly relations, strong global partnerships and the force of international law to protect its sovereignty. In its foreign policy Liechtenstein consistently advocates constructive and inclusive multilateralism, since only then can we ensure peace, stability and global sustainable development in the long term.
Sustainable development is the key issue of our era. Unless an appropriate balance is struck between economic development, social cohesion and protection of natural resources, global peace will be in jeopardy. It is in Liechtenstein’s vested interests to promote sustainable development at home and abroad.
With its 17 sustainability goals, the UN 2030 Agenda serves as a visionary framework for action for all governments. The Agenda sets out goals that all countries around the globe need to address. Our country’s 300th anniversary is an excellent opportunity to conduct a comprehensive analysis of sustainable development in Liechtenstein.
What is the economic, social and environmental situation in Liechtenstein and in what direction are we developing? What steps has the government taken to tackle existing challenges? What role do actors from the world of business and civil society play? What contribution can they make and how can the state and the private sector work together more closely? This report addresses those key questions and provides a first comprehensive overview of the country’s development in all areas of public life.
The government is confident that this report will provide the basis for a source of information on sustainability in Liechtenstein and for considering how we can improve sustainability together.
2 Summary and key points
Sustainable development is a key priority for the government of Liechtenstein. For many years, Liechtenstein has been taking targeted action to promote sustainable economic growth, the careful use of natural resources, the conservation of nature and the landscape, a peaceful, just and inclusive society, and to ensure the rule of law.
At international level, Liechtenstein displays a consistent commitment to promoting sustainable development, whether through protecting and advancing human rights, strengthening the rule of law, fighting impunity for the most serious violations of human rights and international law, and through its commitment to more effective environmental protection. Multilateralism is a major focus for Liechtenstein, particularly when it comes to problems that can only be resolved through international cooperation. That is why Liechtenstein was actively involved in the negotiation process leading up to the adoption of the UN’s 2030 Agenda and  called for it to be of a comprehensive nature. Liechtenstein also advocated an effective review mechanism for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Voluntary reporting to the High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) is an important instrument of this review.
The private sector and civil society also take sustainability very seriously, as shown by a survey that was carried out within the scope of this report. There is a general desire for close involvement in implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
This report on the SDGs shows that, in general, Liechtenstein is already implementing them effectively. In addition, it has taken significant action in many areas to continue improving sustainability. playing a pioneering role with certain projects:
• By consistently promoting solar energy, Liechtenstein has been the “solar world champion” since 2015 with the highest per-capita installed photovoltaic capacity;
• Every municipality in Liechtenstein is strongly committed to increasing energy efficiency and has been awarded the title “Energy City”. Liechtenstein is the world’s first “Energy Country”;
• With its “Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” campaign, Liechtenstein is aiming to become the first country to provide as many vulnerable people with access to clean drinking water as Liechtenstein has citizens;
• Through the Liechtenstein Initiative, the financial sector and government are making joint efforts to end modern slavery and  human trafficking;
• Working with the private sector, the Energy and Climate Pioneers and Energy and Climate Workshop projects are teaching young people about sustainability and giving them the tools to play an active part in shaping a sustainable future.
The report identifies areas where  Liechtenstein has made strong progress in implementing the SDGs, in particular: SDGs 1 (poverty), 2 (hunger), 3 (health), 4 (education), 6 (water), 8 (work) and 16 (peace).
Some areas have been identified as requiring more work in the area of implementation, though statistical indicators show a positive trend:
• De facto gender equality, especially in poli-tics and professional life, has not yet been achieved (SDG 5);
• There is a high dependence on fossil fuels 
(SDG 7);
• Consumption and production are too resource-intensive (SDG 12);
• Greenhouse gas emissions are falling, but are too high in terms of the climate objectives set out in the Paris Agreement (SDG 13).
Finally, certain areas have been identified where development is negative and action is required:
• Mobility in Liechtenstein is heavily based on motorised private transport (SDG 9 and SDG 11);
• Biodiversity in Liechtenstein is endangered (SDG 15).
Existing data was used to evaluate the development of individual SDGs in Liechtenstein. The trends were assessed based on the national system of sustainable development indicators, plus some additional indicators. A total of 62 indicators were assigned  to the individual SDGs. Overall, Liechtenstein’s national indicator system covers few of the UN’s SDG indicators. In future, it will be necessary to examine how the national indicators can be aligned more closely with the SDGs.
Within the framework of international solidarity, Liechtenstein makes a substantial contribution to the implementation of  SDGs in developing countries. It supports projects relating to almost all the SDGs, with a focus on education (SDG 4), advancing the rule of law (SDG 16) and migration (SDG 10).
The commitment of the private sector in Liechtenstein deserves special mention. Charitable foundations alone spend some CHF 200 million annually on philanthropic projects. A further CHF 2 million is raised by numerous civil society organisations for humanitarian aid and development projects overseas. The government plans to continue expanding the cooperation between the public and private sector.

3 Implementation process and   implementation priorities in LiechtensteinImplementation of the UN 2030 Agenda and its 17 sustainability goals poses challenges for all countries around the globe. Not all countries have achieved the same level of implementation and each country needs to  take different action. Irrespective of their level of development, what all countries have in common is that economic, social and environmental sustainability is yet to be achieved.
From the outset, the Liechtenstein government chose a systematic approach to analyse the level of implementation of the SDGs in Liechtenstein and to define the need for  action. To that end the government established an interdisciplinary working group led by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Culture and tasked it with the following:
• Performance of a gap analysis with respect to the level of implementation of the SDGs
• Analysis of the need for action to ensure implementation
• Review of data availability for measurement of the SDGs
In a detailed analytic process the working group drew up an overview of the individual SDGs and their targets and also studied  the available data for measuring progress. At the same time the public was informed at various events about the SDGs and discussions were held with stakeholder groups.
Based on the results and the recommendations of the working group and according to the priority given to the identified need for action, the government decided to define  the SDGs together with the “2017–2021 Government Programme” as one of the strategic guidelines for the government’s work. It aims for the SDGs to be implemented as broadly  as possible but wishes to focus on the SDGs where it perceives the greatest need for action or the most challenges for the future. The government is striving for increased engagement in the following fields in particular:
Ensure inclusive  and equitable  quality education
Pursue an active gender equality policy
Ensure availability and sustainable  management of water
Ensure access to affordable,  
reliable, sustainable and modern energy
Build resilient infrastructure 
Reduce inequality within  and among countries,  especially with respect to migration 
 
Measures to promote  sustainable consumption  and production
Action to combat climate change through a consistent reduction in annual  greenhouse gas emissions
At the same time the government would like to integrate the SDGs into its government activities as far as possible. For that purpose a number of key projects were named that are key to implementation of the SDGs and for which coherence with and reference to the SDGs should be ensured:
Development of the  
2025 Education Strategy
Measures to improve  the compatibility of  family and career
Development of the  
2030 Energy Strategy
Development of the  
2030 Mobility Concept
The relevant ministries are responsible for implementing the various SDG-related  projects. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Culture was tasked with coordinating implementation and with producing this report.
The government is committed to involving the private sector and civil society. For that reason a broad-based survey of actors from the private sector and civil society was  onducted in the course of drawing up this report. The aim of the survey was to identify how the actors view the SDGs and what importance they attribute to the SDGs. The survey was also designed to identify what activities the private sector and civil society have already developed for implementation of the SDGs and how they assess the level of implementation achieved.
Implementation of the individual SDGsOverall trends
For an overall analysis of the SDGs a distinction should be made between the level of implementation and the direction taken. To analyse the level of implementation, information was gathered from all relevant public agencies. The analysis of the level of implementation is chiefly based on the information and assessments of the relevant agencies.
For many years now the National Statistical Office (Amt für Statistik) has maintained a national indicator system for sustainable development that consists of a total of 55 indicators and is published yearly. The indicator system is currently not based directly on the SDGs. For the purpose of this report all existing indicators were matched to the relevant SDGs. In addition, further relevant indicators from existing national statistics were used, with the result that a total of 62 indicators were available for this report.
The indicators are used to assess the direction taken in developing the individual SDGs, rather than the level of implementation. For most of the SDGs several indicators are available to identify the direction taken.¹ An overall trend was identified for each SDG on the basis of the available indicators and is shown in the following diagram.


Explanation of the diagram:
• A positive number means that the SDG is showing a positive trend (i. e. towards greater sustainability)
• 0 means that there is no significant change
• A negative number means that the SDG is showing a negative trend (i. e. towards less sustainability)

1  In order to assess the trends, the initial values of the data collected (base year) were compared with the most recent values for each indicator. 
The base year is not identical for all indicators; instead it depends on when measurement of the indicator began.

End poverty in all its forms everywhere

• There are no extreme forms of poverty in Liechtenstein; SDG 1 is already well implemented in Liechtenstein
• Only a few households do not reach the national minimum income level from their own resources and are dependent on social welfare benefit. They are supported by the welfare system.


Situation in Liechtenstein With Gross National Income (GNI) of approximately 135 000 Swiss francs per resident, Liechtenstein is one of the world’s wealthiest countries. Absolute poverty as defined in target 1.1 (1.25 dollars per day) does not exist in Liechtenstein. However, the high per capita income also goes hand in hand with a high price level. Accordingly, minimum income levels are higher than in other countries in absolute terms.
The social welfare systems in Liechtenstein are very well developed as a whole. The state offers appropriate support for all individuals and families that do not reach the national minimum income level from their own resources. Nobody needs to live in poverty in Liechtenstein. There are two main instruments available, which essentially are equally available to all residents of the country.
Financial social support ensures a minimum income level. Under the Social Support Act (Sozialhilfegesetz), there is no fixed minimum income level in Liechtenstein. Instead, the minimum income level is established on the basis of the individual situation of the persons or families concerned and should be commensurate with the general standard of living and take the individual situation of those in need into account. There is an entitlement to financial social support, if a person’s income is insufficient to meet the minimum income level, established on a case-by-case basis, that person is entitled to financial assistance.
Pensioners, whose income from an old age or survivor’s pension (AHV) or disability pension (IV) is insufficient to ensure an appropriate living standard or residence in a care home, are granted supplementary benefits. Here, too, there is a legal entitlement to those benefits if the personal and financial conditions are met.
The statistical data show that relative poverty in Liechtenstein is very low. In 2018 the social assistance rate in Liechtenstein was just 

2.4 %. In other words, only very few households in Liechtenstein are dependent on financial assistance to reach the minimum income level. The rate of supplementary benefits for old age/survivor’s and disability pensions is low, at 5.5 % (2018).
Low-income households in Liechtenstein therefore have a relatively high resistance to crises. The risk of poverty is accordingly low.
Challenges
Poverty in Liechtenstein is extremely low. Nevertheless, it can be observed that the number of households dependent on welfare support shows a long-term upward trend (as does the social assistance rate), although a reduction in the rate was observed in 2018. Reintegrating unemployed persons into jobs 
Statistical indicators
Beneficiaries of financial assistance
Number of households
700
in the labour market that provide sufficient income will remain a challenge in the future.
Measures
The government considers it critical to empower social assistance beneficiaries to lead independent lives, with the focus on as long-term (re-)integration of all people into the labour market as possible. Poverty can only be kept at a low level in the long term through regular earned income.
In order to further reduce dependence on social assistance, the Liechtenstein authorities provide personal assistance, counselling, employment programmes and financial aid for languages courses or for external childcare. The aim is to further reduce dependency on social assistance.

100 
0

Trend: Increase, sharp decrease from 2017 to 2018 Assessment: neutral
Source: Office of Social Affairs (Amt für Soziale Dienste), Government Accountability Report  (Rechenschaftsbericht der Regierung)
Explanation of the diagram: The number of households receiving social assistance increased by 203 % during the reference period from 1995 to 2018. It should be noted, however, that the number of households also increased by   156 	 % in the period from 1990 to 2015.

End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote  sustainable agriculture

• Nobody goes hungry in Liechtenstein; food security is ensured
• The proportion of organic farming in Liechtenstein is very high and is increasing slightly
• SDG 2 is very well implemented and the trend is positive


Situation in Liechtenstein The remarks concerning SDG 1 make it clear that poverty is not a significant problem at the national level. It can also be concluded that nobody in Liechtenstein needs to go hungry. As for most countries around the globe, ensuring food security and healthy nutrition plays an important role in Liechtenstein and is a long-term task of the state.
Providing the population with diverse foodstuffs is achieved both through domestic agricultural production and through imports. Thanks to the customs treaty with Switzerland, Liechtenstein is integrated in the Swiss customs area, which means it has unrestricted access to its agricultural and foodstuffs market.
The domestic agricultural sector is relatively small. Only 0.7 % of all employees were employed in the agricultural sector in 2016. However, the agricultural sector (including households) contributed 7 % to gross value added in 2016.
Protecting the incomes of farmers is of great importance to ensure that agricultural production is sustainable in the long term. The provision of environmental, landscape conservation and animal protection services is likewise in the public interest and is promoted and subsidised by the state. Farmers can obtain financial support from the state in various ways.
The Liechtenstein government has been committed to an environmentally friendly approach to agriculture for years. In addition, all farms are committed to careful management of resources. The measures taken by the government to promote sustainable Statistical indicators
Utilised agricultural area
in ha

Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative
Source: Agricultural statistics (Landwirtschaftsstatistik)
Environmental compensation areas
Managed semi-natural habitats and wildflower strips as a proportion of the utilised agricultural area 
(as a percentage)
20

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: National Statistical Office; Environmental statistics.
agriculture are having the intended effect. The area of organically farmed agricultural land has continued to increase since 2005, reaching the relatively high figure of 38 % in 2016. In the European Union a proportion of 6.7 % was achieved in 2017. The equivalent figure in Switzerland was 14.4 %. This means Liechtenstein takes a leading position internationally in terms of sustainable agriculture. Organic farming also contributes directly to a healthier diet of the population.
Challenges
Climate change probably poses the greatest risk to Liechtenstein’s agricultural sector. Agriculture is affected by changes in the climate in a range of areas. A combination of drought, heat stress and high ozone concentrations may lead to reduced production in the future. On the other hand, climate change could also have positive effects on agriculture because climate-related warming could enable an increase in production, providing that sufficient nutrients and water are available. In addition, climate change is also changing general global conditions, such as changes to the international agricultural market due to water scarcity, heavily fluctuating harvests, rising transport costs, increased demand, land use conflicts and the growing costs of production factors. Accordingly, climate- related changes may also have an indirect impact on the agricultural markets and on production as a result.
The dry summer in 2018 further raised farmers’ and the Public’s awareness of climate change as well as of conflicts between the different users of the existing water resources. As a result, significant 
progress was made with the development of a concept for artificial irrigation of agricultural land.

Measures
In June 2018, the Liechtenstein government adopted an adaptation strategy to climate change in Liechtenstein. The strategy identifies potential risks especially for the agricultural sector and formulates specific measures for adapting to those risks. Some measures have already been implemented, including:
• Erosion control measures;
• Early warning system for harmful organisms and pathogenic microorganisms in livestock (Radar Bulletin).
In addition, further specific activities are planned to improve the resilience of the agricultural sector:
• Artificial irrigation of crops;
• Avoidance of heat stress for animals and crops;
• Early warning system for harmful organisms in crop cultivation.
Area of organically farmed land in Liechtenstein and the EU
as a percentage of the total utilised agricultural area 

	Trend: Increase Assessment: positive 	Source: Agricultural statistics (Landwirtschaftsstatistik); Eurostat. 

Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all people of all ages

• Healthcare in Liechtenstein is of a high standard
• Healthcare services are available quickly and to everyone
• It was possible to stabilise rising costs in the healthcare sector, but that issue will remain 

a challenge in the future
Statistical indicators
Mortality rate
up to age 65 per 100 000 residents

Trend: No significant change Assessment: neutral
Source: Registry statistics (Zivilstandsstatistik), 
Population statistics
Situation in Liechtenstein In general, healthcare provision in Liechtenstein is of high quality and availability is high. All people resident in Liechtenstein have unrestricted and equal access to health services. For all residents there is mandatory healthcare insurance (OKP), which ensures the provision of healthcare services. Each insured person pays a per-capita premium and a contribution to costs. However, children aged under 16 are exempt from the premium payment and contribution. Persons aged between 16 and 20 pay half the premiums of adults aged over 20 and do not have to pay a contribution. Adults with a low household income receive a contribution to their premiums and contributions.
With around 350 residents per practising physician, the density of physicians is high in international comparison. For necessary care at home, the organisations “Familienhilfe Liechtenstein” and “Lebenshilfe Balzers” Life expectancy at birth
in years
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive Source: Eurostat
Life expectancy at age 65 in years
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Eurostat
provide services, also at short notice. Primary inpatient care is provided by the Liechtenstein National Hospital. However, there are also additional agreements with some 30 hospitals, clinics, treatment centres and rehabilitation centres abroad, especially in Switzerland. In terms of long-term care, there are six care homes available in Balzers, Triesen, Vaduz, Schaan, Eschen and Mauren.
The good healthcare provision is reflected in the trends shown by statistical indicators. Life expectancy has risen significantly in the past 20 years and reached 84 years for women and 80.6 years for men in 2015. Life expectancy at age 65 also shows an upwards trend. 
In 2016, the leading causes of death in Liechtenstein were heart/cardiovascular disease (34.5 %), cancer (22.9 %) and respiratory diseases (15.3 %). The number of communicable diseases that are required to be reported is at a low level but fluctuates relatively strongly due to the small number of cases. Until 2016 the number ranged from 78 to 149 cases.  Maternal mortality, child mortality and the number of persons injured in road traffic accidents are likewise very low.
The number of persons resident in Liechtenstein that are infected with HIV is recorded in official statistics, but no epidemiological evaluation is conducted due to the low number of cases. The number of diagnosed HIV/Aids cases has fluctuated since 2000 at around 0.8 to 1.2 cases per year on average.
Deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents per 100 000 inhabitants
600

Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: National Police (Landespolizei), Government 
Accountability Report (Rechenschaftsbericht der  
Regierung), population statistics (Bevölkerungsstatistik)
Total fertility rate
Average number of children per woman
2.5
2
Challenges
Considerable challenges were posed by the health costs per insured person, since these costs were constantly increasing by 4 % per annum as a long-term average. Thanks to measures implemented by the government in terms of fees, and also an increase in contributions, the costs per insured person have been stabilised since 2013. That is a considerable achievement in international comparison. The current challenge is to continue to keep costs stable.
General challenges can be identified with respect to health-related behaviour. Numerous health problems are directly related to (lack of) exercise, poor nutrition and obesity, as well as the consumption of nicotine and alcohol. There are certain challenges with respect to the consumption of legal and illegal drugs or abuse of medication, espe-

0.5 
0 
	1999	2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
	Trend: No significant change Assessment: neutral 	Source: Registry statistics (Zivilstandsstatistik)
cially among young people.
Measures
The state and local authorities offer numerous preventive and health-promoting measures. These includes free check-ups every five years. In addition, women are invited to attend a gynaecological screening every 2.5 years. Furthermore, there are various briefings, campaigns, projects and target group-specific or topic-specific measures. Awareness- raising campaigns in the fields of nutrition, exercise, nicotine and alcohol have shown that simple measures can achieve a great deal in terms of public health.
Trends in health costs in CHF per insured person, per month

Trend: Stabilised since 2013 Assessment: positive
Source: Federal Health Authority cost monitoring (BAG Kostenmonitoring), 
Ministry for Social Affairs (Ministerium für Gesellschaft)

Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all

• Liechtenstein has a high-quality education system that contributes significantly to positive social and economic development
• Dual vocational training and education play a significant part in Liechtenstein’s success
• Great emphasis is placed on Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) 

in the new curriculum
Situation in Liechtenstein The Liechtenstein government considers ensuring high-quality education as one of its priorities with respect to implementation  of the SDGs. Equal access to education and the organisation of the education system have played and continue to play a key role in Liechtenstein’s development. Liechtenstein’s education system provides its citizens with a wide range of basic and further training and education options and stands for  inclusive, equal and high-quality education that supports lifelong learning.
The importance of education within a country highlights to what extent the government and state are willing to invest in, promote and raise the population’s level of education. A high level of education is critical for the innovative capacity and competitiveness of a country. The importance attached to education in a country is measured by spending on education as a proportion of Gross National Income (GNI). The proportion has remained constant at almost 4 % in recent years, highlighting the great importance of education in Liechtenstein.
Public education begins for children with kindergarten at the age of 4; it is at parents’ discretion whether their children attend kindergarten. However, the second year of kindergarten is obligatory for children whose mother tongue is not German. Compulsory schooling starts at the age of 6 and lasts 9 years. It consists of 5 years of primary school and 4 years at a school at secondary level I (lower secondary school certificate). Sufficient reading, writing and numeracy skills are required for independent and self-reliant Statistical indicators
Spending on public education
as a percentage of Gross National Income (GNI)
6.0

Notes: The method for calculating GNI changed in 
2013 from ESA 1995 to ESA 2010
Trend: No significant change  
Assessment: positive
Source: Education statistics (Bildungsstatistik), National accounts
participation in social, economic and professional life and are the primary goal of the 9-year compulsory schooling. Based on the literacy of 15-year olds, it is clear that this aim is achieved in Liechtenstein.
Young people in Liechtenstein also have the option of dual vocational training and education; attendance of a specialist vocational school alternates with working days at a selected company, providing the young people with comprehensive theoretical and practical training that qualifies them later to practise a profession. The vocational qualification can be extended by attending a vocational school to take the higher school leaving certificate.
Following secondary level II, all young adults have equal access to further education at the tertiary level. Depending on the school leaving certificate (higher general school leaving certificate, technical school leaving certificate or vocational school leaving certificate), that may mean a technical college or university. Even low-income individuals have the possibility to benefit from tertiary education / training thanks to the highly developed system of grants in Liechtenstein. The proportion of the population that is educated at tertiary level is an indicator of the population’s level of education. The proportion has continued to increase for years.
A similar indicator refers to early school leavers, i. e. to young adults who do not  obtain any further educational qualifications following compulsory schooling and are not participating in any training. The lower the proportion of such persons in the population, the higher the level of knowledge and education in the country. That proportion has continuously and massively decreased in the  past years and decades and is now below 5 %.
The considerable educational diversity in Liechtenstein likewise includes the promotion of talent, with a wide range of training offered in cultural skills, such as through the music school or art school. This training paves the way to attend conservatories or art colleges, or also enable personal self- improvement. 
Liechtenstein enables all children, young people and adults to develop their potential and receive optimal support, with the focus on promoting the individual’s potential, not only through the wide range of educational choices, but also through integrated and inclusive support. Children with special learning needs (both children with learning impairments and children with special talents) are supported in lessons by differentiated class teaching or by special needs teachers. Mentally or physically disabled children and young people are included in regular Teacher-pupil ratio
Number of pupils per teacher
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Education statistics (Bildungsstatistik)
Early school leavers
As a percentage
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Census
schools and classes and supported by trained staff. Trained school psychologists and school social workers advise teaching staff, parents and children on their behaviour and on meeting the learning requirements. In addition, there are specific schools for pupils with special needs, such as the Special Needs Centre and the Timeout School. In addition, all educational facilities are designed for children, the needs of the disabled and for gender equality and offer all pupils a safe, violence-free, inclusive and effective learning environment. Taking a long-term view, upon starting school, measures are taken to assist, support and promote the educational development of each individual child, as well as to help their family. Therefore, each child may later participate and get involved in professional, economic and social life.
School classes in Liechtenstein are deliberately kept small, with a maximum of 24 pupils per class to one teacher (in secondary school: 16 pupils). The better the staff to pupil ratio (the fewer children taught by one person), the higher the degree of individualised and differentiated teaching and better the relationship of the teacher to the child and vice versa. That has a direct impact on pupils’ personal success at school and is therefore one of the key indicators for the quality of an education system. The ratio in Liechtenstein of  9.2 children to each member of teaching staff can therefore be considered an indicator of high-quality education. Thanks to the introduction of a new curriculum for the primary level and secondary level I (Liechtenstein curriculum LiLe), new emphasis has been placed on holistic and sustainable education. Knowledge, abilities and skills are related to one another within a context; subjects and disciplines are no longer regarded in isolation, but are linked (combination of subjects in given disciplines). The teaching itself is skills-based, practical, solution-oriented  and situation-specific, with the focus on the Literacy of 15 year olds
Proportion with a skills level of at least 2 as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Education Authority (Schulamt), PISA study
Rate of nationals and foreigners in academic secondary school education
as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Education statistics (Bildungsstatistik)
application of knowledge. The children develop cognitive and methodological skills that enable them to solve problems using all required components and to harmonise, coordinate and apply their abilities and skills. In the interest of a holistic education, another priority of the new curriculum is the development of personal and social skills that are designed to enable children and young people to treat themselves and others in a responsible, respectful and careful manner. As a result, the skills objectives of the new curriculum simultaneously promote methodological, personal and social skills. Different skill levels that build upon one another enable differentiated teaching to encourage slow and fast learners. Another special feature of the new Liechtenstein curriculum (LiLe) is the emphasis on STEM 
subjects; the application of these skills is also supported by the country’s own pepperMINT laboratory. This encourages creativity, research, enjoyment of education and scientific content, and especially encourages girls  to take an interest in STEM subjects, which in turn has a direct impact on equal opportunities for women regarding access to and entry into traditionally male professions. Another priority of the Liechtenstein educational system is the acquisition and development of foreign language skills, which are key to success in today’s society in the context of increasing mobility and an ever more connected world. In Liechtenstein, English is taught from year 1, French is taught from year 6 and further foreign languages are taught at secondary levels I and II. 
Sustainability has been reinforced in the new curriculum by the introduction of the “Education for Sustainable Development (ESD)” discipline, in which seven interdisciplinary aspects are addressed in lessons: politics, democracy and human rights; natural environment and resources; gender and equality; health; global development and peace; cultural identities and intercultural understanding; economy and consumption. This approach teaches children that political, economic, environmental, social and cultural processes are linked, that actions today have an impact on the future and that there are interactions between local and global actions. Most topics have a political, economic, environmental, social and cultural dimension; they have a history and refer to the future, both in a local and in a global context. It is necessary to develop a range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary skills to be able to grasp the complexity of the world with its relations and interactions. The topics for “Education for Sustainable Development” have been integrated into the various disciplines in the Liechtenstein curriculum, in particular the discipline “Nature, People, Society”. As a result, from primary school age onwards children are made aware of the subject of sustainable development and develop an understanding of the importance of sustainability and responsible, sustainable behaviour. 
Proportion of the population educated at tertiary level as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Census
Within the “Nature, People, Society” discipline the subject of “Ethics and Religions” is now also taught; in that subject children specifically look at norms and values, culture of peace, non-violence, world citizenship, questions of faith, various world religions and ethical issues. Topics such as cultural diversity, acceptance and tolerance are covered, with the aim of raising awareness  of the preconditions of peaceful societies.
Also catering to the implementation of  SDG 13, in Liechtenstein pupils are made aware of health, healthy nutrition and regular excercise, starting from the first year at primary school. The Office for Health Promotion in Schools initiates, launches and supports specific exercise programmes for schools and classes; exercise breaks and active lessons are a regular part of daily school life, as are healthy snacks during breaks. In addition, an occupational health management scheme for school staff is currently being developed. 
Challenges
To ensure up-to-date and high-quality teaching in the long term, a range of professional development courses – which are updated yearly – are available to all teaching staff in Liechtenstein. The range of courses is managed by a dedicated unit at the Education Authority. The courses and seminars are free of charge for all individuals involved in education across the country and generally cover topical subjects related to teaching, upbringing, education, health, nutrition, sustainability, environment, personal management and specific curriculum-related and subject-related content. 
Measures
Currently the introduction of a new education strategy is being developed. The new education strategy is based on overarching, global trends and how they impact on education, and establishes suitable guiding  principles, with sustainability reflected in all subordinate goals. Sustainability refers both to the individual’s acquisition of comprehensive knowledge and skills to ensure success and progress in today’s world through inte grated support, and to raising the awareness of the individual to local, regional and global environmental and climate aspects. Inclusion of all stakeholder groups enables the develop ment of a forward-looking education strategy based on the country’s needs.


Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

• Gender equality has been largely achieved in legal terms
• Equality in professional life and in politics remains a challenge

• The trend is moderately positive
Situation in Liechtenstein Gender equality is a priority in terms of implementation of the SDGs by the Liechtenstein government. A distinction should be made between de jure and de facto equality. In recent decades, de jure discrimination between men and women has been progressively eliminated, with the result that today that genders are largely equal in legal terms.
The Liechtenstein Constitution states in Article 31(2) that men and women are equal. In addition, legal protection for girls and women against discrimination is provided by the Act on Gender Equality (Gleichstellungsgesetz). The Act governs the rights and legal remedies available to girls and women affected by discrimination at work or with respect to access to goods and services. For the benefit of those affected, the Gender Equality Act allows for an easing of the burden of proof, whereby discrimination has only to be demonstrated credibly. It bans direct and indirect discrimi nation based on gender, marital status, family status, pregnancy or motherhood in private-sector and public employment and in other occupational fields. The same applies to access to goods and services that are available to the public.
It should also be noted that the Criminal Code was amended in April 2016 and now contains a comprehensive ban on discrimination. Since then public incitement to hatred or discrimination, also on the basis of gender, has been  a crime and may be punished with a prison sentence of up to two years. The term “gender” includes not only women and men, but also transsexuals and intersex persons. It is also a criminal offence to refuse an offered service that is intended for the public to a person or group of persons based on the afore-mentioned characteristics.
Although gender equality has largely been implemented in de jure terms, the de facto equality of women in politics, in society and in the working world has still not been fully achieved. Inequality between the genders can be seen in various respects.
In the working world, women are significantly less likely to hold management positions  than men. While in 2015 more than 40 % of men were in a management position in their job, that only applied to some 20 %  of women. The difference is even more pronounced at board level. Only one percent of working women are board members, whereas five percent of men are. The gap in occupational status has reduced in recent years but is  still evident. There are also differences in terms of wages. The median wage of women was roughly 85 % of the median wage of men in 2016. A large part of that gap can be explained by objective features, such as occupational status, industry and education level. There are currently no general studies about the extent of the non-objectively explicable wage gap. Studies that take specific training and position in the given company into account show  that non-explicable wage differences are very low. 
Women are under-represented in politics. Currently the government consists of two women and three men. By contrast, there is a clear difference between representation of the genders in Parliament. In the current legislative period (2017–2021), women account for just 12.1 % of representatives in Parliament (Landtag), with that proportion decreasing significantly since 2013. At the level of municipal councils, the proportion of women was 16.5 % in the period 2015–2019. That figure increased significantly in the 2019 municipal council elections, reaching a historic high of 39.1 %. In addition, for the first time two of the 11 municipalities are led by women.
Trends in police interventions in cases of domestic violence
Number of cases
Another relevant topic is domestic violence; combating and preventing domestic violence is a high priority. The annual number of police interventions in domestic violence cases shows that there are several cases of domestic violence per year in Liechtenstein. In statistical terms, the number of cases fluctuates relatively strongly from year to year and no general upwards or downwards trend can be detected. Women are significantly more likely to be victims of domestic violence than men.
Statistical indicators
Occupational status by gender
Proportion of working population in a management position as a percentage
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Census
Wage gap between men and women 
Median wage of women as a percentage of the median wage of men
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive Source: Wage statistics (Lohnstatistik)
  
Numerous measures are in place to combat and prevent domestic violence. Liechtenstein law contains comprehensive bans on gender-specific violence against girls and women and therefore fosters prevention and law enforcement. That includes the right to protection against violence, enabling the preventive eviction of the potential offender and the imposition of a ban on entering the joint home. In addition, numerous crimes in relation to domestic violence are crimes that are required to be investigated ex officio. Particular attention is paid to the rights of victims during criminal proceedings. A victim support office has been established for that purpose. In addition, the state is assisting the prevention of gender-specific violence through a number of awareness-raising campaigns.
Challenges
In recent years, a great deal has been achieved in terms of gender equality in Liechtenstein, especially in legal terms. Statistical data show, however, that there is still need for action with respect both to equality in professional life and the political participation of women, even though the trend with respect to SDG 5 is assessed as positive overall  and the most recent elections at the municipal level have shown very good results in this respect. However, these are predominantly social policy issues, rather than there being a need for action in legal terms.
To achieve actual equality in all areas of life, an improvement in compatibility of work and family life is of the utmost importance. This need applies to women in particular, but also to men. The insufficient compatibility of work and family life is a significant obstacle to career development. The following factors are currently topics of public debate:
• equal pay for equal work;
• maternity leave and parental leave;
• external childcare options;
• unpaid family work in the household.
Another challenge is to achieve the approximately equal representation of women and men in political offices. While that may be considered to have been achieved in  municipal councils and in government, there is room for improve ment in Parliament and with respect to the positions of municipal leader or mayor. According to the political parties, it is, how ever, significantly more difficult to convince women to run for office. Since the chances of women being elected were actually higher than those of men in the latest municipal elections, it is to be hoped that it will be easier in the future to persuade women to run for office.
Measures
Equal opportunities between men and women play a significant role in the coalition agreement of the two governing parties, the 2017–2021 Government Programme and the government’s SDG implementation strategy. Accordingly, targeted measures have already been implemented to achieve this goal. In addition, further measures are being developed. The following measures can be highlighted: Since 2008, the state as an employer has been committed to gender 
Proportion of women in Parliament as a percentage, including substitutes
30
equality and has expressly made equal opportunities between women and men a goal of HR policy goal in the State Personnel Act (Staatspersonalgesetz). Gender- based wage discrimination was not observed within the state administration. 
A “family policy” working group has been established. It addresses the political  conditions for improving the compatibility  of work and family life and launched a survey on the situation of families in Liechtenstein. All persons in Liechtenstein with children aged up to 12 were surveyed, amounting to a total of 5440 persons. The survey found that 90 % of those surveyed (88 % of men and 90 % of women) are satisfied or fairly satisfied with their workload and 90 % of those surveyed (89 % of men and 91 % of women) are satisfied or fairly satisfied with their childcare situation. Based on the results of the survey, a list of measures was developed. The individual measures are currently being prioritised with respect  to implementation.
Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative
Source: : Official government announcements (Amtliche Kundmachungen der Regierung), 
Statistical Yearbook (Statistisches Jahrbuch)The government takes the view that a specific family model should not be imposed by state 
Proportion of women on municipal councils
as a percentage

Trend: decreasing trend between 2003 and 2015, strong increase in 2019 Assessment: positive Source: Official government announcements
(Amtliche Kundmachungen der Regierung)
Explanation of the diagram: The proportion of  women represented in municipal councils is shown, including the leader of the municipality. Looking at only municipal council seats that are elected via  the proportional representation system, the proportion of women in the 2019 election is 43 %.
measures, but rather that the greatest possible choice should be provided.
A “day care financing” working group has been set up to develop performance-based  financing of day care centres, taking into account the various forms of childcare and according to the principle of equal treatment of all providers. The government has decided that from 1 September 2019 external childcare should no longer be financed on the basis of flatrate support, but on the basis of income and childcare provided. This should also enable low-income parents to work.
In addition to the government, the private sector is also endeavouring to improve the compatibility of work and family life. Several Liechtenstein companies support external childcare, also through financial contributions, as well as by establishing their own day care centres. The Liechtenstein Chamber of Commerce and Industry (LCCI) included the compatibility of work and family life in its vision for 2025 and is working with its member companies on further improvement in this field. The initiatives differ according to company and include flexible working hours instead of core time, more parttime jobs, home office, annual working hours, help with the search for external childcare, company day care centres, buying additional days off and the provision of  unpaid leave to supplement parental leave.
Since the parliamentary elections in 2017, the political parties have launched measures to raise awareness and are increasingly seeking to persuade women to run for office and to increase their election chances.


Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all

• SDG 6 is very well implemented in Liechtenstein and the trend is positive
• Climate change poses risks in terms of water management. Measures are provided  for in the adaptation strategy to climate change
• Through the “Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” project, Liechtenstein is contributing globally to the sustainable management of drinking water and is improving access to clean drinking water in developing countries
Situation in Liechtenstein The government considers ensuring access to clean drinking water and sanitation a long-term and high-priority goal. Liechtenstein has plentiful drinking water resources of excellent quality. Half of drinking water production is from spring water and half is  from groundwater. In the country, there are 22 spring regions with a total of 90 springs for drinking water production. Groundwater is used to cover the remaining percentage of water requirements. That proportion fluctuates according to consumption and spring discharge. Everyone in Liechtenstein has access to running, clean drinking water.  In terms of chemical composition, drinking water in Liechtenstein barely differs in quality from purchased mineral water. That is thanks not least to extensive protection of the catchment areas of the springs and pumping stations. To ensure that water resources are suitably protected, regulations stipulate in great detail what activities are allowed when and where for spring areas and groundwater pumping stations.
The municipalities are responsible for establishment, inspection and maintenance of the infrastructure. They operate seven water supply facilities across the country. Investments are made regularly by the municipalities. They make forward-looking, high-quality investments to ensure that this impeccable quality can be ensured in the future too. Drinking water quality is monitored on an ongoing basis by the relevant state and municipal bodies. 
Liechtenstein is also very well positioned with respect to sanitation. All wastewater from households and companies undergoes wastewater treatment and does not enter the environment untreated.
Statistical indicators
Nitrate content in groundwater
Concentration (annual maximum value) in NO³-/l
Trend: No significant change 
Assessment: neutral
Source: Office of Environment (Amt für Umwelt)
Drinking water consumption in litres per resident, per day
1400
The indicators for sustainable management  of drinking water show a positive trend overall. It can be seen, for example, that drinking water consumption in Liechtenstein has decreased by almost 40 % since 1982. Both individuals and companies are significantly more economical in their use of the available drinking water. It can also be seen that the nitrate concentration in groundwater has remained practically unchanged in recent years. The nitrate concentration is also an indicator for the presence of other contaminants.
Challenges
400 
200 
–	 
1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 Trend: Decrease Assassment: positive Source: Office of Environment(Amt für Umwelt)Although Liechtenstein currently has plentiful clean drinking water, there are a number of risks in the future, especially due to climate change. Effects on the water cycle are expected, such as changes in the seasonal distribution of precipitation, the discharge  regime and the groundwater levels. Extreme events occurring with greater frequency,  such as dry periods and heavy precipitation, also pose a challenge. Dry periods lead to water usage conflicts due to reduced water availability. Heavy rainfall can lead to capacity bottlenecks in terms of urban drainage and to flooding. In addition to climate-related effects on water availability, drainage and flooding, a decline in quality of the water resources is also possible, e. g. through increased leaching of contaminants into the groundwater or due to a rise in temperatures.
Measures
Sustainable water management is an important component of the adaptation strategy of the government to climate change. That strategy comprises a number of measures to ensure secure access to clean water in the long-term too.
The existing measures include:
• The return of non-polluted rainwater from settlements to the natural water cycle;
• Safeguarding areas that are particularly  suited to the use of groundwater by identifying them as protected areas.
The following measures are planned in the future:
• Clearer regulations on the irrigation of agricultural crops;
• Monitoring of groundwater temperature;

“Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” • If water usage conflicts intensify,  additional water resource management  plans can be drawn up.

To mark World Water Day, on 22 March 2017 “Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” was launched by the “Drink & Donate” association and by the “LIFE Klimastiftung Liechtenstein” foundation. The principle behind the project is very straightforward: “Drink tap water. Donate drinking water”.
Clean water as a basis for life The Waterfootprint consists of an environmental and a social component. The environmental “footprint” stands for responsible management of natural resources. That includes greater consumer awareness.  The Water footprint means that consumers refrain from mineral water, which is transported by road and increases plastic consumption and emissions, thereby polluting the environment unnecessarily. Instead they increasingly consume tap water, which is of a very high quality in Liechtenstein.
However, the humanitarian aspect of the water footprint – the social footprint – is also important. Through donations, which are generated by refraining from drinking mineral water, numerous people in areas with insufficient water supply gain long-term access to clean water. That is the basis for health and prosperity and is therefore essential.
Liechtenstein’s ambitious goal The aim of “Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” is to provide access to high-quality water to one person for every resident of the Principality of Liechtenstein, i. e. to improve the living conditions of around 38 000 people in need. To date a total of 22 009 “water footprints” have been activated in Liechtenstein.
State and private-sector actors are involved in the “Waterfootprint” project The Liechtenstein state administration, all Liechtenstein municipalities and numerous Liechtenstein companies now refrain from purchasing bottled mineral water and only use domestic tap water. The budget that is saved is used to aid drinking water projects in developing countries. For example, between 2017 and 2019, the state administration activated a total of 3000 water footprints, as a result of which 3000 people in 
Tanzania have access to clean drinking water.

Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all

• The supply of energy to people and companies in Liechtenstein is secure
• Liechtenstein is the world’s first “energy country” and has been a 
“solar world champion” since 2015
• The proportion of domestic renewable energy is increasing, but its potential is limited
Situation in Liechtenstein Liechtenstein currently has a secure energy supply, which is available at any time and affordable for the population and for companies. Electricity is the main energy source, accounting for roughly a third of total energy consumption, followed by natural gas (21.5 %) and diesel (11.9 %). Overall, there is high dependence on energy imports from abroad. Just 12 % of total energy consumption  can be met by domestic energy sources.  The remaining 88 % comes from energy imports.
 
The government has been pursuing a clear strategy for years with respect to ensuring Liechtenstein’s long-term energy supply. The 2020 Energy Strategy was passed in 2012 for that purpose. This strategy includes the following goals for the period up to 2020:
• Increasing energy efficiency by 20 % to stabilise consumption compared to expected consumption without efficiency measures;
• Increasing the proportion of domestic renew-able energy sources to 20 % of total energy requirements;
• Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % compared to 1990 (see the remarks on SDG 13).
In the scope of energy efficiency and CO² legislation, numerous measures have been implemented and incentives created to use renewable energy sources (e. g. financial subsidies for renewable energy sources and improved building insulation). In addition to state subsidies, the municipalities also make an important contribution to the 2020 Energy Strategy through their own measures. 
The indicators show that these measures Energy consumption in 2017
have had a significant impact. For example, energy consumption per capita has fallen by approximately 18 % since 2006. Domestic renewable energy as a proportion of total energy consumption has increased to 12.6 %; it is likely that the goal of 20 % cannot be reached by 2020 since the required potential is not available within the country.
Two examples in particular demonstrate these consistent efforts to increase energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.
• Since 2015 Liechtenstein can refer to itself as a “solar world champion”. With a cumulative installed photovoltaic capacity of 620 Watts per person, Liechtenstein is well ahead of Germany in first place in the world and has won the SolarSuperState Prize three times in a row.
• Liechtenstein is the first country in the world that can call itself an “energy country”. As of November 2012, all the country’s  municipalities have the “energy city” label. This certificate is awarded to municipalities that lead the way by implementing a sustainable energy policy. “Energy cities” promote renewable energy sources and environmentally friendly mobility and make efficient use of resources.
Challenges
In 2017, the government published an interim report on the implementation of the 2020 Energy Strategy. It made clear that a great deal has been achieved in the field of energy efficiency, but less could be achieved than had been hoped with respect to renewable energy sources. It showed that the potential is significantly lower than originally hoped. However, it also emphasised that climate targets can be met if these measures continue to be pursued consistently.
Measures
Access to clean, modern and affordable  energy is a priority for the Liechtenstein Statistical indicators
Energy consumption
in kWh per resident
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Energy statistics (Energiestatistik)
Renewable energy 
Domestic renewable energy as a proportion of energy consumption (as a percentage)
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Energy statistics (Energiestatistik)
government with respect to implementation  of the SDGs. The following measures in  particular are planned to achieve this goal:
A 2050 Energy Vision is currently being drawn up. The green light was given in August 2018. The aim is to develop a longterm vision for energy policy for the period up to 2050. The process is being made as broad-based and inclusive as possible. Several events and workshops have already been held to encourage the active participation of stakeholders. As a result, the interests and ideas of people in Liechtenstein are being taken into account as far as possible.
The findings of this participative process will be included in the 2030 Energy Strategy in the first interim stage. The strategy will take into account both findings from the implementation of the existing 2020 Energy Strategy and the needs of the population on the basis of the 2050 Energy Vision. It will also be a key component in achieving 
Liechtenstein’s climate goals by the year 

Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth,  full and productive employment  and decent work for all

• A high level of innovation and broad diversification of the economy are key factors of economic growth in Liechtenstein
• There is practically full employment and domestically there are more jobs than people
• With the “Liechtenstein Initiative” for a financial sector commission, Liechtenstein  is committed to combating modern slavery and human trafficking on a global scale 

Statistical indicators
Gross Domestic Product
in CHF million at current prices
7000

2000 
1000 
0 
	1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
	Increase 	 positive 
160000
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000 
40000 
20000 
– 

Unemployment rate
as a percentage

Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Unemployment statistics
Gross National Income (GNI) 
per resident in CHF
Situation in Liechtenstein With a total population of around 38 000 people, Liechtenstein is one of the smallest states in the world. It follows that the domestic sales market only has greater relevance to business. For larger companies, the domestic sales market is practically non-existent. They are, therefore, particularly reliant on trade and exports. Due to its customs treaty with Switzerland and membership in the European Economic Area, Liechtenstein is part of two economic areas and has direct access to both the Swiss and the European Single Market.
The Liechtenstein economy has always relied on innovation and technology leadership due to locational factors (high production costs as well as a strong Swiss franc) and has in fact achieved these in individual niche industries. The workplace is therefore also seen internationally as very competitive. These factors have led to a significant increase in economic performance over the past 20 years. 

	1999	2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015
	stagnant 	 neutral 
Gross value added per employee (full-time equivalents) in CHF
250000
200000
150000
100000 50000 
– 
	1999	2000	2001	2002	2003	2004	2005	2006	2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015
	stagnant 	 neutral 

Youth unemployment
as a percentage

Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Unemployment statistics Labour productivity
Cost leadership is not possible due to the framework parameters and price dumping is currently not an issue for suppliers and employees. The private sector offers an extraordinarily high number of jobs which, due to their requirements, demand well- educated and thus well-paid skilled workers. There are just as many jobs as there are residents in a population of around 38 000. For many years, the number of jobs has also been rising steadily. This means that the percentage of commuters from neighbouring countries has been rising for years. The percentage of commuting employees in 2016 was 54 %. The employment rate of the  domestic population has also increased  significantly over the last 20 years.
The economy of the country is thus a far- reaching job magnet in the region. Unemployment was only 1.9 % in 2017 and youth unemployment was, at 2.5 %, also extraordinarily low in 2017. Additionally, unemployment has fallen in recent years. The average duration of unemployment has been 75 days for years. Businesses compete with each other to retain both employees and specialists, which greatly strengthens the workers’ position in the labour market. 

Employment rate
Proportion of 15–64 year olds in the labour force as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Population statistics
A basic prerequisite shaping this development is the high level of education in Liechtenstein. The dual vocational training and education system has proved its worth, and also secures new talent for the future, thus further reducing informal employment.
In an international comparison, the low tax burden on income and moderate non-wage labour costs reduce the risk of informal employment. 
Active measures against informal employment and wage dumping consist of a fine network of laws, regulations and inspection and sanctioning bodies. So-called universally agreed collective labour agreements (CLAs) apply to 

Employment rate of older workers
Proportion of 55–64 year olds in the labour force as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive Source: Population statistics
a total of 16 industries in Liechtenstein and represent around a third of the workforce. These collective labour agreements regulate both minimum wages and other working conditions which have been negotiated by social partners. Compliance with them is regularly monitored.
The companies registered with the Liechtenstein Chamber of Commerce and Industry (LIHK) cover around 40 % of employees in Liechtenstein. A CLA was also negotiated for them, together with the social partners. The LIHK’s members are obliged to comply with it. 
Only around 10 000 jobs are not subjected to minimum conditions as negotiated by the social partners. Most of these jobs, however, are in the financial services sector, where wage levels and working conditions are above average. Hence working conditions in Liechtenstein are rated overall as exceedingly good. Evidence of this positive development is the number of “working poor”, which is already low and is tending to continue to decline.
Proportion of commuters
Proportion of commuters as a percentage of employees

Trend: Increase Assessment: negative
Source: Employment statistics
Public revenue quota of public authorities
Tax revenue as a percentage of gross  domestic product (GDP)

Trend: No significant change  Assessment: neutral
Source: Tax statistics, national accounts
Challenges
Liechtenstein finds itself in an exceptionally good starting position with regard to economic growth, working conditions and the labour market. The smallness of the country and virtually non-existent domestic market implies that Liechtenstein’s capacity for innovation and broad diversification of the economy must be be preserved. This represents an ongoing challenge for the state and the economy.
The indicators show that domestic gross  value added and gross national income are already at high levels and show a tendency to continue to rise. At the same time, however, it should be noted that gross national income per capita and labour productivity have not significantly changed for years. Economic growth is, therefore, principally based on growth in employment. Therefore, the conservation of optimal framework conditions for Liechtenstein as a business location and further promotion of innovative capacity will also remain of central importance for the future.
Although SDG 8 is well-implemented domestically, Liechtenstein companies are also active abroad with production and distribution sites or source raw materials and goods from foreign countries. The responsibility of the private sector in complying with environmental, social labour and human rights  in their production and supply chains is becoming increasingly important.
Working Poor
Number of households

Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Office of Social Affairs (Amt für Soziale 
Dienste), Government Accountability Report 
(Rechenschaftsbericht der Regierung)
Measures
In order to support the economy in adapting to future challenges, and thus secure longterm growth and jobs in Liechtenstein, there is a wide variety of measures that are already being implemented:
• In March 2019, the Digital Agenda of the Liechtenstein Government was adopted. It comprises a variety of goals and concrete measures in the fields of government and administration, business and innovation, blockchain and fintech, infrastructure, transport, health, family and equal opportunity as well as culture. The agenda is intended to significantly increase Liechtenstein’s attractiveness as a location and to actively involve the population in digitisation issues.

The “Liechtenstein Initiative” to combat modern slavery and human trafficking• The government encourages innovation  and digitisation through innovation and digital checks (see the explanations on SDG 9).

The Liechtenstein government and a number of major private companies and charitable foundations in Liechtenstein (LGT Bank, Liechtenstein Bankers Association, Hilti Family Foundation, Medicor Foundation and Tarom Foundation) have set themselves the goal of making, as part of a public-private partnership, a significant contribution to the implementation of SDG 8.7 (Termination of Modern Slavery) and related SDGs, such as SDG 5.2 (ending trafficking in women and girls) and SDG 16.2 (ending Human Trafficking). Worldwide, over 40 million people are victims of modern slavery and human trafficking – an illegal business model that generates some USD 150 billion annually.
The international financial sector can be associated in varied ways to modern slavery and human trafficking. This can happen, for example, when funds derived from such illegal practices are used, or by financing goods and services with supply chains where modern slavery or human trafficking occurs. 
In light of the global nature of the activity and the need to access financial data to identify abuses, the involvement of the global financial sector in this fight against modern slavery and human trafficking is essential. Through the promotion of due diligence,  development of responsible investment and promotion of inclusive financial technologies, the global financial sector is in a key position to effectively fight modern slavery and human trafficking. Liechtenstein’s financial community and regulatory authorities have considerable expertise in combating illicit financial flows and can play a pioneering role in this regard.
The goal of the “Liechtenstein Initiative” for a financial sector commission against modern slavery and human trafficking – developed in cooperation with the United Nations University, Australia and the Netherlands – is the elaboration of a catalogue of measures that places the global financial sector at the centre of the global effort to end modern slavery and human trafficking. This catalogue is intended to as a tool to act against those who enrich themselves  illegally and at the expense of others. Recommendations will also be made to financial institutions to protect against investment in these businesses. The Financial Sector Commission – consisting of financial leaders, global regulators, victims of trafficking and child labour and civil society actors – is tasked with drawing up this catalogue of measures, which will be presented to the international community at the next high- level week of the UN General Assembly, in September 2019.
In addition to Liechtenstein, Australia and the Netherlands are also partner countries in the initiative.


Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation

• Liechtenstein is one of the most highly industrialised countries in the world and has great capacity for innovation
• Excellent infrastructure forms the basis for economic development
• There is room for improvement, especially in the field of sustainable transport


Situation in Liechtenstein Ensuring sustainable and resilient infrastructure is one of the government’s priorities in the implementation of the SDGs.  The country already has well-developed and reliable infrastructure, which forms the basis of its broad-based and inclusive economic development. The transport and telecommunications infrastructure is of a high standard. The Liechtenstein economy enjoys broad  diversification and, compared to the rest of the world, has a particularly high level of industrialisation:
Industry and manufacturing make a major contribution to domestic gross value added (43 %) and, together with financial services (23 %), are the most important sectors of the Liechtenstein economy.
Liechtenstein is characterised by its high capacity for innovation. Large and small companies in Liechtenstein are successful in global markets, often playing leading roles in technological development in niche fields. The financial community in Liechtenstein also shows an extraordinarily high degree of innovation, such as in the area of fintech. The comparatively high and rising number of patent applications filed by Liechtenstein companies is a testament to their high level of innovation.
Employees by economic sector 2017	Proportion of gross value added in 2016
Agriculture	Agriculture and households
As already mentioned under SDG 8, Liechtenstein offers a high number of jobs, of which more than half are filled by commuters from neighbouring countries. So more than 20 000 people commute to Liechtenstein every day. This places a heavy burden on traffic infrastructure, particularly at peak periods. The result is longer traffic jams, especially at the border.
In 2008, the Liechtenstein government adopted the Mobility Concept 2015. One of the guiding principles of this strategy is sustainability: The interests of society, the economy and the environment should be taken equally into account in order to ensure intact development opportunities for future generations. To increase sustainability, on the one hand, a reduction in motorised work-related individual transport is required, while simultaneously increasing the share of public transport. The Mobility Concept 2015 was updated in 2016 on the basis of the “Status Report with Outlook 2020” with a rather short-term timeline. On the one hand, updating the concept made it possible to be more certain about looming developments and opportunities and, on the other hand, it serves as a basis for the development of a longer-term mobility concept.
In parallel to Mobility Concept 2015, operational mobility management was introduced for the national administration, which aims to reduce motorised work-related individual transport among employees. Since then, the share of motorised private transport among civil servants has been reduced from 72.5 % to 53 %.
Challenges
The preservation of, and increase in, the attractiveness of Liechtenstein as a business location presents a continuing challenge. This is especially true against the backdrop of increasing globalisation and digitisation, which have a major impact on the economy. The state must, therefore, create optimal framework conditions so that the private sector can develop optimally, even in the age of digitisation.
Ensuring sustainable mobility is of key importance to the country. The transport infrastructure is subject to evergreater burdens. Due to the increasing share of commuters and population growth, increasing traffic volume has to be overcome. Hence,  increasing the sustainability of transport is a major challenge.
Statistical indicators on the sustainability  of transport tend to show a negative trend. The motorisation rate in Liechtenstein, i. e. 
Statistical indicators
Motorisation rate
Passenger cars per 1000 residents
900

Trend: Increase Assessment: negative
Source: Vehicle statistics
Environmentally friendly passenger traffic
Share of environmentally friendly traffic as a percentage

Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative
Source: Census
the number of passenger cars per 1000 inhabitants, has been rising steadily for years and, by international standards, is relatively high. Additionally, the proportion of environmentally friendly traffic is declining steadily. While the proportion of environmentally friendly traffic was still more than 50 %  in 1970, by 2010 it had sunk to almost 25 %. The main reason for this is the increase in motorised individual transport.
Measures
In order to maintain and increase the innovative capacity of Liechtenstein’s private sector in the long term, the government has implemented a series of measures:
• The Digital Agenda was adopted in March 2019, and aims to prepare the state, business and society for increasing digitisation and to seize its opportunities;
• Regulatory Laboratory as well as Innovation Clubs, which allow innovative companies to implement their ideas in cooperation with the state and improve framework conditions;
• In June 2019, Parliament will consider  creating a law on tokens and TT²-service providers. The purpose of the law will be to promote the potential of the token economy and to provide legal certainty regarding token ownership and blockchain transactions; • For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Liechtenstein, there are also financial support instruments for research and innovation:
institutions and take advantage of tailored research and development services;
•Digital Cheques support SMEs in harnessing the potential of digitisation to transform production, service, work, teaching and learning processes.

2  Trusted technologies• I nnovation Cheques make it easier for SMEs to get involved in continuous research and innovation activities. With  the cheques SMEs can turn to research  
In the mobility area, concrete measures are also planned. As part of the implementation of UN 2030 Agenda in Liechtenstein  and the 2017–2021 Government Programme, Mobility Concept 2030 is currently being elaborated. Building on the existing mobility concept, a strategy paper focusing on 2030 will be developed. In a participatory process, 
Patent Applications
at the European Patent Office per million inhabitants
1800
the guiding and transport policy principles are currently being reviewed, adjusted and supplemented where necessary. Special attention will be given in particular to new transport requirements, future forms of work and housing, digitisation and technological progress in transport.

	Trend: Increase Assessment: positive 	Source: European Patent Office

Reduce inequality within  and among countries

• Equal opportunity and non-discrimination are generally well guaranteed in Liechtenstein
• Income inequality is showing an upward trend
• The international solidarity of Liechtenstein is an important contribution to the reduction of  inequalities between states; the ODA interest rate is to be increased in the medium term


Situation in Liechtenstein As already explained under SDG 1 and 2, there is scarcely any poverty in Liechtenstein. Welfare is at a high level. Practically all social classes benefit from a higher than average income level. On the other hand, inequality in relation to income distribution is showing an upward trend. While the ratio of the top 20 % of earnings to the bottom 20 % was 11.8 in 2000, the ratio had grown to 13.4 by 2015.
Another relevant issue is the guarantee of equal opportunities and the fight against discrimination in all its forms. Equality before the law is enshrined in Article 31 of the national constitution. The criminal code also penalises public incitement to hatred or discrimination based on race, language, nationality, ethnicity, religion, belief, gender, disability, age or sexual orientation as a criminal offence that carries a sentence of up to two years of imprisonment. Other special laws, such as the Gender Equality Act and the Disability Equality Act, protect against discrimination. Liechtenstein is also party to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and virtually all of the major UN human rights conventions. Systematic  discrimination against individual groups cannot be observed in Liechtenstein.
Migration plays a prominent role in the current global political situation, as well as in domestic politics. Liechtenstein has been known as a classic immigration country for decades. The migration balance is consistently positive, which means that more people permanently immigrate to Liechtenstein than emigrate. Accordingly, the proportion of foreigners in the Liechtenstein population is high. For many years, this proportion  has been relatively stable at around one third. 
Statistical indicators
Inequality of the distribution of earnings
Ratio of earnings among the top 20%  to the earnings of the lowest 20%

Trend: No significant change  
Assessment: neutral
Source: Tax statistics; National Statistical Office
Net migration 
per 1000 inhabitants
-10
Trend: No significant change Assessment: neutral 
Liechtenstein, within the framework of applicable laws and regulations as well as governmental decisions, pursues a clear migration strategy. It covers issues such as types of migrants, skill levels and circular migration, as well as measures to promote integration. In addition, Liechtenstein – not least through its EEA and Schengen/ Dublin membership – is committed to developments at the European level, such as the EU Migration Agenda, and initiates any necessary measures to implement these strategies. Furthermore, an integration concept, which was adopted in Liechtenstein in 2010 (“Strength through Diversity”), is currently in force. This is based on the “Promote and Demand” principle. The state promotes linguistic and social integration through projects. In return, migrants must commit themselves to learning the German language and familiarising themselves  with Liechtenstein culture and its form of government.
Source: Population statistics
Early school leavers by nationality as a percentage
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Census
Official development cooperation
as a percentage of Gross National Income (GNI)
Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative
Source: Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
Justice and Culture
International solidarity is the core instrument of Liechtenstein’s foreign policy in contributing to the reduction of inequality between states. Every year Liechtenstein supports aid and development projects in developing countries in the amount of CHF 22.6 million (see chapter 5 for more information).
Challenges
Current European and international developments in the field of migration are also of particular relevance to Liechtenstein. In particular, integration and inclusion of its foreign population in society should be further improved in the future. The goal of the government is to keep the proportion of  foreigners in the population constant in the long term in order to implement a socially, ecologically and economically sustainable migration policy.
International solidarity remains a priority in foreign policy and the government remains committed to achieving the 0.7 % ODA target in the long term. This figure was in fact achieved in 2012. However, the strong links between Liechtenstein’s economy with foreign countries (high commuter percentage, high export percentage) mean that gross national income is subject to strong annual fluctuations (sometimes in the range of +/- 10 %). This factor makes reliable, long-term ODA percentage planning difficult.

Measures
In the field of migration policy, the government set up a working group in the spring of 2018 to develop a new integration strategy and a new action plan for the integration of people with a migrant background in all areas 
of life. As a first step, a migration study was commissioned by the government, on the basis of which the 2010 integration concept is to be revised. Among other things, the study is to clarify
• What the problems, needs and obstacles facing migrants are; 
• In which areas of migration and integration policy a need for action exists; 
• Which problems should be prioritised  and addressed via an integration strategy;
• And point out good examples from other countries in terms of labour integration, education, language learning and community integration.
In the area of international solidarity, the government is also committed to increasing the ODA percentage over the medium term.

Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable

• The public transportation network is well developed; the entire population has access to it in the immediate vicinity of residential areas
• The means of transportation are strongly networked regionally with the neighbouring states of Switzerland and Austria
• There is potential for improvement in the sustainability of transportation


Statistical indicators
Average CO² emissions from new passenger vehicles
in g CO²/km

Trend: Decrease Assessment: Neutral, still off target
Source: Vehicle statistics – new registrations, environmental statistics
Situation in Liechtenstein Liechtenstein has a total area of 160 km², of which around 42 % is forest, 33 % is agricultural land and only 11 % is settlement  areas. This means that settlement areas correspond to around 18 km². The country consists of eleven municipalities, with the largest municipality having just over 6000 inhabitants. Liechtenstein has no cities in the classical sense; the country has a rural character. The municipalities of Liechtenstein and the neighbouring regions in Switzerland 
(St. Gallen and Graubünden) and Austria (Vorarlberg) form a closely networked agglomeration area.
The total settlement area in Liechtenstein increased by almost 40 % between 1984 and 2014; this growth was at the expense of agricultural land in particular. If we look at Particulate concentration
Trend: Decrease Assessments: positive
Source: Office of Environment (Amt für Umwelt)
Ozone concentration
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Office of Environment (Amt für Umwelt)
population growth in the same period, Liechtenstein’s per capita settlement area has not changed significantly since 1984. Access to affordable housing is guaranteed for all people in Liechtenstein, and there is currently an oversupply of housing.  Nevertheless, real housing costs have been rising steadily since 1980. For the population, there is a large variety of green and recreational areas available.
In 2011, the Liechtenstein government approved the National Roadmap for Spatial Development. The National Roadmap is the central planning instrument that identifies and coordinates all significant spatial activities. It focuses on the areas of countryside, settlement, infrastructure, public buildings and facilities, as well as transport. Additionally, each municipality in Liechtenstein has its own planning instruments for town planning (in particular, building regulations and a zoning plan).
Municipal waste disposal works very reliably in Liechtenstein. Household waste is collected weekly and incinerated. However, a large portion of municipal waste is recycled separately. Municipalities have appropriate recycling centres, where waste is separated and collected for recycling. Municipal waste has increased by about 590 % since the 1970s,  but recently has shown to a slight downtrend. The recycling rate for waste is currently well above 60 % and shows a tendency to increase.
Nitrogen dioxide concentration
Annual mean value in μg/m³ at various measuring stations
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Quelle: Office of Environment (Amt für Umwelt)
Municipal waste
The public transportation network in Liechtenstein is well developed; hence the entire population has access to public transport near their place of residence. There are also excellent crossborder transportation links. However, it must also be noted that motorised private transport still accounts for the bulk of traffic in Liechtenstein. Liechtenstein’s air quality is developing positively, with a perceptible downtrend in the concentrations of ozone, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter.
Disaster risk management and civil protection are of high priority in Liechtenstein. Protection against natural hazards of all kinds, such as floods, landslides, mud flows or avalanches, is well-developed. The forest also plays a key role in disaster protection. Over 52 % of the for-ests (3611 ha.) in Liechtenstein have a protective function; the proportion of forest area providing direct protection to persons and property above settlements and infrastructure is around 23 %.

Incinerated municipal waste in tonnes, including separated municipal waste

Settlement area 	Challenges in ha	Population growth as well as growing 
commuter traffic together present major 
2000 challenges in terms of the sustainability 
1800 of settlements. The unchanging settlement 
1600 area per capita, coupled with a growing 
1400
population, means that the settlement area 
1200is expected to further increase in the future. 
1000One of the main reasons for this is that 
800there are still a large number of detached 
600houses in Liechtenstein in comparison to 
400multi-family dwellings.
200
0A more sustainable design for mobility will 
	1984	1996	2002	2008	2014	also be a key challenge in the future. For this, 
see the detailed remarks under SDG 9.
Trend: Increase Assessment: negative
	Source: Environmental statistics	With regard to disaster risk management, 
impacts from climate change are also to  be expected. Specifically, it is assumed that the following risks will increase in Liechten-
	Housing costs	stein in the future:
Average net rental price (excluding utilities)  
	per month and m² in CHF (at 1990 prices)	• Floods;
• Landslides and mud flows;
• Rockfalls and rockslides;
• Forest fires due to prolonged droughts; and
Trend: Increase Assessment: negative
Source: Census, National consumer price index

Settlement area per resident in m² per resident
474

Trend: No significant change  
Assessment: positive
Source: Environmental statistics, Population statistics
Measures
Of particular note is Liechtenstein’s adaptation strategy to climate change, which includes practical measures necessary for dealing with climate-related risks. An array of measures is already being implemented:
• There are natural hazard maps for the entire country; they are adapted to changing situations as needed;
• Statistical analysis of extreme precipitation events;
• Integrated risk management (monitoring as well as the implementation of structural and spatial protective planning measures and contingency planning); and
• Revision of forest community mapping, taking climate change into account.
Additionally, further future measures are planned:
• Ongoing inspection and adaptation of  existing protective structures;
• Emergency planning for heavy precipitation; and
• Emergency planning for forest fires.
Due to Liechtenstein’s economic growth and the resulting increased traffic load in the  lowlands, the “Development Concept Liechtenstein Lowlands und Schaan” platform  was launched in 2016. The goal for the platform is to create a master plan that defines long-term development for transport, settlement and the economy as well as the countryside and which will define future spatial patterns. In June of last year, Vision 2050, which is a preliminary step toward the master plan and was developed by the government together with community leaders, was presented to the population.
Furthermore, work on a spatial concept  as a strategic framework for the coordination of spatial activities with the Development Concept Lowlands and Schaan and the Mobility Concept 2030 is currently underway. The spatial structure, its function and scope for action are to be explained in the spatial concept. Important topics include traffic planning (capacity situation at border crossings, the promotion of public transportation and non-motorised traffic), alternative energy generation (wind energy plants, solar plants), sustainable and economical use of land, as well as population and  employment densities in Liechtenstein.

Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns

• The sustainability of consumption and production is improving
• Resource consumption is still too high and must be reduced
Statistical indicators
Energy intensity of the economy
Energy consumption in relation to 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in kWh per CHF
0.40
Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Energy statistics (Energiestatistik); 
National accounts
Domestic
In Liechtenstein, no data exists on the total consumption of resources. However, it can be assumed that it is as high as in Switzerland, with which Liechtenstein forms a customs union. In Switzerland, the ecological footprint is currently about three times as large as the world’s biocapacity. Accordingly,  the need for action to reduce its footprint is also evident in Liechtenstein. 
However, the available statistical indicators show that resource efficiency in Liechtenstein is developing positively. The waste recycling rate has been increasing for years. This also underscores the fact that people in Liechtenstein are aware of the issue and actively support waste recycling. The energy and CO² intensity of Liechtenstein’s economy has been declining since the end of the 1990s. Since drinking water consumption is also falling at the same time (see SDG 6), this indicates an overall positive development.
CO²-intensity of the economy
CO² emissions in relation to Gross Domestic  
Product in g CO² per CHF
70

Trend: Decrease Assessment: positive
Source: Office of Environment (Amt für Umwelt),  
National accounts
The state has also created stronger incentives for more efficient and less environmentally harmful resource management. Environmental taxes have increased and apparently have some effect on consumption and production patterns.
Challenges
Despite this positive trend, there is no doubt that additional efforts are required to further improve resource efficiency. However, this requires a fundamental change in the behaviour of consumers and producers.
Furthermore, the positive domestic picture should not be overestimated, since the improvement in domestic resource efficiency is also linked to the partial relocation of  

resource and energy-intensive production abroad.
Environmental taxes
Income from environmental taxes as a percentage of national fiscal revenue
5.0

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Environmental statistics, Tax statistics
Waste recycling rate 
as a percentage
66

	Trend: Increase Assessment: positive 	Source: Environmental statistics


Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts

• Liechtenstein has, in a global comparison, relatively low greenhouse  gas emissions per capita and will further reduce them by 2030
• Measures taken to reduce emissions are having an effect, but there is further potential for improvement
• Climate protection will be even more strongly integrated into education in the future
• Liechtenstein is expected to withdraw from European emissions trading from 2021 

due to the reductions achieved
Situation in Liechtenstein Liechtenstein is a party to the UN Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. Additionally, Liechtenstein has ratified the second period of the Kyoto Protocol (until 2020), which has not yet come into force. As a party to the treaty, the country has entered into the following commitments:
• Reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-sions by 8 % compared to 1990 by 2012 
(Kyoto Protocol);
• Reduction of (GHG) emissions by 20 % compared to 1990 by 2020 (second period of the Kyoto Protocol);
• Reduction of (GHG) emissions by 40 % compared to 1990 by 2030 (Paris Agreement).
Climate protection is widely integrated in national policy and has been integrated  into various sector strategies. The government adopted a climate strategy in 2015  that formulates the measures for achieving the climate targets. In addition, an adaptation strategy for climate change, which sets out the risks of climate change for Liechtenstein and defines measures for dealing  with them, was adopted in June 2018.
Other strategies, such as energy strategy or the mobility concept, are likewise closely linked to climate goals. The measures taken by the government are having an impact and emissions have shown a downward trend since 2008, subject to certain fluctuations. Per capita emissions were reduced from around eight tonnes of CO² equivalents to around 5.2 tonnes in 2016. Liechtenstein thus has relatively low GHG emissions  per capita compared to other industrialised countries.
The first Kyoto period was successfully concluded in 2016. The reduction target of -8 % was achieved through domestic GHG reductions and the use of foreign emission credits. In the second Kyoto period, Liechtenstein will also achieve its reduction target of -20 % compared to 1990 with the help of foreign emission credits. The national climate targets under the Paris Agreement (Nationally Determined Contributions, NDCs) are being consistently implemented. The emission reductions are intended mainly to occur within Liechtenstein and a portion will be achieved with foreign credits.
Liechtenstein participates voluntarily in climate financing, which is provided for both 
Statistical indicators
Development of greenhouse gas emissions under the UN Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement. New and additional funding for climate projects in developing countries, totalling more than CHF 2 million, has been made available since 2012.
Challenges
Greenhouse gas emissions in 1000 tonnes CO2 equivalent, incl. LULUCF*
Per capita greenhouse gas emissions in tonnes CO2 equivalent
*LULUCF: Land Use, Land-Use Change and ForestryWhen implementing climate targets, particular attention must be paid to ensuring they are socially and economically compatible. As the explanations to SDG 7 note, fossil fuels continue to play an important role in the country’s energy supply. This dependence is difficult to break. In general, it has become clear that the rate of renovation of older buildings is currently too low and that clear rules for new buildings to further reduce dependence on fossil fuels in the future are lacking. Further reductions in the industrial sector can hardly be achieved without new regulations. In the transport sector, measures taken to date have not yet had the desired effect. The trend towards powerful 

and heavy vehicles continues to rise, and motorised personal transport is tending to increase. Furthermore, agriculture should make an additional contribution to reducing emissions by 2030, which will also be a challenge.
Measures
CO² legislation provides for the possibility of CO² exemption for certain companies, provided that they make specific commitments to reduce emissions and implement them in a binding manner. All Liechtenstein companies that meet the criteria have made  use of this instrument. Under the concluded target agreements, significant reductions were achieved in the factories.
The energy network in Liechtenstein came into being several years ago. At these events, companies invite guests to visit their plants and present their efficiency measures. This platform for exchanging experiences has proved valuable and will probably be continued.

Education project: Liechtenstein as climate pioneerAnother positive aspect is that a Liechtenstein gas supplier voluntarily agreed to offset its own emissions.

In the future, climate protection and sustainability is to become even more important in the country’s kindergartens, primary and secondary schools. In April 2019, the government decided to implement two specific  projects, along with the Swiss “myclimate” foundation. The two projects aim to support as many young people in Liechtenstein as possible in contributing to greater sustainability and climate protection. As a result, Liechtenstein should take on a pioneering role. The projects have been endorsed by business associations and are also supported by private foundations.
Project 1: Energy and Climate Pioneers Within the framework of this project, young people from kindergarten through secondary school are encouraged to discover their scope for action by developing and implementing sustainability projects in class – for example, to protect the climate and the environment. The following topics can be dealt with in the projects: Nature, environmental protection, climate protection, energy efficiency, sustainability, biodiversity, consumption, measurable emission reductions as well as environmentally friendly technologies. School classes implement their own projects and describe them on an Internet platform. Their projects will also be presented at a local closing event. This is meant to inspire others to get involved.
During the five-year project, parallel to the projects, teaching aids and instructional material will be developed for teachers’ independent application of learning content. The project thus supports the implementation of the new Liechtenstein curriculum in the Education for Sustainable Development area (ESD – see SDG 4). Teachers are supported through the project to teach ESD and climate protection in an activityoriented way.
Project 2: Energy and Climate Workshop This project is in the field of dual vocational training and education and gives trainees in Liechtenstein the opportunity to use their professional knowledge to develop sustainable and energy-saving projects. Trainees should implement their own projects in small groups and submit them as part of a competition to be held every two years. In addition, trainees should analyse existing processes at their company, independently develop innovative solutions and make a valuable contribution to the business. After the projects have  been submitted for competition, they will  be evaluated by a jury and the best projects will be honoured at an award ceremony. Project duration is six years.

Emissions trading
By building a cross-border steam pipeline from the waste incineration plant in Buchs (CH) to Schaan (LI), Liechtenstein has been able to significantly reduce its emissions in the long term, since two large  companies in the country now cause only very low emissions.
As a result, Liechtenstein will no longer participate in the fourth European emissions trading period (starting in 2021), as both companies will make use of the exemption. The Emissions Trading Act has had the desired effect and can be successfully concluded.

Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Together with Uzbekistan, Liechtenstein is one of only two states that have no direct access to the sea and are also surrounded by neighbouring states that also have no direct access to the sea (doubly landlocked). Given its geographical situation, SDG 14 is somewhat less relevant for Liechtenstein than the other sustainability goals.
However, Liechtenstein is aware that oceans and seas play a central role in the global ecosystem. By improving domestic sustainability and through its international solidarity (see SDG 17), Liechtenstein indirectly contributes to the sustainable development of oceans, seas and marine resources.
Liechtenstein’s increasing recycling rate 
(see SDG 12) and specific projects, such as “Waterfootprint Liechtenstein” (see SDG 6), contribute to the reduction of plastic waste that could end up in the oceans.
Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse soil degradation and halt biodiversity loss

• Ecosystems, such as terrestrial ecosystems and inland water ecosystems, forests, wetlands and mountains are in good condition and adequately protected
• Liechtenstein is committed to global environmental protection and nature conservation and participates in close regional cooperation within Europe
• Biodiversity in Liechtenstein is under increasing threat

	Statistical indicators	Situation in Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein is party to every important 
Woodland
international legal instrument in the field of 
in ha
environmental protection and nature conser-
6700	vation and is actively committed to their 
implementation. In particular, the sustainable management of forests is important, as in 
tive function against natural hazards. The forest area has tended to increase over the 
of alpine farming, as has the ecological quality of the forest. However, due to a lack of 
	1984	1996	2002	2008	2014	show a tendency towards ageing.
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive	Ecosystems are generally not in very good Source: Environmental statistics	condition. Particularly in the area of biodiver-

Ecological quality of forests as a percentage

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Environmental statistics
Amphibian species

Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative
Source: Environmental statistics
sity, it is apparent that more and more species are threatened. The indicators show a decline in species, particularly among amphibians and breeding birds. According to the most recent surveys, the Red List of Threatened Species includes 25 % of plants, 44 % of birds, 62 % of fish, 67 % of reptiles and 75 % of amphibians. In amphibians, there is also a negative trend. On the other hand, the situation for fish has improved slightly. However, the majority of the watercourses in the valley area are still severely impaired, i. e. they run straight and are structurally poor over long distances. To achieve a good ecological condition or potential,  further restoration measures are necessary.
The most important factors identified in the increasing threat to species diversity are the destruction of habitats through the growth in settlement areas and the spread of alien species.
Challenges
Conserving and improving biodiversity is currently the biggest challenge in the context of SDG 15. In particular, it is expected that climate change will bring further negative effects. The climate change adaptation strategy identified the following risks from climate change:
• Endangering of habitats and species;
• Endangering of biotope connectivity and network;
• Spread of alien species;
• Reduction of the gene pool leading to the  reduction of genetic diversity.
• Impairment of ecosystem benefits.
Breeding bird species

Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative Source: Environmental statistics Fish species
Measures
Within the framework of the climate adaptation strategy, measures have already been implemented or are planned for the future, particularly concerning the conservation of biodiversity.
A neophyte concept has already been implemented. It aims at early detection and control of invasive alien species as well as the conservation of habitats that are particularly affected.
The restoration of watercourses is also planned in the valley. These are straight and poor in structure. Targeted restoration measures should improve habitats and encourage an interconnected effect.

30 
25	24	25
171620
15
10
5
0
	1990–1999	2010–2012
Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Environmental statistics

Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels

• Liechtenstein is a well-functioning constitutional state with a stable and inclusive political system
• A national human rights institution (NHRI) was introduced in 2016 in accordance with the Paris Principles
• Social cohesion is high and must be safeguarded through constant vigilance against hate speech and possible radicalisation
• With the “Act on Token and TT Service Providers” and the “Digital Agenda”, Liechtenstein  is striving to enhance legal certainty and the involvement of the general public in the use of new technologies
• Internationally, Liechtenstein is actively committed to and promotes the protection and promotion of human rights, the rule of law, and international law
• Liechtenstein is committed to combating corruption and money laundering as well as 

to recovering illegal funds internationally
Situation in Liechtenstein The Liechtenstein constitution guarantees comprehensive protection of fundamental 
and civil rights. Liechtenstein is also party to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) as well as practically all major UN human rights conventions. All people in Liechtenstein enjoy equal access to justice. They have access to a wide variety of available legal claims and complaint options against official decisions. The constitutional court can examine laws and regulations with regard to their constitutionality and hear individual complaints against violations of constitutionally guaranteed rights. Once all domestic instances have been exhausted, the inhabitants of the country may, as a last resort, lodge an appeal with the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). Liechtenstein has also recognised the right to address individual complaints to the UN Committees on civil and political rights against torture, racial discrimination, discrimination against women, and for the rights of the child.
Liechtenstein’s political system has a high degree of transparency and inclusion for all stakeholders. The National Constitution defines Liechtenstein as a constitutional hereditary monarchy on a democratic and parliamentary basis. No law can enter into force without the consent of the Reigning Prince and Parliament. In addition to electing the parliament every four years, the people have numerous effective instruments for political participation at their disposal. In  the case of important legislative proposals, the government conducts a consultation procedure during which all interested parties can comment on the proposal before the matter is referred to parliament. With 1000 signatures voters can demand a referendum against laws passed by parliament and demand a plebiscite. Likewise, the people can launch legal (1000 signatures) or constitutional (1500 signatures) initiatives, which must be dealt with by the parliament. 
If Parliament rejects an initiative, a referendum is held on it.
Liechtenstein is one of the safest countries in the world. Social cohesion and social peace are guaranteed. Neither violence in the public sphere nor crime is an obvious problem. The number of violent offenses ranges from 200 to 250 per 100 000 inhabitants on a long-term average. The steadily growing number of associations in which the residents volunteer for various social concerns is a good indicator of social cohesion.
There are effective measures to combat and prevent violence. To combat all forms of violence in public spaces, there is a Commission for the Prevention of Violence which implements various awareness-raising measures. Of particular note are the successful awareness-raising measures by the Commission for the Prevention of Extremism and Radicalisation. Since 2011, no incidents of violence motivated by right-wing extremism have been registered in public.

Statistical indicators Violent crimes 
per 100 000 inhabitants

Trend: No significant change  Assessment: positive
Source: Statistical yearbook, population statistics
As a financial centre, Liechtenstein pursues a clear strategy of transparency and tax cooperation. The Liechtenstein Declaration of 2009 and Government Declaration of  2013 laid the foundation for an open and internationally oriented financial centre. Through its membership in international organisations, Liechtenstein has committed itself to the implementation of international standards in the fight against corruption and money laundering and undergoes regular reviews. These include, for example, the evaluation by the Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) or the review under the UN Convention against Corruption (UNCAC).
Close cooperation with the financial community to combat illicit financial flows is provided by the Financial Sector Commission, created by the Liechtenstein Initiative for a Financial Commission against Modern Slavery and Trafficking in Human Beings. The initiative brings together the private sector and the government in a public-private partnership. The Liechtenstein financial sector’s expertise is thus used for a project to further the sustainability goals (see also SDG 8).
Challenges
Constant commitment is required for longterm social cohesion to be assured. In the case of Liechtenstein, there are three areas in particular where challenges have been identified:
• The opportunities of digitisation must be exploited by making them accessible and usable to all social classes where possible. It is important to prevent individual social groups from being “left behind” by rapid technological development. At the same time, the risks posed by new technologies must be combated 
(e. g. legal uncertainty and abuse);
• Insulting or even discriminatory comments against individual social groups have increased in Liechtenstein newspapers and on internet forums. So-called “hate speech” can have a long-term negative impact on political discourse as well as on social cohesion; 
• The consistently high proportion of foreigners in Liechtenstein society requires the steady development of integration efforts in order to strengthen both the willingness of migrants to integrate and the willingness of Liechtenstein citizens to accept integration.
Measures
• In March 2019, the Digital Agenda of the Liechtenstein Government was adopted. It comprises a variety of goals and concrete measures in the fields of government and administration, business and innovation, blockchain and fintech, infrastructure, transport, health, family and equal opportunity as well as culture. The agenda is intended to significantly increase Liechtenstein’s attractiveness as a location and to actively involve the population in digitisation issues.
• The Parliament will address the law on tokens and TT service providers in June 2019. The purpose of the law will be to promote the potential of the token economy and to provide legal certainty regarding to-

Number of associations
350

Trend: Increase Assessment: positive
Source: Justice Department, Government 
Accountability Report
  ken ownership and blockchain transactions; • The Commission for the Prevention of  Violence has intensified its activities to  prevent “hate speech”. Discussions were  held with the editors-in-chief of the two largest Liechtenstein print media in order to sensitise them to the topic of “hate speech” and to draw their attention to their legal  obligations. These meetings were productive and revealed that the editors had already  taken a critical look at the issue and that the exchange with the Commission was  highly appreciated. A regular exchange on the subject of hate speech was therefore agreed upon.


Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development

• Liechtenstein is committed to constructive multilateralism to implement the SDGs globally
• Through specific aid and development projects, Liechtenstein supports developing countries as partners in the implementation of the SDGs
• Liechtenstein is committed to a universal, rule-based, inclusive and non-discriminatory multilateral trading system with the WTO at the top

	Statistical indicators	International solidarity
Liechtenstein‘s memberships 	International solidarity – consisting of in international organisations	development cooperation and humanitarian 
	Number	aid – is the central instrument through 
which Liechtenstein makes a substantial 
35contribution to global sustainable develop30ment. This is mainly achieved through  
    financing aid and development projects in 25
developing countries. The guiding principle 
20of international solidarity is to support  
15developing countries in specifically improv-
ing the framework conditions for devel- 
10
opment, empowering people to lead inde-
5pendent lives and promoting partnerships 0with various actors to this end (states, 
non-governmental organisations and private individuals). Liechtenstein’s commitment to international solidarity is as broad-based 
	Trend: Increase Assessment: positive	as possible, with a particular focus on  
	Source: Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Culture	reaching and improving the prospects of 
Liechtenstein‘s contribution to the implementation of the SDGs in developing countries
in CHF millions


the poorest and most vulnerable people in the world. By doing so, Liechtenstein makes a significant contribution to achieving the overarching goal of the 2030 Agenda, “Leave no one behind”.
In the course of preparing this report, all existing projects were assessed for their  impact on the SDGs. Every project was  evaluated in terms of its impact on the individual SDGs. This analysis has shown that projects financed by Liechtenstein make an overall contribution to the implementation of almost all SDGs. The majority of  projects contribute to the implementation of several SDGs simultaneously. The chart at the top illustrates the priorities of Liechtenstein’s international solidarity.
The vast majority of Liechtenstein’s projects make a direct or indirect contribution to combating poverty (SDG 1), which also contributes to the overarching goal of international solidarity. The focal points of projects are in the following areas: 
• Primary education and vocational training (SDG 4);
• Promoting sustainable economic growth and decent work (SDG 8);
• Rural development and food security through sustainable agriculture (SDG 2) 
• Protection and promotion of human rights and the rule of law (SDG 16);
• Combating irregular migration (SDG 10).
Especially with regard to education projects, the positive experiences of the Liechtenstein educational system can be used. The projects will provide partner countries with targeted support in developing their educational infrastructure and pedagogical foundations, as well as in improving networking between educational institutions and the private sector in the area of vocational training.
Additionally, there are cross-cutting themes which are an important component of all development and aid projects:
• The projects are gender-sensitive and promote the equality and empowerment of women;
• The projects promote the inclusion of vulner-able groups and social minorities.
Liechtenstein attained an ODA percentage of 0.42 in 2016. This has steadily declined since 2012 (0.75 %) as economic output increased. It should be increased in the medium term. The geographical priority for international solidarity is Africa:
Multilateral engagement Liechtenstein has had no armed forces and has not been involved in any armed conflicts since 1868. Respect for international law and a multilateral system in which the sovereign equality of all states applies form the basis for Liechtenstein’s security and recognition at the international level. Liechtenstein believes that global sustainable development cannot be achieved without constructive and inclusive multilateralism. Liechtenstein has been a member of the UN since 1990 and considers it to be the central forum for seeking solutions to common global challenges and promoting international law and the international rule of law. Global partnerships are essential to resolving global issues. Liechtenstein is committed to this. 
Breakdown of development and aid projects by region
Liechtenstein’s engagement focuses on the protection and promotion of human rights, the rule of law, and international law. These issues form the basis for constructive multilateralism and collective security Liechtenstein enjoys a distinguished reputation in 
the fields of human rights and the rule of law. In particular, the following Liechtenstein initiatives within the framework of the UN can be highlighted:
• International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to assist in the investigation and prosecution of persons responsible 
Official development cooperation
as a percentage of Gross National Income (GNI)
0.80
for the most serious crimes under International Law committed in the Syrian 
Arab Republic since March 2011 (IIIM);
• Code of Conduct regarding Security  Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes.

0.10
0.00 
	Trend: Decrease Assessment: negative 	Quelle: Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Culturen

5 Non-state actors and sustainability

Key statements
• The private sector gives high priority to the SDGs and is willing to become more involved;
• There is a call for more work on public relations and stronger networking between the state  and the private sector for the implementation of the SDGs;
• The philanthropic and civil society engagement in financially supporting the SDGs is ten times higher than the government´s spendings for international solidarity: Over CHF 200 million are 

spent on projects abroad.  
The implementation of SDGs at the national as well as the global level cannot be carried out by states alone. There is a need for significant contribution and behavioural changes by states, the private sector, civil society and individuals. Broad partnerships are needed.
Consultation of non-state actors The broadest possible involvement of civil society and, in particular, business is a central priority for the Liechtenstein Government. The implementation process should therefore take place in collaboration with the private sector and civil society. In the course of preparing this report, a wide-ranging consultation with private actors took place in Liechtenstein. A survey was sent to a variety of actors in industry, the financial sector, commerce, philanthropy and civil society. The following questions were in the foreground:
• What significance do the SDGs have for the economy and society in Liechtenstein, and where are the priorities placed?
• Obtaining an overview of ongoing SDG-relat-ed activities in Liechtenstein;
• Identifying possibilities for harnessing  synergies.
Results of the consultation The survey was met with great interest in all areas of the private sector. A total of 40 questionnaires were submitted by stakeholders. This underscores the great importance attached to SDGs and sustainability in Liechtenstein society and the private sector. Taken as a whole, the following conclusions can be drawn from the information obtained:
• All stakeholders attach great importance to SDGs and sustainability;
• The majority of associations and companies see the SDGs as relevant to their strategy. Explicit integration of the SDGs into association or corporate strategies does not exist in most cases;
• All stakeholders are aware of their own re-sponsibility, and that of society as a whole, for greater sustainability;
• There is widespread demand for closer coop-eration between the government and private actors in a structured process;
• SDG implementation progress is considered good by the majority, but there is also a need for action. The private sector’s assessments essentially agree on the areas that the government has identified a need for action.
5 N on-state actors and sustainability
The SDGs named most frequently were the following:
• A ctual gender equality (SDG 5);
• S ustainability of the energy supply (SDG 7);
• S ustainability of mobility (SDG 9);
• S ustainability of consumption and production (SDG 12);
• C limate change and environmental protection (SDG 13 and 15).
• The public’s awareness level of the SDGs is still too low overall, and there is a broad wish for more awareness raising;
• Particularly regarding the financial commu nity, the importance of sustainable investment is increasing.
Positive examples of private engagement In addition to the findings on the general significance of the SDGs, a review of the  consultation also revealed some particularly noteworthy activities by the private sector in implementing the SDGs domestically and abroad:
In 2015, Liechtenstein non-profit foundations spent about 9.5 million Swiss francs on philanthropic projects in Liechtenstein and over CHF 200 million on projects abroad. This clearly surpassed the government’s commitment;
Civil society organisations (associations) have founded a “Network for Development Cooperation” (Netzwerk für Entwicklungszusammenarbeit). Members of the network contribute around CHF 2 million annually for implementation of the SDGs in developing countries. The network has also launched a mapping process within civil society, which should provide a better overview of existing commitment and further strengthen the network of stakeholders;
The Liechtenstein financial community is increasingly committed to sustainability. Sustainability criteria are increasingly important with investments. The Liechtenstein Bankers Association is currently  conducting a survey among all member banks. This should result in a comprehensive inventory of sustainability issues. Among other things, measures taken to achieve the SDGs at the strategic and corporate management level, as well as in core business areas, are also being polled. The consolidated results will be available in mid-August 2019.

6 Areas for action in the future
Within the framework of this report, the level of national implementation of the SDGs was determined on the basis of the available information. The resulting challenges and the need for action in a number of areas were outlined. Essentially, Liechtenstein can look back on an exceptionally good level of implementation for the SDGs, especially in international comparison.
Despite its generally exceptionally positive starting position and positive direction, Liechtenstein will have to take further measures to achieve greater sustainability. The government is therefore committed to focusing on the following thematic areas:
• There is currently only a limited amount of data and there are few indicators available for the systematic evaluation of the level of implementation and development of SDGs in Liechtenstein. The government will study options for both improving the indicators in the future and aligning them more closely with the SDGs;
• Collaboration between the state and the private sector to implement the SDGs has already improved. The government is striving to further intensify and institutionalise  this collaboration in the future;
• Ensuring policy coherence is a major chal-lenge. This is particularly the case, given the conflicting objectives between various SDGs. To achieve this, the government will increasingly look for suitable instruments to ensure reasonable balance when prioritising the individual sustainability goals.

