
Table 1: Malaysian Policies and Plans Corresponding to the SDGs  	48
structure of the report

Malaysia together with other world leaders adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (2030 Agenda) at the United Nations General Assembly in New york on 25 September 2015. This is a global commitment towards a more sustainable, resilient and inclusive development, with 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets. The 2030 Agenda has been shaped by relevant United Nations (UN) agreements and Conventions as well as the experiences and achievements gained through the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the global development agenda spanning the period 2000n2015. The 2030 Agenda was the result of two years of intensive public consultation and engagement with civil society and other stakeholders around the world. It transcends the MDGs to include wider economic, social and environmental objectives, and with a greater focus on peace, participation and inclusiveness. 
In support of the global monitoring and reporting of the 
Agenda, Malaysia takes pride in presenting a Voluntary 
National Review (VNR) at the 2017 global High-level Political Forum (HLPF), and is committed to undertaking broader country reporting every four years. This document is Malaysiais first VNR on the 2030 Agenda.
The VNR takes into account Malaysiais efforts to align key elements of the SDGs with the latest five-year development plan, the Eleventh Malaysia Plan 2016n 2020 (11MP) (Box 1), and a series of baseline studies, engagements and consultations that culminated in the development of a National SDG Roadmap 2016n2020. The Roadmap also documents the participatory processes involved in these efforts. Participation was received from states, Government agencies, non-government organisations (NGOs), civil society organisations (CSOs) and the private sector, driven by the Economic Planning Unit (EPU), and supported by the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) in Malaysia.
This document provides the context of Malaysiais development by describing the nationis development journey, key achievements and lessons learned in Chapter 2. The Chapter includes snapshots of Malaysiais achievements on eight selected SDGs in line with the 2017 HLPF theme of \0xECEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world. Chapter 3 details the enabling environment established for the 2030 Agenda and SDG implementation. Chapter 4 describes the means of implementation, and Chapter 5 concludes this VNR.

	INTRODUC TION		3
Box 1: the eleventh Malaysia plan: Anchoring Growth on people 
The Eleventh Malaysia Plan 2016-2010 (11MP) is the last five-year national development plan before Malaysia completes the journey to become a developed nation by 2020. Its theme of \0xECAnchoring Growth on People continues the Governmentis development focus of balancing the needs of both the people economy and the capital economy. Six strategic thrusts are identified to address the nationis challenges and opportunities of the fast-changing global landscape. They also aim to comprehensively address the end-to-end needs of the people and the nation, as follows:
\0xEF Enhance inclusiveness towards an equitable society to ensure all Malaysians benefit from economic growth regardless of gender, ethnicity, socio-economic status,  or geographic location;
\0xEF Improve the well-being for all to promote a socially advanced Malaysia with healthy individuals and happy households, living in cohesive and united communities;
\0xEF Accelerate human capital development for an advanced nation to improve labour productivity, deliver  a higher-skilled workforce, and create a virtuous cycle of job creation, growth and social development;
\0xEF Pursue green growth for sustainability and resilience to ensure \0xECgreen growth will be a way of life and lead to strengthened food, water, and energy security; lower environmental risks; and ultimately, better well-being and quality of life;
\0xEF Strengthen infrastructure to support economic expansion to ensure all Malaysians will have access to basic amenities and be connected through integrated transport and high-speed Internet; and
\0xEF Re-engineer growth for greater prosperity to ensure quality growth and international competitiveness. All economic sectors will migrate towards more knowledge-intensive and high value-added activities with greater productivity.
Six game changers have also been identified to primarily shift the growth trajectory of the economy and address future challenges, as follows:
\0xEF Unlocking the potential of productivity to ensure that multi-factor productivity becomes a major source of growth apart from capital and labour to ensure a sustainable and inclusive growth. Specific initiatives will be targeted at all levels 
- the government, industry and enterprise;
\0xEF Uplifting B40 households towards a middle-class society to ensure households in the Bottom 40 income group will not miss out on the opportunities that come with national prosperity;
\0xEF
  Enabling industry-led Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) to ensure that the demand from industry is fulfilled in terms of number and quality of graduates, and that the TVET gains recognition and popularity as the preferred career choice; 
\0xEF Embarking on green growth to ensure a balance between the nationis development needs and the need to protect its environment;
\0xEF Translating innovation to wealth; and
\0xEF Investing in cities as nodes for strong economic agglomeration to attract investment and talent and drive innovation while ensuring inclusivity.
Box 1: the eleventh Malaysia plan: Anchoring Growth on people (continued)

Malaysia is making progress on many SDG targets. In line with the theme of eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world, this chapter places Malaysiais historical development in context and presents the current status on eight selected SDGs in terms of achievements made, the key strategies that have contributed to these outcomes, and the remaining development agenda to be pursued

Malaysiais development journey
Malaysiais development journey has been truly remarkable since the countryis formation in 1963. Despite being a relatively young nation, various actions have been taken across a spectrum of development areas, guided by long- and medium-term plans and policies. Malaysia continued to record significant growth in subsequent decades by addressing wider economic, social and environmental objectives. The New Economic Policy, formulated in 1971, focused on the philosophy of growth with equity, based on a two-pronged strategy of poverty eradication and restructuring of society.
The importance of environmental sustainability was highlighted in the Third Malaysia Plan 1976-1980, and it mainstreamed sustainable development into national development agendas. In 1991, Malaysia launched Vision 2020, the national aspiration of becoming a fully developed country by 2020, in economic, political, social, spiritual, psychological and cultural terms alike. 
This set the tone for a broader development focus that is grounded on people, growth and equity.
In 2009, Malaysia launched the New Economic Model (NEM) (Box 2) intended to guide the development trajectory towards becoming a high income and inclusive nation in the 10 years leading to 2020. Thus far, Malaysia has witnessed significant progress in terms of almost eradicating poverty, improving health including child and maternal mortality rates, providing access to treated water, improved sanitation and stable electricity supply.
These achievements were made possible through the following measures (Details in Box 3): \0xEF  use of pragmatic and comprehensive development plans;
\0xEF recognition of inclusivity as critical for sustaining long-term prosperity and unity; and
\0xEF improvements to service delivery through collaborative partnerships with the private sector, NGOs and  civil society. 

Box 2: New economic Model 2011n2020
The New Economic Model (NEM) represents the vision for the last decade in Malaysiais journey towards its goal of becoming a high-income nation by 2020. It was launched in 
2010 following the completion of the National Vision Policy 2001n2010. The NEM is premised on three main goals of achieving high-income nation status, as well as inclusiveness and sustainability in development. The estimated minimum threshold to reach high-income status refers to achieving a Gross National Income per capita exceeding US$15,000 by 2020. Inclusiveness means no one will be marginalised from the countryis progress. This will entail, among others, reducing the divides between urban and rural dwellers, and between various ethnic groups, in an equitable and market-friendly manner. Sustainability refers to not only managing the environment well, but also the way the Government manages its resources and finances.
Four pillars have underscored the NEM to achieve its goals, with three pillars under the National Transformation Programme (NTP)-1Malaysia; the Government 
Transformation Programme (GTP), and the Tenth and 
Eleventh Malaysia Plans. The fourth pillar, the Economic Transformation Programme (ETP), complements the other three pillars through private sector-driven growth and incorporates two crucial elements for promoting economic growth. The first element covers 12 National Key Economic Areas (NKEAs), such as oil and gas, agriculture, education services, financial services, private healthcare and ICT. The second element covers six Strategic Reform Initiatives (SRIs), which comprise the policies and procedures to create a vibrant business environment, including:
\0xEF re-energising the private sector to drive growth;
\0xEF developing quality workforce and reducing dependency on foreign labour;
\0xEF creating a competitive domestic economy;
\0xEF strengthening the public sector;
\0xEF ensuring transparent and market-friendly affirmative action;
\0xEF building the infrastructure of a knowledge base;\0xEF enhancing the sources of growth; and
\0xEF ensuring sustainability of growth.
Since 2010, Malaysiais GDP has recorded robust annual growth, regularly achieving rates that were more than double global growth. Further, the Governmentis sources of revenue have diversified: the formerly dominant oil and gas sectoris share of revenue has declined from 41.3 per cent in 2009 to 14.7 per cent in 2016. By the end of 2016, the Gross National Income per capita had increased to US$9,102 against the high-income minimum threshold of US$12,476 for 2016. In addition, the NTP has helped to create more than 2.26 million jobs since 2010. Most importantly, in working towards an inclusive economy, the NTP has touched the lives of millions of people, especially in rural areas. About 5,260km of rural roads have been completed since the initial 750km of rural roads completed in 2010; rural electrification and water supply programmes continue to be undertaken, along with building and restoring houses for the rural poor. All these have benefited 4.1 million people in rural areas. Other highlights of the NTP include the Pengerang Integrated Petroleum Complex (PIPC) in Johor, a world-class hub for downstream oil and gas activities that is drawing sizeable private investment and driving Malaysiais oil and gas capabilities higher up the value chain. The Human Capital Development Strategic Reform Initiative has created skilled workforce that supports Malaysiais high income aspirations  and raises its global competitiveness.

Box 3: Measures Applied and Key Achievements in Malaysiais Development Approach
Malaysia had recognised the multidimensionality of development since the 1970s. Apart from poverty eradication plans that emphasised job creation and skills development, Malaysia rapidly expanded education and health facilities, even in rural areas. This allowed for a growing population that had the physical health and skills to participate fully in employment and overcome poverty. In addition, Malaysia reduced water-borne diseases by more than 85 per cent between 1990 and 2012, through improved treated water and sanitation facilities. Coupled with better nutrition and better healthcare, deaths resulting from treatable childhood diseases were greatly reduced.
Malaysiais guided and pragmatic approach to development has resulted in sustained economic growth of 6.2 per cent a year over the last five decades. Per capita income has increased by more than 25-fold since 1970. As of 2016, Malaysiais per capita income has reached US$9,102 (RM37,760), bringing the country closer to its aspirations of achieving highincome and developed-nation status. Malaysia has also continued to enjoy full employment level since the 1990s. Prudent macroeconomic management has also allowed Malaysia to successfully channel revenues from rich natural resources into built capital. Similarly, the 
successful restructuring of the economy from agriculture-based to manufacturing and services-based has further demonstrated the value of a forward-looking development vision followed by pragmatic action. As of 2016, the services sector made up 54.3 per cent of GDP, while manufacturingis share was 23 per cent. Malaysia is an open economy with trade at 1.3 times of GDP. Employment growth policies have resulted in full employment despite the population growing from 10.4 million in 1970 to 31 million in 2016. Through investments in education and talent management, Malaysia continues to grow the services sector and embrace new areas like the digital economy and green economy.
Importantly, Malaysia achieved development gains with support from the private sector, NGOs and CSOs. Malaysia achieved these development gains premised on its long term outline perspective plans and medium-term fiveyear development plans. These plans were formulated by the government in consultation with the private sector, academia and civil society. This consultative approach to development was also used in the formulation of the New Economic Model (NEM) in 2009. Currently, a very comprehensive consultation and engagement process, which is unprecedented is being undertaken to chart the future development vision till 2050, known as Transformasi Nasional 2050 (TN50).

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
When the Millennium Development Goals were globally adopted in 2000, Malaysia was well-positioned to achieve the MDGsi aspirations. In line with this, Malaysia continued to address issues of poverty, universal primary education, gender equality and empowerment of women, child and maternal health, communicable diseases, environmental sustainability and global partnerships, at sub-national levels and employing disaggregated data by gender, region, location and other determinants. In turn, by 2015 Malaysia largely had eliminated absolute poverty; achieved universal primary education for both boys and girls; lowered child mortality to levels comparable to high-income nations; more than halved maternal deaths, while maintaining a high proportion of safe deliveries and antenatal care coverage; halted and reversed infectious diseases like HIV/AIDS and malaria; incorporated sustainability of the environment into key plans and policies; achieved near-universal coverage of clean water supply and basic sanitation; and reduced the number of households living in squatter settlements. At the same time, Malaysia continued to play an active role in regional and international fora.
Malaysiais development growth was remarkable because it managed to sustain economic growth even as the country faced periodic external shocks and crisis. The resilience of the countryis economic growth is an outcome of Malaysiais prudent macroeconomic management. Figure 1 shows the growth of the economy, the GNI per capita, and the economic crises and shocks faced over the past 55 years.
Like other nations around the world, Malaysia adopted the far broader 2030 Agenda as the MDGs ended in 2015. The Agenda comprises 17 SDGs and 169 targets. Already, progress has been made on the SDGs, as shown in Figure 2, with further achievements yet to come. In the next subsection, Malaysia further highlights eight SDGs in line with the HLPF theme for 2017.

Figure 1: Malaysiais Annual economic Growth Rate and GNi per Capita, 1970n2014

Figure 2: Key Development Achievements in Malaysia in terms of SDGs

Figure 2: Key Development Achievements in Malaysia in terms of SDGs (continued)
MAlAySiAiS VoluNtARy NAtioNAl ReView RepoRt 2017
INCOME INEQUALITIES
ENVIRONMENTAL ENDOWMENT
GLOBAL ROLES
Reduced as indicated by lower Gini 
Coefficient from 0.513 (1970) to 0.401 (2014). Less than 1% poverty rate for male- and female-headed households







  Maintained 55.2% forest cover, 12.1% as terrestrial protected areas and 3.36% as marine protected areas. Malaysia participates in international trans-boundary conservation efforts, namely, Heart of Borneo initiatives for forests and Coral Triangle initiatives for marine areas

Shared development experience with 31,000 participants from 142 countries through Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme (2016); Strong partner in 
the implementation of ASEAN Economic 
Community













Thematic analysis
Malaysia has made striking development achievements in economic development, especially in rural areas, that has resulted in overall economic progress for its people and more significantly poverty eradication. As at 2015, only pockets of poverty remained. Although the initial approach was mainly economic, it has increasingly taken on a multidimensional approach with a focus on distribution and the environment.
This sub-section further explores the progress of eight SDGs, listed below, in line with the 2017 HLPF theme of \0xECEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world. For each Goal, the current status, success factors for Malaysiais achievements and remaining priorities are presented.
\0xEF goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
\0xEF goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture
\0xEF goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
\0xEF goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
\0xEF goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive 
and sustainable industrialisation, and foster innovation
\0xEF goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development
\0xEF goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use 
of territorial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
\0xEF goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development
In a rapidly changing global environment, developing countries would face greater challenges in their development journey. Malaysia believes that investments in skills and technology are crucial to attain competitiveness in its quest for greater prosperity. Empowering people through education and skills upgrading will provide them with access to better jobs and higher incomes, while also helping to achieve better quality of life and well-being. Moreover, this will help address remaining pockets of poverty and other forms of deprivations. In all, these goals resonate strongly with the 11MPis theme of anchoring growth on the people. 
The nation is well-endowed with natural resources and mega-biodiversity that is valuable not only to Malaysia but also to the global community. In this regard, measures are being undertaken to protect, conserve and sustainably use natural resources towards promoting green growth. Malaysia also recognises the importance of collaboration and partnerships to achieve better development outcomes. As Malaysia stands at the threshold of becoming a developed nation, it pledges its commitment to the 2030 Agenda and the Agendais principles. 
goal 1: end poverty in all its forms everywhere
Malaysia has successfully reduced absolute poverty, based on the national poverty line, from 49.3 per cent in 1970 to 0.6 per cent in 2014 n a remarkable achievement made in just four decades. The national poverty line is estimated at US$2.02 per capita per day, which is above the US$1.90 per capita per day international benchmark. As of 2014, low poverty rates also were recorded across ethnicity, gender and rural-urban strata. For example, the poverty rate of female- and male-headed households stood at 0.8 per cent and 0.6 per cent, respectively. The incidence of hard-core poverty, which is below the food poverty line, also was extremely low, at 0.2 per cent. Details of the current status in relation to SDG1 are given in Figure 3.
These achievements have been made possible through the implementation of nationwide multidimensional poverty eradication programmes that started as early as the 1960s. Malaysiais efforts to eradicate poverty have always emphasised education and skills development, income generation, employment creation and provision of access to basic needs such as electricity, clean water, transportation and housing, as well as social safety nets. Other programmes by NGOs, CSOs and the private 

sector (e.g., Amanah Ikhtiar Malaysia, yayasan Hasanah) further complement these efforts. In addition, Malaysiais centralised National Poverty Data Bank (eKasih) keeps detailed information about poor households, for better profiling and targeting of assistance. With absolute poverty largely eradicated, Malaysia has begun to focus on relative poverty in the Bottom 40 (B40) households, which comprise the bottom 40 per cent of the nationis income distribution. A profile of these households is provided in Box 4.

Box 4: the Bottom 40 Community in Malaysia
As per the 2014 threshold, B40 households earn a monthly income of RM3,860 and below, with a mean income of RM2,537 and a median income of RM2,629. The B40 community comprises 2.7 million households that lack financial and nonfinancial asset ownership, and that are highly dependent on Government assistance. About two-thirds depend on a single source of income, which makes them vulnerable to disasters and economic shocks. Generally, the B40 have low educational attainment, and most heads of household are either engaged in low-paying jobs or small-scale agriculture, or self-employed in the informal sector. They are highly affected by inflation and rising cost of living, while some may not have benefited from social safety nets.
About 63 per cent of the B40 households are in urban areas, living in high-density housing and facing multiple issues including non-conducive living conditions. About 16 per cent of rural and 34 per cent of urban B40 households rent or share accommodation. The most vulnerable include the hard-core poor, who are below the food poverty line, and the poor  (0.3 million households), as well as the low-income (1 million).  These households can be further disaggregated into 80.7  per cent male-headed households and 19.3 per cent femaleheaded households. According to a finding in the Malaysia Human Development Report 2013, senior-headed households experienced more acute relative income deprivation. 
Source: Eleventh Malaysia Plan

Figure 3: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 1
GOAL 1: END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE
CuRReNt StAtuS
Very low 	0.6%	incidence of absolute poverty based on the national 	1.6%	rural poverty rate n poor households mostly employed in incidence of 	poverty line (2014), a reduction from 49.3% in 1970. 	agriculture, forestry and fisheries (2014) poverty, with 	Reduction observed across all states, ethnicity and  
a few pockets	rural-urban strata (2014)	2 %	of children below Poverty Line Income (PLI) in 2014, a 
decline from 9% in 2009, with 15% of those living  
0.2%	incidence of hard core poverty (below the food  poverty 	in households with incomes less than twice the PLI line) indicating households were able to secure the 
	minimum level of dietary requirements (2014)	20%	incidence of poverty among indigenous people of Sabah 
                                                            and 7.3% among indigenous people of Sarawak; Orang 0.8%	poverty rate among female-headed households while 	Asli are among the poorest (2014) that of male-headed households was at 0.6% (2014)
Social 	7.1	million persons benefited from BR1M programme at a 	42	social protection programmes implemented protection 	cost of RM5 billion (2015)
programmes 	inadequate coverage of social protection programmes 
are in place	eKasih was established in 2008 as a Centralised 	such as those working in the informal economy, foreign 
National Poverty Data Bank for better profiling and 	migrant workers targeting of poor households
Income 	5.6	times lower mean income for households in the bottom 	6.3%	per year increase in real income of B40 households inequalities 	40 per cent of national income range compared to 	between 2009n2012 compared to the 5.2% increase have reduced 	that of top 20 per cent households (2014). This is an 	observed for average households slightly, but 	improvement compared to the ratio of 7.0 in 1989
there are 	64.7%	of B40 households depend on single income source vulnerabilities 	0.401	Gini coefficient in 2014, indicating a decline in overall to shocks and 	income inequalities from 0.441 in 2009
disasters   
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Providing universal education and skills training
\0xEF Creating employment opportunities
\0xEF Maintaining low inflation and adequate standard of living
\0xEF Providing social safety nets
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Increasing income and economic potential of B40 households
\0xEF Enhancing social protection system
Moving forward, Malaysia is implementing the Eleventh Malaysia Plan Strategic Thrusts 1 and 3 to address poverty in all its forms. Malaysia also is working to \0xECUplift B40 households towards a middle class society as one of the six \0xECgame changers1.
Increasing Income and Economic Potential
\0xEF Enhancing accessibility to quality education and skills training
\0xEF Providing quality employment opportunities and entrepreneurial support
\0xEF Increasing use of modern technology among small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and small-scale agriculture
\0xEF Promoting wealth ownership through investment programmes
Addressing Higher Cost of Living and Income Vulnerability
\0xEF Monitoring prices and ensuring fair market practices
\0xEF Improving access to affordable housing, transportation and healthcare
\0xEF Strengthening the social protection system towards a more integrated and comprehensive coverage 
\0xEF Enhancing financial and debt management programmes
Enhancing Delivery Systems
\0xEF Improving targeting mechanisms of Government interventions
\0xEF Partnering with the private sector, NGOs and CSOs to reach out to the needy\0xEF Addressing multidimensional needs of the B40
1
enhancing inclusiveness towards an equitable society
goal 2: end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable 

agriculture
Malaysia has eradicated hunger and greatly reduced malnutrition through sustained efforts to supplement the dietary needs of children from hard-core poor families. To address issues of malnutrition, a number of initiatives have been undertaken by the Ministry of Health (MOH). For example, the Rehabilitation Programme for Malnourished Children has been implemented since 1989 to improve the nutritional status of children aged 6 months to 6 years from hard-core poor families; the programme was later expanded to those from poor and low-income households. These children are given basic food supplies, immunisation, treatment and health education. Other programmes that further complement these efforts include the Community Feeding Programme and the Supplementary Feeding Programme for Pregnant and Lactating Mothers with poor weight gain and anaemia (Full Cream Milk Programme).
Between 1990 and 2014, these efforts resulted in a  90 per cent reduction of under-nutrition cases, based on administrative data (Figure 4). Collaborations with NGOs such as the MyKasih Foundation also have allowed poor families to access food and basic necessities. These efforts, among others, have been key to Malaysiais success in eliminating hunger. 
Malaysia also is stepping up efforts to improve selfsufficiency levels (SSL) in food production and preparing for the impacts of climate-related disasters to ensure food security. Sustainable agriculture development is guided by the National Agrofood Policy 2011n2020 and National Commodity Policy 2011n2020. Production of major 

agrofood commodities also showed encouraging growth between 2011 and 2016, at an average rate of 3.9 per cent annually. As of 2015, Malaysia achieved SSL targets for paddy, vegetables and fruits, and achieved above 100  per cent SSL for poultry and eggs (Figure 4).
These achievements were made possible from the use of quality seeds, breeds and fries, wider adoption of effective technologies among farmers, and establishment of new large scale food production areas. Malaysia also has been proactive in maintaining genetic diversity and undertaking research in climate-resistant crops and farmed animals. The country adopted a series of certification schemes of good agricultural practices, such as Malaysia Good Agricultural Practices (myGAP), Malaysia Organic (myOrganic), and Malaysia Sustainable Palm Oil (MSPO) certifications, among others, to ensure sustainable production and keep fresh produce safe.

	Figure 4: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 2


GOAL 2: END HUNGER, ACHIEVE FOOD SECURITY AND IMPROVED NUTRITION AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
CuRReNt StAtuS
Hunger is largely under control but the double burden of malnutrition* is rising
90%
13.7%
20.7%
11.5%
reduction in under-nutrition between 1990 and 2014 based  on administrative data
prevalence of underweight chidren below five years of age (2016), with prevalence being higher for boys (14.9%) than girls (12.4%)
prevalence of stunted children below five years of age (2016), with prevalence being higher for boys (22.2%) than  girls (19.2%)
prevalence of wasting among children below five years of age (2016) with prevalence being higher for boys (13.3%) than  girls (9.7%)
24.9%
47.7%
11.7%
prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity (food quantity insufficiency due to financial constraint in past 12 months)
prevalence of overweight and obesity in adult population prevalence of childhood obesity
Ensuring food security and promoting sustainable agriculture
3.9%
72.3%
56.7%
80.8%
>100%
yearly growth in major agrofood commodities between  
2011n2016
self-sufficiency level (SSL) reached for paddy (2015)
SSL reached for vegetables (2015)
SSL reached for fruits (2015)
SSL reached for poultry and eggs (2015)
13,018
205.14
15,000
accessions of rice conserved at MARDI Penang 
and 18,554 plant genetic resources conserved by MyGeneBank\0xF4
metric tonnes of post-harvest losses for rice, amounting to 7.89% of production or  RM246 million (2016)
metric tonnes of food are wasted per day with
20% being edible food
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Implementing food supplementation programmes for children from poor and low-income households
\0xEF Raising productivity and maintaining self-sufficiency in certain food crops
\0xEF Establishing a good public healthcare system that also reached rural and remote areas
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Reaching pockets of remote communities that have food and healthcare needs
\0xEF Reducing the incidence of obesity, which is a rising issue
\0xEF Ensuring food security in the face of climate change
\0xEF Accelerating the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices
* Note:  Double burden of malnutrition is characterised by the coexistence of under-nutrition along with overweight and obesity, or diet-related non-communicable diseases, within individuals, households and populations, and across the life course (WHO 2017)
Moving forward, Malaysia is addressing Goal 2is objectives through the Eleventh Malaysia 
Plan Strategic Thrusts 1, 2 and 6, in addition to the National Plan of Action for Nutrition of Malaysia III 2016-2025 and the National Agrofood Policy.
Tackling New Dimensions of Nutrition
\0xEF Enhancing accessibility to quality education and skills training
\0xEF Providing quality employment opportunities and entrepreneurial support
\0xEF Increasing productivity through adoption of modern technology
\0xEF Promoting wealth ownership through investment programmes
Enhancing Food Security
\0xEF Improving productivity through intensifying research and development, optimising agricultural land use, reducing post-harvest loss and encouraging smart and precision farming
\0xEF Strengthening the food supply chain through empowering agriculture clusters, cooperatives and associations
\0xEF Improving support and delivery services through market linkages plans, both domestically and internationally
\0xEF Enhancing knowledge and skills of farmers and fisherfolk in modern agricultural practices
\0xEF Ensuring food bio-security, bio-safety and standards to improve competitiveness of agrofood products at the international market
\0xEF Maintaining gene banks and collaboratively work with international agencies to protect and conserve local breeds and seeds
1
enhancing inclusiveness towards an equitable society
6
re-engineering economic growth for greater prosperity
goal 3: ensure healthy lives and promote  well-being for all at all ages


Malaysia has made great strides in providing quality healthcare for its people since the 1960s. An efficient and nationwide system of healthcare exists, comprising a comprehensive public sector system and complemented by an active private healthcare system. A universal healthcare system, from primary care to tertiary treatments, is available; basic healthcare reaches even remote settlements through \0xECflying doctor services. Strong collaboration with non-Government partners also has complemented national responses to communicable and non-communicable diseases. Consequently, 
Malaysiais health indicators are almost at par with levels  of developed countries (Figure 5).
As of 2016, Malaysia continues to show progress in healthcare: Maternal and child health indicators show low rates in maternal and child mortality, high immunisation rates and more than 99 per cent of births handled by skilled healthcare workers. Adolescent birth rates declined more than half between 1991 and 2015. Communicable diseases are also under control, with sustained efforts resulting in drastic declines in malaria incidence and new HIV infections, as well as stabilisation of HIV-related deaths. Although tuberculosis (TB) showed an increasing trend between 2010 and 2014, preventive and curative efforts have resulted in a decline of TB incidence rates to 79.45 per 100,000 population in 2015. With these good health achievements, Malaysia will be moving on to tackle \0xECsecond-tier health issues of non-communicable diseases; improved sexual and reproductive health and family health; better delivery of healthcare services to vulnerable groups such as the poor, those with disabilities and the elderly; and enhanced healthcare financing.


\0xEF A nationwide healthcare system that reaches rural areas and remote communities
\0xEF Adequate public and private investments in healthcare to cater to rising demand
\0xEF Coexistence of a strong private healthcare system relieved pressure on the public system
\0xEF Comprehensive healthcare to include communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, sexual and reproductive health, and improved overall quality of healthcare
\0xEF Partnership with NGOs to serve specialised needs (e.g., HIV/AIDS, elderly, persons with disabilities)
\0xEF Encouragement to the public to stay healthy, promoting a healthy lifestyle
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Reaching the pockets of communities that have health needs
\0xEF Promoting a healthy lifestyle for Malaysians
\0xEF Addressing health financing
\0xEF Achieving cost-effective healthcare system
Moving forward, Malaysia is implementing Goal 3is objectives through the Eleventh 
Malaysia Plan Strategic Thrust 2, in addition to a series of sectoral plans such as the National Strategic Plan for Non-Communicable Diseases.
Understanding Vulnerable and Unreached Population
\0xEF Conducting baseline studies and establishing monitoring mechanisms through inter-agency collaboration
\0xEF Intensifying collaboration with local organisations for better outreach
Refocusing on Preventive Approach by Leveraging Collaborative Effort
\0xEF Intensifying collaboration with relevant stakeholders
\0xEF Supporting community and enhancing private sector participation
Exploring Health Financing Solutions
\0xEF Developing alternative financing options
\0xEF Enhancing universal health coverage to improve social protection
Implementing Fully Existing Plans and Policies
\0xEF Expediting implementation of sectoral plans to achieve better health outcomes
\0xEF Enhancing frontline staff capabilities to handle cross-cutting issues
\0xEF Engaging in cross-agency and multi-stakeholder discussions

goal 5: achieve gender equality and empower 

all women and girls
Malaysia has made notable progress on gender equality and womenis empowerment. Under the Federal 
Constitution, the supreme law of Malaysia, Article 8(2) was amended in 2001 to prohibit gender discrimination. The National Policy on Women 1989 and the Plan of Action for the Advancement of Women 2010-2015 have resulted in more coherent and focused programmes to integrate women in development and further elevate their status in society. Malaysia also has ratified several international agreements that demonstrate the nationis commitment in ensuring that the rights of women and girls are addressed (Figure 6). The Sexual Offences Against Children Act 2017 also has been recently passed to protect children from harmful practices. 
Notably, the Ministry of Women, Family and Community Development, with its agencies and partners such as the TalentCorp, have also focused on strengthening the family institution by creating a more conducive working environment and increasing the number of women in decision-making positions. Various measures have been taken to encourage women to return to the workforce, including career comeback programmes, grants for establishing child care centres at workplaces, increasing maternity leave and making flexible work arrangements.
Based on the outcomes, Malaysia thus has made significant progress in terms of gender equality (Figure 6). Life expectancy for women is longer than that for men, while gender parity has been achieved in education since early 1990s. In 2015, female student enrolment in public higher education reached 62 per cent, and has exceeded 60 per cent since 2003. The female labour force participation rate also shows an upward trend towards achieving the target of 59 per cent by 2020. 

As highlighted above, the poverty rate among femaleheaded households also stands at below 1 per cent.
Further, Malaysia has achieved the 30 per cent target of women in decision-making roles in the public sector and is progressing towards the target for the private sector. Ongoing initiatives to increase womenis representation on boards of directors in the private sector include special programmes for women directors and a registry of women directors who have been groomed for board of director roles in publicly listed companies. In addition, the 30% Club, launched in 2015, is a group of chairpersons and business leaders who are committed to bring more women onto Malaysian corporate boards.

\0xEF Creating opportunities for women to work, re-enter the labour force, secure top positions
\0xEF Legislating anti-discrimination, especially to eliminate gender bias at the workplace, and to criminalise sexual crimes and violence against women
\0xEF Partnering with NGOs that advocate for gender equality and womenis empowerment
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Ensuring gender empowerment
\0xEF Reducing all forms of gender discrimination
\0xEF Reducing gender-based violence
Moving forward, Malaysia is addressing this goal through the Eleventh Malaysia Plan Strategic Thrusts 1 and 3 and the \0xECgame changer of \0xECUplifting B40 households towards a middle class society. This has been further complemented by the National Policy on Women 1989 and Plan of Action for the Advancement of Women 2010n2015.
Tackling Gender-based Violence
\0xEF Raising awareness of women and girls on their rights to protection against violence
\0xEF Reviewing of regulations to improve protection against gender based violence
\0xEF Gathering baseline data on sexual and gender-based violence
Removing Discriminatory Practices
\0xEF Enhancing the role of women in development
\0xEF Promoting work-life balance by providing support such as early child care and flexible working arrangements
\0xEF Strengthening the family institution by emphasising the importance of role sharing
Gender Mainstreaming
\0xEF Enhancing gender mainstreaming in Government programmes
\0xEF Increasing accessibility to quality early childcare and childhood education
Prioritising Gender Data Collection
\0xEF Developing disaggregated data collection systems and publications
1
enhancing inclusiveness towards an equitable society
goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and 

foster innovation
Malaysia has prioritised infrastructure development to accelerate economic growth, connectivity, mobility and well-being of the people. The scope of infrastructure investments has ranged from transportation to power, water and sanitation, drainage and irrigation, communications, and cities and urban settlements (Figure 7). A good and integrated infrastructure network has been a key factor to attract foreign direct investment to Malaysia, and has driven economic transformation since the 1970s. Between 2010 and 2015 alone, Malaysiais road network increased 58 per cent, providing accessibility, mobility and connectivity that accelerated the growth of cities as well as urban and rural areas. On trade and logistics, two of Malaysiais major ports, Port of Tanjung Pelepas and Port Klang, were listed among the worldis Top 20 container ports; since 2010, cargo and container volume in the country grew 23 per cent. In line with rising demand in the energy sector, the construction of the Pengerang Integrated Petroleum Complex (PIPC) in 2012 is expected to ensure the security and sustainability of the energy supply. Digital access also was increased, through both broadband infrastructure expansion and initiatives to ensure affordability. With all this infrastructure in place, Malaysia again is geared towards becoming a developed nation by 2020.
The transition of the manufacturing industry from low-value assembly operations into innovative, knowledge-intensive and high-value added activities has provided growth impetus, creating higher-paying jobs and employment opportunities. Investment in the manufacturing industry amounted to RM159.1 billion between 2011 and 2014, which provided an estimated 348,000 new job opportunities, mainly in the managerial, 

technical, supervisory and skilled categories. SMEs, including micro-enterprises, contributed to about 35 per cent of GDP and 59 per cent of the total employment of 14 million people in 2015. 
Sustainable economic growth, meanwhile, has been underpinned by an enhanced innovative ecosystem and improved institutional support, including a strengthened role for intermediaries such as SIRIM-Fraunhoffer, Public Private Research Network (PPRN), and Steinbeis programmes, which intertwine theory and practice, all of which promotes collaboration among industry, academia and Government in research, development, commercialisation and innovation. In turn, Malaysia was ranked 35th out of 128 countries in the Global Innovation Index 2016 and classified as an \0xECinnovation achiever for 2011-2014. Further, innovation has been promoted at grassroots level, using a bottom-up approach to produce innovative, inclusive and sustainable solutions and products to cater to local communitiesi needs.

Figure 7: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 9
GOAL 9: BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, PROMOTE INCLUSIVE AND  
                SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALIZATION AND FOSTER INNOVATION CuRReNt StAtuS
Infrastructure 	58%	growth in road network since 2010. Total length of federal 	81.5%	national broadband penetration (2016), up development	& state roads was 216,837km, improving connectivity 	from 55.6% in 2010
nationwide (2015)
                                                  91.2%	broadband coverage of populated areas (2016) 23%	growth in cargo and container volume since 2010 to 0.57 billion in 2015; two national ports, Port of Tanjung Pelepas 	95.5%	of the population was served with clean and and Port Klang are in the worldis Top 20 container ports	treated water supply (2015)
Innovation as 	35	ranking out of 128 countries on the Global Innovation 	82	Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation 
an economic 	Index (2016)	Social Innovation Projects to promote driver	grassroots innovation benefiting local 
	1.26%	Gross Expenditure on R&D (GERD); share of R&D 	communities (2016). Social needs were met 
	expenditure by business enterprises is 45.7% (2014)	through projects, services, capacity building in 
skills or innovative products by using existing 
	97.3%	SMEs representation in total business establishments  	sustainable technology
(2010)
\0xEF Malaysia is nurturing and growing digital 60.7	ratio of researchers per 10,000 labour force (2014), an 	entrepreneurs and start-ups that create increase from 57.5 in 2012	cutting-edge technologies. Grassroots 
innovation movements are actively promoted
Quality of 	\0xEF	MyCarbon pilot programme, where industries and private 	\0xEF	National eCommerce Strategic Roadmap aims economic 	sector voluntarily report their greenhouse gas emissions 	to double the eCommerce contribution to GDP 
growth	and mitigation actions	through an increase of ICT and eCommerce 
adopted by SMEs
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Investing in economic and social infrastructure to attract private investment and generate economic growth
\0xEF Focusing infrastructure investment on meeting demand and improving connectivity
\0xEF Transforming industry and expanding trade opportunities
\0xEF Developing an innovative ecosystem to support new start-ups, scale up enterprises and attract investment
\0xEF Underscoring strong public-private partnerships
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Embedding elements of sustainability in the development of infrastructure and industry in pursuit  of green growth (Box 5)
\0xEF Gearing up for the \0xECIndustrial Revolution 4.0 and cutting-edge technologies
\0xEF Strengthening human capital development for economic transformation
\0xEF Promoting sustainable consumption and production (Box 6)
Moving forward, Malaysia is implementing the Eleventh Malaysia Plan Strategic Thrusts 3, 4, 5 and 6 as well as \0xECgame changers on \0xECTranslating Innovation to Wealth and \0xECEmbarking on Green Growth (Box 5). Complementary policies to support this Goal include the National 
Policy on Science, Technology and Innovation 2013n2020, the Strategic Information and 
Communications Technology Roadmap and the National e-Commerce Strategic Roadmap. 
Building Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure
\0xEF Enhancing connectivity and seamless integration across transport modes and regions
\0xEF Improving safety, efficiency and service levels of transport operations
\0xEF Unleashing growth of logistics and enhancing trade facilitation
\0xEF Improving coverage, quality and affordability of digital infrastructure
Unlocking Productivity and New Growth Potentials
\0xEF Enhancing productivity through adoption of new technology, automation and cyber-physical systems to gear up for \0xECIndustrial Revolution 4.0
\0xEF Increasing digitalisation and e-commerce adoption among SMEs
\0xEF Energising manufacturing sector towards high-value-added, complex and diverse products
\0xEF Adopting sustainable consumption and production practices in industries
Strengthening Innovation Ecosystems
\0xEF Enhancing demand-driven research and promoting collaboration among companies, researchers and academia
\0xEF Promoting social enterprise and grassroots innovation among SMEs and communities
3
accelerating human Pursuing green growth capital development  for sustainability for an advanced nationand resilience
5
Strengthening re-engineering 
infrastructure to support economic growth for economic expansiongreater prosperity
Box 5: Green Growth as a Strategic thrust for Development under the 11Mp


Box 6: Sustainable Consumption and production 
Sustainable consumption and production (SCP) was introduced into the 11MP as a key approach to achieve green growth and address environmental sustainability. The SCP specifies measures and priority areas needed for this achievement, and to ensure more coordinated, effective SCP implementation in Malaysia. The SCP focuses on several priority areas, namely, the public sector, private households and industries, as well as building, housing, food, tourism and transport.
Key SCP Initiatives in Malaysia
\0xEF Government Green Procurement (GGP): This  focuses on Government purchases of environmentally-friendly products and services to spur demand for green industries. The GGP is intended to create demand for green products and services, encouraging industries to raise both the standards and quality of their products in order to meet green requirements. GGP guidelines have been adopted in stages since early 2014 and made mandatory at federal level in 2017. By the end of 2016, Government procurement of green products and services stood at RM429million.
\0xEF SCP in Education: Integrating SCP in the formal education syllabus to inculcate a sustainable lifestyle among students has become increasingly important. The Ministry of Education (MOE) has aligned the SCP curriculum with the national education curriculum and has developed a guidebook for teachers on global sustainability, which includes SCP.
\0xEF Recycling rate for solid waste: By 2020, the recycling rate is intended to rise to 22 per cent from 17.5 per cent in 2016.
Sustainable
waste
                     resource management management
Sustainable	Design for lifestyles	sustainability
Sustainable
Consumption
Sustainable	and Production marketing
Sustainable
	procurement	Sustainable
transport
\0xEF Tourism: The National Ecotourism Plan 2016n2025 provides a general framework for developing the countryis ecotourism potential.
\0xEF Transport: The Government is formulating a National Transport Policy, with an emphasis on low-carbon mobility.
\0xEF Built environment: The Malaysian Carbon Reduction and Environmental Sustainability Tool (MyCREST) was adopted in 2016 to quantify carbon emissions and sustainable impacts of the built environment.
\0xEF Malaysia is currently formulating the Malaysia SCP Blueprint, which will provide a comprehensive framework for the implementation and assessment of SCP in priority areas.
goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Malaysia has introduced policies and measures to sustainably manage marine and coastal areas, including the National Coastal Zone Physical Plan (NPP-CZ) and the Coral Triangle Initiative Malaysia National Plan of Action (CTI-NPOA). The NPP-CZ was formulated to establish a strategic spatial framework that ensures a productive, safe and biologically diverse coastal zone for the benefit of present and future generations. The CTI-NPOA, meanwhile, is Malaysiais plan of action as a member of a multilateral partnership of six countries2 since 2009 aimed at addressing urgent threats faced by the marine ecosystem, ensuring food security and protecting the livelihoods of coastal communities in the region.
As of 2016, Malaysia has established 63 marine protected areas covering 16,492.92 km2, or 3.36 per cent of the coastal and marine areas. Development in the protected areas is guided by their own management plans, covering the conservation and rehabilitation of the resources as well as the provision of alternative livelihoods for local communities. Emphasis also is given to maintaining the health and resilience of marine ecosystems through the establishment of permanent monitoring stations to monitor marine water quality and coral reef health. Likewise, initiatives have been taken to restore and rehabilitate areas at risk of degradation and to overcome the loss of marine habitats, especially within marine protected areas.
Critically, the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is a key measure to control landbased pollution and protect 

marine and coastal ecosystems. A successful Mangrove Planting Programme was initiated in 2005 to mitigate pollution caused by solid waste disposal, as well as to protect against tsunamis and enrich coastal and marine biodiversity. In addition, an extensive network of marine monitoring stations has been established across the country to monitor marine water quality. Malaysia also is well-prepared to manage any potential oil spill in its waters, guided by the National Oil Spill Contingency Plan.
Various programmes are being implemented to ensure sustainable fisheries and aquaculture activities in the country, including enforcing zoning regulations for fishing areas and promoting good aquaculture practices through certification schemes (Figure 8). Illegal fishing practices, overfishing and harmful fishing practices are mitigated through the National Action Plan of Management of Fishing Capacity and the National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.

Figure 8: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 14
                 GOAL 14: CONSERVE AND SUSTAINABLY USE THE OCEANS, SEAS AND MARINE RESOURCES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CuRReNt StAtuS
Marine protected 	3.36%	marine protected areas (2015), an increase from 1.05% 	8,987	square kilometers of Tun Mustapha Park (TMP) 
areas have 	in 2013	in Sabah gazetted in 2016. TMP is the largest increased	marine park and the first multiple-use park in  
63	marine protected areas as a network of 16,492.92 	the country and involves local communities  square kilometres that provides protection to marine 	in its protection and management ecosystems throughout Malaysia
Efforts to enhance 	2,711	hectares of mangroves planted from 2005 to 2016 	National Coastal Erosion Study in 2016 to management of 	during Mangrove Planting Programme	identify critical erosion areas and the effects of 
marine and coastal 	erosion on economic and social activities ecosystems are 	53.82%	live coral cover in Peninsular Malaysia (2016)
ongoing	The National Coastal Zone Physical Plan has 
The Government has an extensive network of marine 	been implemented monitoring stations comprising 151 coastal, 76 estuary 
	and 90 island stations that provide data on the state of 	State governments have implemented \0xEBNo Plastic 
	marine water quality	Bagi campaigns to reduce pollution
Sustainable 	The use of trawl nets was prohibited in Zone B (8n15 	Good Agriculture Practice (MyGAP) certification fisheries and 	nautical miles) fishing areas	to promote sustainable aquaculture practices 
aquaculture are 	with the introduction of a new standard, the 
being encouraged	Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) 	MS 2467:2012 Code of Practices for Seaweed 
to improve income, livelihoods and food security in 	Cultivation and MS 1998:2007 n Good coastal communities through new sustainable coastal 	Aquaculture Practice (GAqP) n Aquaculture Farm fisheries and poverty reduction initiatives by 2020	General Guidelines
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Implementing policies and enforcing regulations that support sustainable management of marine and coastal ecosystems
\0xEF Partnering with NGOs in advocating sustainable use of marine and coastal resources
\0xEF Establishing marine protected areas
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Achieving holistic marine and coastal management at both federal and state levels
\0xEF Strengthening monitoring, surveillance and enforcement capacities
\0xEF Enhancing knowledge on marine resources
\0xEF Minimising impact of climate change to the marine and coastal ecosystem
Moving forward, Malaysia is implementing this Goal through the Eleventh Malaysia 
Plan Strategic Thrust 4 and the \0xECgame changer of \0xECEmbarking on Green Growth (Box 5). This is being further supplemented by other sectoral plans and policies such as the National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025.
Strengthening Institutional and Regulatory Frameworks
\0xEF Enhancing coordination between federal and state levels through a single platform
\0xEF Strengthening legislative and regulatory frameworks by reviewing relevant Acts such  as the Environmental Quality Act 1974
\0xEF Developing management plans based on an Ecosystems Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM)
\0xEF Building capacity for effective EAFM implementation
Enhancing Monitoring, Surveillance and Enforcement
\0xEF Strengthening the monitoring of marine water quality with the establishment of a network of continuous and manual monitoring stations
\0xEF Conducting research on Total Maximum Daily Load to determine the threshold of pollution discharged into rivers flowing to the sea
\0xEF Strengthening inter-agency cooperation and regional collaboration
Improving Knowledge and Data for Better Decision-making  Support Systems
\0xEF Developing a geo-spatial database (MyNDOC) with updated fishery stock assessments
\0xEF Establishing a data sharing platform among agencies
Mitigating the Impact of Climate Change on Marine and Coastal Ecosystems
\0xEF Intensifying scientific research to assess the impact of climate change on marine and coastal ecosystems
4
Pursuing green growth for sustainability and resilience
goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of territorial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss


Malaysia has taken commendable steps to protect its biodiversity with the formulation of various policies and legislation such as the National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025, National Forestry Policy 1978 
(Amendment 1992), Second National Mineral Policy 2009, 
Wildlife Conservation Act 2010 (Act 716), National Parks 
Act 1980, Biosafety Act 2007 and others. The National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025 provides the framework for continuous conservation, sustainable utilisation and sharing of biodiversity benefits in a fair  and equitable manner.
As of 2015, 55.2 per cent of Malaysiais total land area was covered with forests under various forms of protection, fulfilling the pledge at the Earth Summit 1992, in Rio de Janeiro, to ensure at least 50 per cent of land is under forest cover (Figure 9). Various forms of protected forest areas include national and state parks, Ramsar sites, permanent reserve forests, and water catchment areas. Maintaining forests is important because they provide a range of ecosystem services to sustain life and support important biodiversity, including critically endangered species; at the same time, they minimise, halt and reverse land degradation and biodiversity loss. 
To address the issue of forest fragmentation, transboundary projects also have been initiated, including the Central Forest Spine in Peninsular Malaysia and the Heart of Borneo, which involves Sabah and Sarawak states. Conservation action plans for iconic species n that is, for tigers, elephants and tapirs n also being undertaken. Further, Malaysia is drawing up a National Red Data List for threatened species and implementing innovative methods to pool resources to combat poaching, illegal wildlife trade and encroachment into protected areas. The National Conservation Trust Fund for Natural Resources (NCTF) also has been established to fund initiatives related to conservation efforts. Most recently, Malaysia has begun developing a resource mobilisation plan to support the National Policy on Biological Diversity. 

Figure 9: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 15
GOAL 15: PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE USE OF TERRESTRIAL 
ECOSYSTEMS, SUSTAINABLY MANAGE FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION, AND 
HALT AND REVERSE LAND DEGRADATION AND HALT BIODIVERSITY LOSS
CuRReNt StAtuS
Forest cover 	12.1%	of total land area protected (2015), an increase from  	55.2%	of total land area remains as natural forest has been 	10.76% in 2013	(2015) with a network of protected areas in 
maintained	national and state parks and Ramsar sites. Most 
940,807	hectares of terrestrial and water bodies presently gazetted 	are under various forms of protective status e.g. in Sarawak	forest reserves
Biodiversity 	6	Forest Management Units in Peninsular Malaysia 	The second National Policy for Biological 
and habitat 	successfully certified and maintained the Forest 	Diversity (2016n2025) recently has been 
protection is 	Management Certification	launched a priority
	1,640	ha. covered for forest reforestation project under the  	Tapir Conservation Action Plan is being 
	11MP with RM100 million allocated	formulated, whilst the existing National 
Tiger Conservation Action Plan for Malaysia 
	1,236	threatened species in Malaysia as of December 2014 in the 	(2008n2020) and Malaysian National Elephant 
	Red List	Conservation Action Plan (2013n2022) are being 
implemented
A National Red Data List for threatened species being  
	drawn up	Central Forest Spine covers an area of 18,866 
hectares of Permanent Forest Reserves in 
	1Malaysia Biodiversity Enforcement Operation Network 	Peninsular Malaysia; Heart of Borneo covers  
	(1MBEON) operating in Taman Negara since 2014	20 million hectares
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Increasing the gazetting of terrestrial protected areas
\0xEF Implementing sustainable forest management and the Malaysian Timber Certification Scheme
\0xEF Enforcing legislation to combat poaching, illegal wildlife trade, encroachment and illegal logging
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Strengthening institutional and regulatory framework for forest management
\0xEF Increasing capacity of related agencies
\0xEF Strengthening monitoring, surveillance and enforcement capacities
\0xEF Intensifying reforestation efforts nationwide
\0xEF Strengthening partnerships with indigenous and local communities
Moving forward, Malaysia is implementing this Goal through the Eleventh Malaysia Plan Strategic Thrust 4 and the \0xECgame changer of \0xECEmbarking on Green Growth (Box 5). This is further supplemented by other sectoral plans and policies such as the National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025.
Improving the Management of Biodiversity and Terrestrial Ecosystems
\0xEF Implementing the National Policy on Biological Diversity 2016n2025 including the gazetting of 20 per cent of terrestrial and inland protected areas by 2025
\0xEF Implementing the National Tiger Conservation Action Plan for Malaysia 2008n2020 and the Malaysian National Elephant Conservation Action Plan 2013n2022
Strengthening Capacity and Capability
\0xEF Enhancing manpower and expert training, namely, in forestry management as well as in wildlife and protected areas management
\0xEF Expanding the use of new technology to manage natural assets such as hyperspectral and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)
\0xEF Strengthening international cooperation and collaboration to curb illegal activities
Leveraging Indigenous and Local communities (ILC) in Management of Natural Resources
\0xEF Empowering ILC in reporting of illegal activities
\0xEF Increasing the socioeconomic well-being of ILC to decrease dependency on extraction of natural resources
\0xEF Empowering ILC to have the right to give or withhold consent to proposed projects that may affect their lands
4
Pursuing green growth for sustainability and resilience
goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development

As this VNR illustrates, Malaysia is fast realising its vision of being a developed country by 2020. Moreover, the journey that started when Malaysia was formed has been unique: While Malaysia has benefited from technical assistance as well as grants and loans from multilateral agencies and from development assistance from numerous bilateral partners, it has also shared its development experience with other developing countries, despite still being a developing country itself. This South-South Cooperation has been in place since  the early 1980s, through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme.
South-South Cooperation has a long history, and has been important in creating innovative approaches to partnership and international development around the world. Malaysia has been active in South-South Cooperation and has participated in all major South-
South mechanisms, including the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77, the South Commission and the Group of Fifteen (a summit-level consultative group of South countries). Malaysiais contributions to SouthSouth Cooperation also have been strengthened through Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) efforts. 
With even greater focus and togetherness, South-South Cooperation now can strongly contribute to areas of importance under the SDGs such as economics, inclusivity and sustainability.
In a further example of strengthened partnerships, ASEAN has completed its first phase of regional integration and is in the second phase of forming the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), with Malaysiais support. 
During Malaysiais chairmanship of ASEAN in 2015, the 
AEC Blueprint 2025 was developed to further deepen 

economic integration of the region. The AEC Blueprint will transform ASEAN into a single market and production base, which in turn will form a highly competitive region fully integrated into the global economy. 
In terms of trade, Malaysia is a founding member of the World Trade Organisation. The country has signed and implemented seven bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) n with Turkey (2015), Australia (2012), India (2011), 
New Zealand (2010), Pakistan (2008), and Japan and Chile 
(both 2006) n and six regional FTAs as an ASEAN member. Currently, Malaysia is negotiating three more FTAs, namely, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), Malaysia-European Free Trade Area Economic 
Partnership Agreement (MEEPA) and ASEAN-Hong Kong 
Free Trade Agreement (AHKFTA). Meanwhile, almost 
90 per cent of products requested by Least Developed Countries are already duty free in Malaysiais current tariff structure. In addition, 75 per cent of agricultural products and 64.1 per cent of non-agricultural products have  zero-tariff rates. 

Figure 10: Current Status, Key Success Factors and Remaining priorities for Goal 17
GOAL 17: STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND REVITALIZE THE 
                GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT CuRReNt StAtuS
South-South 	\0xEF Malaysia has shared development experience with other developing countries via:
initiatives	  - The Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme (MTCP)
  -  Collaboration with development partners such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the Colombo Plan and the German Internation Cooperation Agency (GIZ)
31,000 participants from 142 countries have participated in MTCP as of 2016
Trade and 	63.9%	of GDP made up of exports at RM785.9 billion (2016) 	75%	of Agricultural products and 64.1% of Non-
market 	compared to 77.8% to GDP in 2010	Agricultural products of Malaysiais Most-Favoured 
opportunities	Nation tariff rates are already zero
	1.2%	of total world merchandise exports are from Malaysia, 
	making the country the 23rd biggest merchandise exporter 	7	bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTA) signed and 
	(2015)	implemented. Currently negotiating 3 FTAs namely 
                                                             Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 90%	of products requested by Least Developed Countries (LDC) 	(RCEP), Malaysia-European Free Trade Area are duty free in Malaysiais current tariff structure based on 	Economic Partnership Agreement (MEEPA) and 
	Duty Free Quota Free to LDCs	ASEAN-Hong Kong Free Trade Agreement (AHKFTA)
ASEAN 	\0xEF  During Malaysiais chairmanship of ASEAN in 2015, the ASEAN Leaders signed the \0xEB2015 Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the 
Cooperation	Establishment of the ASEAN Community and Declaration on ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together.i The AEC Blueprint 2025 has made ASEAN one of the most attractive locations for foreign direct investment
\0xEF Malaysia continues to implement the Strategic Action Plan for SME Development 2016n2025 and be involved in trade facilitation initiatives that will need to be fully operationalised. These initiatives include the ASEAN-Wide Self-Certification Scheme; the ASEAN Trade Repository; the full implementation of the ASEAN Single Window (ASW); the ASEAN Solutions for Investments, Services and Trade (ASSIST); the ASEAN Tariff Finder; the ASEAN Customs Transit System (ACTS); and the harmonisation of standards and technical regulations in ASEAN 
 
Key sUCCess faCTORs 
\0xEF Developing a South-South strategy that aims to create economic opportunities
\0xEF Sharing development experience with other countries through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme and tripartite cooperation
\0xEF Engaging in partnerships with other countries at all levels on issues of common interest
\0xEF Practicing a \0xECprosper thy neighbour approach for mutual benefits
ReMaiNiNG pRiORiTies
\0xEF Achieving inclusive development at regional and international levels through partnerships
\0xEF Pursuing closer trade networks
\0xEF Continuing to promote and maintain global peace and security
Moving forward, Malaysia is addressing this goal through the Eleventh Malaysia 
Plan Strategic Thrust 6 in addition to its foreign and trade policies
Promoting Global Prosperity through Partnerships
\0xEF Continuing the sharing of Malaysiais development experience
\0xEF Continuing to support global development agendas
\0xEF Exploring new forms of cooperation and continuing to work with global partners
\0xEF Collaborating with regional and global alliances on trade facilitation
\0xEF Cooperating with concerned countries to combat terrorism

6
re-engineering economic growth for greater prosperity
Reflections on lessons learned and emerging trends
In retrospect, Malaysia has risen from the ranks of a lowincome economy in the 1970s to a high-middle-income economy today by emphasising the fundamentals for the economy and social development. From actively eradicating poverty to investing in education and supplying basic health facilities, water, electricity, improved sanitation and transportation, while also creating job opportunities, Malaysia has boosted development outcomes for all segments of society.
Against the backdrop of political stability, Malaysia attracted foreign direct investment to accelerate economic development. Maintaining friendly foreign policies, Malaysia became a neutral voice of reason in the global community and inspired other developing nations to pursue better development outcomes in a peaceful manner. Rich natural resources further enabled the nation to develop through prudent macroeconomic policies. Most importantly, having the foresight to identify and act on emerging trends enabled the nation to transform the economy from agriculture-based to manufacturing- and services-based rapidly, in just 50 years. Thus, Malaysia has been pragmatic while also having a clear vision of its development ambitions. 

Figure 11: lessons learned from Malaysiais Development Journey
leSSoNS leARNeD

COMPLEX AND CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
With basic development needs mostly addressed, the complexity of development has increased and its nature has become increasingly cross-cutting. The challenge therefore lies in breaking down the operational culture of working in \0xECsilos, based on legal or defined jurisdictions. Responsive, flexible and collaborative systems and new work cultures are needed to move forward
IMPLEMENTATION AND INNOVATION
Local capacity to implement is critical for development while empowering and up-skilling capacities needs much more work at local levels. Investing in people, creativity and innovation to develop a nation capable of riding through the challenges of the future are also a remaining challenge to build in resilience and sustainability.
GROWING DEMAND FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND SOCIAL TRUST
The demand for public participation and social trust is growing but there is need for mechanisms to positively harness public contribution and manage expectations against actual development. Empowerment and engagement must be meaningful for the people in order to gain their trust and enhance the level of ownership of development, and to reduce 
their dependency on the Government
MONITORING AND EVALUATION NEEDS
Assessments for baseline situations are lacking in several aspects and in many instances, the development of tools and mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation is still needed. Yet, there is need to balance the costs and benefits of monitoring every single indicator, especially with the 244 SDG indicators proposed. The challenge lies in framing the indicators right and measuring what is useful to help Malaysia pursue development that is sustainable, resilient and inclusive in the true spirit of  the SDGs.

Malaysia has been proactive in accelerating the adoption of the 2030 Agenda  and SDGs nationally. This chapter describes the progress made to create an enabling environment for SDG implementation, which includes the governance structure and other efforts to incorporate the SDGs into national development and statistical frameworks
Figure 12: SDG preparations in Malaysia

A SNAPSHOT OF 
MALAYSIAiS
SDG PREP
ELEVENTH MALAYSIA 
PLAN 2016n2020
The SDgs have been mapped 
to this plan and will be implemented in Phase 1
SDG SYMPOSIUM
to launch the final MDg Country report 2015 and build awareness on the SDGs amongst the 300 participants
OFFICIAL DECISION ON 
SDG IMPLEMENTATION
Malaysian Cabinet approved the way forward for Malaysiais implementation 
to incorporate SDG into the 
11MP
NATIONAL SDG ROADMAP FOR MALAYSIA
Consulted multiple stakeholders, producing detailed mapping of the SDGs, target and indicators to the 11MP strategies, action plan/initiatives and 
outcomes via the Cluster 
Working Committees (CWCs) and tasks Force under each Goal
Malaysia has been gearing up for SDG implementation
POST-2015 
CONSULTATIONS conducted by ePu in collaboration with the uNCt in Malaysia
CONDUCTED STUDY ON POLICY COHERENCE
institute for Strategic and international Studies Malaysia conducted a study in 2015 on the policy coherence, governance, human capital and data responses for  SDGs, including a gap analysis
STUDY ON DATA READINESS
conducted through the Department of Statistics Malaysia (DoSM)
MULTI-STAKEHOLDER PARTNERSHIP CONFERENCE
for implementation of the 2030 Agenda, co-organised by ePu and uNCt. Participants were consulted on the development of a National SDg roadmap for Malaysia, on how to localise the 2030 agenda  and SDgs
building ownership of the sDGs
Malaysia began making preparations for the SDGs in 2014, nearly two years before the Goals came into effect. Figure 12 provides a chronological list of key SDG preparations. 
In 2014, EPU, in collaboration with the UNCT, conducted inclusive and extensive consultations on the post2015 development agenda. These also provided important inputs for the 11MP. In 2015, Malaysia conducted a study on the policy coherence, governance, human capital and data responses for the SDgs, in partnership with United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Institute for Strategic and International Studies Malaysia.
Further, the UNDP and EPU co-organised an SDg Symposium that brought together multiple stakeholders to discuss operationalisation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Malaysiais MDG Report 2015 was also launched at this symposium. 
In mid-2016, the Cabinet agreed to implement the 
SDgs over three phases and to incorporate the SDgs into the national planning framework. It also acknowledged the need for data readiness and highlighted the need for a governance structure to oversee the implementation, monitoring and reporting of the SDGs, with membership from various stakeholders.
In November 2016, EPU in partnership with the UNCT, conducted a Multi-stakeholder Partnership Conference to launch a whole-of-government and multi-stakeholder process for development of the SDG Roadmap, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting on the SDGs. The two-day conference also discussed, among others, the trade-offs and synergies across goals and targets; key elements of localisation and reaching those furthest behind first; building partnerships and promoting action on the SDGs; as well as participation, transparency and accountability.

Figure 13: SDG Governance Structure in Malaysia


institutional mechanisms for sDG implementation
At the apex of the SDG governance structure is the National SDG Council, chaired by the Prime Minister of Malaysia. This Council plans and monitors the SDG implementation. The Council is supported by a National Steering Committee (NSC), chaired by the Director 
General of the EPU, as illustrated in Figure 13. The National SDG Council reports to the UN via the  High-level Political Forum.
The NSC consists of five SDG Cluster Working Committees (CWCs), under which are Task Forces for each of the Goals. The five CWCs and their respective SDGs are shown in Figure 14. The CWCs are tasked with identifying indicators for each SDG, as well as with developing and implementing programmes and reporting progress to the NSC. Each CWC is led by a Section Head in EPU and includes representatives of Government Ministries/agencies, civil society, the private sector, academics, United Nations agencies and youth representatives. In this regard, the central agency, EPU, has an overall view and is able to monitor implementation. Critically, the inclusive and participatory approach used in this governance structure is in line with the 11MP, which focuses on a paradigm shift towards more participatory government by citizens, including NGOs/CSOs, as partners in service design  and delivery. Greater engagement of NGOs/CSOs thus  is envisaged.

Figure 14: Cluster working Committees
CluSteR woRKiNG CoMMitteeS
	working Committee	working Committee	working Committee	working CommitteeENVIRONMENT &	working Committee
	INCLUSIVITY	WELL-BEING	HUMAN CAPITAL	NATURAL RESOURCES	ECONOMIC GROWTH
	Goal 1: No Poverty	Goal 3: Good Health & 	Goal 4: Quality 	Goal 6: Clean Water 	Goal 8: Decent Work & 
	Goal 2: Zero Hunger	Well-being	Education	& Sanitation	Economic Growth
	Goal 5: Gender Equality	Goal 11: Sustainable 	Goal 7: Affordable & 	Goal 9: Industry, 
	Cities & Communities	Clean Energy	Innovation & 
	Goal 10: Reduced 	Infrastructure
	Inequality	Goal 16: Peace, Justice 	Goal 12: Responsible 
& Strong Institutions	Consumption & 	Goal 17: Partnerships Production	for the Goals
Goal 13: Climate Action
Goal 14: Life Below 
Water
Goal 15: Life on Land
phasing sDG implementation
	pHASe 1 (2016n2020)	Taking a pragmatic approach, Malaysia is implementing 
Prioritising SDG according to 11MP	the SDGs in three phases, coinciding with the five-year Malaysia Plan periods, and thus incorporating SDGs into the national development framework. Hence, SDG 
programmes and projects are funded through existing 
	pHASe 1 (2021n2025)	Government budget and mechanisms. It is envisioned 
	Focus on post-2020 goals and targets	that funding and resources from the Government will be 
supplemented through collaboration with the private sector, NGOs, civil society and international agencies. 
	pHASe 3 (2026n2030)	Through phased implementation, Malaysia can maintain 
	Remaining goals and targets in line with Malaysiais 	flexibility in adjusting and realigning strategies based on 
capacity and global role	the achievements, challenges and lessons learned in the previous phase, while also assessing emerging trends and circumstances that may affect desired development outcomes. It also provides an opportunity for feedback 

and greater participation from various stakeholders as they gradually align themselves with the 2030 Agenda  and the SDGs.
incorporating sDG into national frameworks
Mapping the SDGs to the Eleventh Malaysia Plan Between November 2016 and February 2017, Malaysia undertook an extensive mapping exercise to align the 11MP strategies, action plans, initiatives and outcomes with the SDG goals, targets and indicators. This mapping exercise was intended to reveal interactions between the Goals and targets within a cluster, which may cut across economic, social and environmental dimensions. An example of the mapping is shown in Figure 15, while detailed mapping of the 11MP thrusts to the SDGs is shown in Figure 16.
At the same time, Malaysia is undertaking preparations to support the implementation, monitoring and reporting  of future phases. This includes:
\0xEF undertaking further analyses on remaining issues;
\0xEF improving data readiness, indicators and tools to establish baselines and measure progress; and
\0xEF strengthening and piloting mechanisms for collaboration, partnership and resource mobilisation across the public, private and social sectors.
These preparatory exercises involved not only 
Government Ministries and agencies, but also NGOs, CSOs and the private sector. In doing so, they assisted stakeholders to better understand how their operations and plans under 11MP and existing sectoral plans were aligned with the SDGs. In turn, this proved a valuable step in raising awareness and garnering ownership for the SDGs across both Government and non-Governmental stakeholders involved in the process.

Figure 15: example of Mapping process between SDGs and eleventh Malaysia plan

Figure 16: Mapping process of SDG targets and eleventh Malaysia plan
tHe MAppiNG pRoCeSS oF SDG tARGetS AND 11Mp
11MP: Strategic Thrust 1	
Enhancing inclusiveness towards an equitable society
11MP: Strategic Thrust 2
Improving well-being for all
11MP: Strategic Thrust 3
Accelerating human capital development for 
an advanced nation



Key initiatives
Inclusivity ensures all Malaysians benefit from economic growth regardless of gender, ethnicity, socio-economic status, or geographic location

Key initiatives
Healthy individuals and happy households, living in cohesive and united communities 
- this embodies the vision for a socially 
advanced Malaysia

Key initiatives
The focus on cradle-to-grave talent development and lifelong learning will improve labour productivity, deliver a higherskilled workforce, and create a virtuous 
cycle of job creation, growth and social 
development












11MP: Strategic Thrust 4
Pursuing green growth for sustainability  and resilience
11MP: Strategic Thrust 5
Strengthening infastructure to support economic expansion
11MP: Strategic Thrust 6
Re-engineering economic growth for  greater prosperity
Key initiatives
\0xECGreen growth will be a way of life. This will lead to strengthened food, water, and energy security; lower environmental risks; and ultimately, better well-being and quality of life

Key initiatives
All Malaysians will have access to basic amenities and be connected through integrated transport and high-speed Internet. New investments will focus on lowering cost of business and enhancing competitiveness

Key initiatives
We will ensure quality growth and international competitiveness. All economic sectors will migrate towards more knowledge-intensive and high value-added activities with greater productivity

Transorming public service for productivity




\0xEF Enhancing project management for better and faster outcomes
\0xEF Strengthening talent management for the public service of the future
\0xEF Enhancing service delivery with citizens at the centre
\0xEF Rationalising public sector institutions for greater productivity and performance
\0xEF Capitalising on local authorities for quality services at the local level

Preparing the National SDG Roadmap
The next step that Malaysia took to accelerate adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs was the preparation of the National SDG Roadmap. The Roadmap provides direction for Phase 1 of the SDG journey, i.e. 2016n2020. It is the main reference for Malaysiais commitment to and work on the SDGs and provides direction and specific actions for achieving the national aspirations. In doing so, it serves as a guide for informing, inspiring and supporting stakeholders, at all levels of society, to align themselves to and participate in this collective journey towards sustainable, resilient and inclusive development. In line with the three implementation phases, this Roadmap will be reviewed in 2020 and 2025.
Building on the inputs and momentum received from the mapping exercise, the process of formulating the Roadmap started in late February 2017 and included:
\0xEF taking stock of MDG achievements and assessing the widened SDG scope;
\0xEF focusing on key challenges and issues with respect to achievement of Goals and targets;
\0xEF assessing priorities of the clusters within the Goals and targets;
\0xEF identifying cross-cutting inter-linkages;
\0xEF engaging with key partners and stakeholders;
\0xEF assessing data availability and accessibility, as well as monitoring frameworks needed to examine processes, impacts and outcomes; and
\0xEF conducting validation workshops for each cluster to 
finalise inputs with stakeholders.
This process produced rich ideas and materials, as well as detailed information for each SDG. Further processing of information was necessary to condense the material into a concise and strategic document. The Roadmap is meant to build awareness, promote ownership and indicate a way forward for Phase 1 implementation.
The mapping exercise whereby the policies and plans  of the 11MP and sectoral plans were matched with the SDGs is summarised and presented in Table 1. Note that this list of policies and plans in Table 1 are subject to further updates.
table 1: Malaysian policies and plans Corresponding to the SDGs
	 	GoAl 
poliCieS AND plANS
\0xEF National Strategic Plan for Non-Communicable Diseases 2010n2014
\0xEF National Strategic Plan for Tobacco Control 2015n2020
Goal 4: Ensure Inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
\0xEF National Strategic Plan Ending AIDS in Malaysia (NSPEA) 2016n2030
\0xEF The National Plan of Action for Nutrition of Malaysia III 2016n2025 
(NPANM III)
\0xEF National Reproductive Health Education and Social Education (PEKERTI) Policy and Action Plan
\0xEF Health Human Resource Master Plan
\0xEF 11MP Strategic Thrust 3
\0xEF Malaysian Education Blueprint 2013n2025 (MEB)
\0xEF Malaysia Education Blueprint (Higher Education) 2015n2025
\0xEF National Higher Education Strategic Plan
\0xEF Blueprint on Enculturation of Lifelong Learning for Malaysia  
2011n2020

table 1: Malaysian policies and plans Corresponding to the SDGs (continued)
 	GoAl 
poliCieS AND plANS
Goal 8: Promote sustained, 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrusts 3, 4 and 6 and Game Changers \0xECEmbarking on Green inclusive and sustainable 	Growth and \0xECUnlocking the potential of productivity economic growth, full and 	\0xEF Occupational Safety and Health Master Plan 2016n2020 productive employment and 	\0xEF SME Master Plan 2012n2020 decent work for all	\0xEF Malaysia Productivity Blueprint
Goal 9: Build resilient 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrusts 3, 4, 5 and 6 and Game Changers \0xECTranslating infrastructure, promote 	innovation to wealth and \0xECEmbarking on Green Growth inclusive and sustainable 	\0xEF National Policy on Science, Technology and Innovation (NPSTI) 2013n2020
	industrialization, and foster 	\0xEF Strategic Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Roadmap
	innovation	\0xEF National eCommerce Strategic Roadmap
	Goal 10: Reduce inequality 	\0xEF 11MP Strategic Thrust 1
	within and among states	\0xEF National Policy on Children and its Plan of Action
\0xEF National Child Protection Policy and its Plan of Action
\0xEF National Action Plan for Persons with Disabilities 2016n2020
\0xEF Minimum Wage Policy
Goal 11: Make cities and 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrusts 1, 2, 4 and 5 and Game Changer \0xECInvesting in human settlements inclusive, 	competitive cities
	safe, resilient and sustainable	\0xEF National Physical Plan 3 (NPP3)
\0xEF National Urbanisation Policy 2 (NUP2)
\0xEF Competitive Cities Master Plans
\0xEF National Environmental Health Action Plan
\0xEF National Housing Policy (DRN) 2013n2017 and DNR 2.0 2018n2022
\0xEF Road Safety Plan of Malaysia 2014n2020
\0xEF National Solid Waste Management Policy
Goal 12: Ensure sustainable 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrusts 4 and 6 and Game Changer \0xECEmbarking  consumption and production 	on Green Growth
	patterns	\0xEF National Ecotourism Plan 2016n2025
\0xEF National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025
\0xEF National Solid Waste Management Policy 2006
table 1: Malaysian policies and plans Corresponding to the SDGs (continued)
	 	GoAl 
poliCieS AND plANS
Goal 13: Take urgent action to 	\0xEF 11MP Strategic Thrusts 2, 4 and 5 combat climate change and its 	\0xEF National Policy on Climate Change 2009 impact	\0xEF National Urbanisation Policy 2006n2020
\0xEF National Physical Plan 3
\0xEF National Green Technology Policy 2009
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrust 4 and Game Changer \0xECEmbarking on Green use the oceans, seas, and 	Growth
	marine resources for sustainable 	\0xEF National Plan of Action for the Coral Triangle Initiative (NPOA-CTI) 2009
	development	\0xEF National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016-2025
\0xEF National Oil Spill Contingency Plan (NOSCP)
\0xEF National Coastal Zone Physical Plan
\0xEF National Ocean Policy 2011n2020
\0xEF National Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate IUU Fishing
\0xEF National Plan of Action for Management of Fishing Capacity in Malaysia 2014n2018
Goal 15: Protect, restore and 	\0xEF  11MP Strategic Thrust 4 and Game Changer \0xECEmbarking on Green promote sustainable use of 	Growth
territorial ecosystems, sustainably 	\0xEF National Policy for Biological Diversity 2016n2025 manage forests, combat 	\0xEF National Tiger Conservation Action Plans 2008n2020
desertification, halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
\0xEF Elephant Conservation Action Plans 2013n2022
\0xEF National Forestry Policy 1992
\0xEF National Action Plan on Peatlands 2011

Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development
\0xEF 11MP Strategic Thrusts 1 and 2 and Chapter 9 on \0xECTransforming public service for productivity
\0xEF National Policy on Children and its Plan of Action
\0xEF National Child Protection Policy and its Plan of Action
\0xEF ASEAN Regional Plan of Action on the Elimination of Violence Against Women and Children
\0xEF Plan of Action on Child Online Protection (PTCOP)
Lessons learnt from the mapping exercise and roadmap preparations
Through these initial processes, several lessons can be learned. First, the mapping exercise encouraged government ministries and agencies to consider how their sectoral operations, plans and strategies would contribute to the SDgs and to national development. Synergies and gaps also became more apparent.
Second, by including NGOs, CSOs and private sector representatives in the CWCs, Malaysia has formalised their participation in the national development process. Despite limited resources, Malaysia saw greater selforganisation among Ngos and CSos, which has led to the formation of a Malaysian CSO-SDG Alliance (Box 7). Furthermore, some non-government stakeholders have mapped their strategies and activities to the SDg framework; these include the World Wildlife 
Fund for Nature Malaysia (WWF-Malaysia), Coalition of 
Malaysian NGOs in the UPR Process (COMANGO), and yayasan Hasanah. Other stakeholders such as SUHAKAM, a statutory body, and TalentCorp, a Government agency under the Prime Ministeris Department, have done likewise. The list of agencies mentioned is not exhaustive. Working with the UNCT and other partners, the Global Compact Network Malaysia (Box 8) is working to more effectively engage the private sector on the SDGs.
third, cross-cutting issues are increasingly critical to the next stage of development, and these require integrated solutions. By including NGOs, CSOs and private sector representatives in this process, it opened up opportunities for discussion and deliberation on charting the way forward for national development. New ideas and perspectives were discussed that further emphasised joint responsibilities and plans to drive the SDGs forward. Broadly, the Government has been increasing communication and engagement with stakeholders on development plans since the late 1990s, and especially  in recent years.

Box 7: the Malaysian CSo-SDG Alliance
The Malaysian CSO-SDG Alliance is an informal grouping of CSOs that have come together for networking, joint cooperation, action and liaison with the Government in commitment to the effective implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in Malaysia. The first CSO-SDG discussion was hosted by the Society for the Promotion of Human Rights (PROHAM) and the Global Movement of Moderates, on 27 October 2015. Discussion findings have since been published by KITA-UKM, a paper entitled \0xECSustainable Development Goals and Malaysia Society: Civil Society Perspectives.
The Alliance comprises four umbrella CSOs and 25 individual 
CSOs and institutions, translating to more than 200 CSOs 
being involved in discussions and mapping exercises intended to identify areas of grassroots involvement that are relevant to the SDGs. These CSOs can broadly be grouped by type, namely, development- and service-based; human rights-based; environment-based; and think tanks. Each has its own area of expertise and specialisation within eight areas of involvement, including awareness raising, grant providers, capacity building, policy advocacy, research, community development and societal \0xECwatchdogs.
Further reading about the CSO-SDG alliance is available at: http://onlineapps.epu.gov.my/sdg/images/sdg_document_ november/presantation/Datuk_Denison_SDG_Alliance_paper_ at_sdg_road_map_conference_Nov_2016.pdf

Box 8: Global Compact Network Malaysia
The Global Compact Network Malaysia (GCMY), launched in 2008, is now an independent legal entity under the Malaysian Registrar of Societyis Act. With the core objective of advancing corporate sustainability in Malaysia, the GCMY actively promotes the Global Compactis ten principles. The GCMY is managed by a Contact Person who is appointed by the Steering Committee composed of representatives of multinational corporations, a Global Compact LEAD company, local publicly listed companies, small and medium-sized 
enterprises and civil society. On 25th May 2017, the GCMY organised a one-day event on the SDGs. The 1-Day SDG Business Summit brought more than 300 business leaders, policy makers and CSR Practitioners with meaningful discussions and insights 
on the topic of the SDGs. Co-organised by the Securities 
Industry Development Corporation, the Global Compact Network Malaysia and the United Nations Country Team, the event further promoted the uptake of SDGs by businesses  in Malaysia.
Figure 17: Recent Approaches used to increase public participation in Development


LAB APPROACH

Introduced by PEMANDU in 2009, the lab approach is part of an 8-step process used by Malaysia to drive transformation. The approach involves lab sessions with participation from government and private sector as well as NGOs to identify industry needs, initiatives to be undertaken and allocation of resources. Particularly, labs involved people in sectors most affected by a given issue so that they could participate in developing effective solutions. Participant feedback showed that lab sessions allowed hierarchical and jurisdictional divisions to be temporarily set aside to allow people on the ground to take ownership or  highlight problems.

Formally organisat participa has also 
and mon
than 80 
NATIONAL BLUE OCEAN STRATEGY (NBOS)


endorsed by the Prime Minister of Malaysia in 2009, NBOS has been breaking down traditional silos between 
ions, unlocking underutilised resources, creatively deploying those resources to hotspots and allowing greater public 
tion in development. The strategy serves as the basis for the Malaysian National Development Strategy (MyNDS), which 
guided the formulation of the 11MP. It is currently being executed through the NBOS Summit while day-to-day execution itoring support is undertaken by the Ministry of Finance. Presently, there are 90 NBOS initiatives undertaken by more ministries and agencies in addition to the numerous NGO and community partners.


NATIONAL CONSULTATIONS USING OPEN SPACE TECHNOLOGY (OST) METHOD 


First experimented by the UN Country Team and EPU during the post-2015 discussion titled \0xEBThe Malaysia We Wanti in 2014, this method allows participants to determine the topics, schedules and length of group discussions in relation to the wider topic under discussion. Plenary sessions at the beginning and end of each day allowed participants to share key points, experiences, feelings and comments about how to move forward. While the methodology has limitations, the method can be easily replicated at different scales and can allow participants to better understand issues that they may be interested but did not previously know much about. The platform also allows participants to build networks that lead to future partnerships and to feel included in the discussions of development.


Since 2009, Malaysia has experimented with a number of approaches to garner more public participation in development. This commitment to become more civiccentric in development planning is also reflected in  11MP aspirations.
Figure 17 lists key examples of approaches applied in Malaysia in recent years to enhance civic participation in development planning. In turn, the gradual implementation of these approaches has contributed to a 
Box 9: transformasi Nasional 2050 (tN50)
more mature participation observed in preparation of the National SDG Roadmap 2016n2020, as highlighted above.
Most recently, Malaysia has started engagement with all segments of society at an unprecedented scale for the preparation of the new national aspiration vision (2020n2050), Transformasi Nasional 2050 (TN50) (Box 9). In all, national consultation is the new norm in gathering inputs for Malaysiais development planning and charting its future.

TN50 is an initiative to plan for the future of Malaysia in the period of 2020 to 2050. It is a continuation of Vision 2020 with the aim of bringing Malaysia to greater heights. The overarching vision is to become a top 20 nation in economic development, social advancement and innovation. Aspects of 
being a Top 20 nation would be defined through a collective collaboration from all segments of society through a bottomup syndication process. This is an unprecedented move by the government in its efforts to involve the population at large in charting their own future. 
In this regard, the Ministry of Youth and Sports have started engaging the youth since early 2017 while engagement with other segment of society has started mid-2017. The engagement format ranges from town hall dialogues to online surveys. Through the youth engagement, more than 680,000 youths have been engaged with more than 30,000 inputs gathered. Inputs from the youth engagement have been collated and divided into five main themes, namely work and value creation; living and well-being; governance; society; and lifestyle. To delve deeper into these topics, the \0xECFuture Circles group comprising subject matter experts with varied experiences has been formed. Inputs obtained from the Future Circles will then be used towards the formulation of the TN50 document by the Economic Planning Unit. Dialogue will also focus on megatrends that will impact the world in 2050 (such as urbanisation, ageing, digitalisation, climate change, resource scarcity and others), how it will impact Malaysia and what trade-offs need to be made in order to address them.
The bottom-up approach is used to ensure that the TN50 document incorporates aspirations or inputs from all segments of the society to ensure inclusivity and a sense of ownership towards making it a reality. In line with this, all ministries have begun engaging their respective stakeholders such as the engagement session and dialogue between the Prime Minister and the civil servants, the dialogue session with women, children, persons with disabilities (PWD) and another session with the entertainment industry players. In addition, segment leaders comprising ministers and senior corporate leaders have also been appointed in order to represent various sectors such as the Government-linked companies, public listed companies, finance, defence and others. 
Further information about TN50 is available at:  
https://mytn50.com/
incorporating the sDGs into the national statistical framework
Since 2016, Malaysia has been taking steps to better understand the data needs of the SDGs, as well as data readiness at a national level.
Under the lead of the Department of Statistics of Malaysia (DOSM), the country completed a preliminary assessment of SDG indicators in January 2017. The objectives of this assessment were to identify the availability and reliability of data for the SDG indicators; and to review the data needs, methodology and consistency of indicators, including administrative data, provided by ministries and agencies. The scope of the assessment included indicators available from Government agencies (federal and state) and the private sector. Findings from the assessment were also expected to identify areas for targeted capacity building and to support development of a plan for data collection, such as open and big data.
In the preliminary assessment, DOSM utilised the \0xECtiers framework proposed by the United Nations Statistical Commissionsi Inter-agency and Expert Group on SDG indicators (IAED-SDGs) to assess data accessibility. Based on the five data categories that correspond to the IAEDSDG tiers framework, DOSM categorised 244 global indicators using inputs from the mapping exercise and Roadmap preparation process, as well as engagement with other data providers.
Based on a preliminary assessment of data availability in January 2017, 93 indicators (39 per cent of 244 indicators) were identified as \0xECavailable or Tier 1. Another 41 indicators (17 per cent) were described as \0xECpartially 

Figure 18: Breakdown of proposed Global SDG indicators by  Data Availability

available, and 64 indicators (26 per cent) were \0xECpartially available but need further development. Collectively, the 105 indicators with partial data availability were identified as Tier 2 indicators, that is, indicators where a methodology has been established but data is not easily available. As for Tier 3 indicators, Malaysia identified 28 indicators (12 per cent) for which data are \0xECnot available and 13 indicators (5 per cent) \0xECnot relevant to Malaysia (Figure 18). 
Considering the numerous indicators proposed and their associated costs, Malaysia will identify priority indicators to measure its development efforts and build statistical capacity. To this end, DOSM undertook another round of categorisation exercise using an SDG priority framework, as shown in Figures 19 and 20.

Figure 19: DoSM Data Availability Framework: Criteria and tiers of SDG indicators
AVAilABility 	CRiteRiA uSeD	iAeG-SDGs tieRS
oF DAtA
available
\0xEF Data already exists (at DOSM or Agencies)	Tier 1  
\0xEF MDG Indicators (partially)	An established methodology 
\0xEF Metadata clearly defined (proposed by 	exists and data are already international experts agencies)	widely available

paRTially available
\0xEF Data partially exists but need to improve the 	Tier 2  methodology of data collection or coverage etc.	A methodology has been 
established but for which are 
paRTially available, 
NeeD fURTheR 
DevelOpMeNT 
\0xEF Derivative of data (ownership of data)	not easily available
\0xEF Metadata exists (international) and need to suit with Malaysia level

NOT available
\0xEF Metadata exists (international) but data not 	Tier 3  
	available in Malaysia	An internationally agreed 
\0xEF No metadata (international/Malaysia)	methodology has not yet been developed
NOT RelevaNT
\0xEF Need to be confirmed with agencies
\0xEF Not suitable to apply in Malaysia
Figure 20: Malaysian SDG priority Categorisation and Criteria to Assess SDG indicators


Independently of DOSM but concurring with its assessment, CSO and NGO representatives also expressed concern about the appropriateness of certain global indicators. For example, Target 14.2 of Goal 14 is concerned with sustainable management of marine and coastal ecosystems, including strengthening their resilience and taking restorative actions. The proposed indicator, \0xECproportion of national exclusive economic  zone managed using ecosystem-based approaches,  does not measure the health of marine ecosystems.  Other indicators, such as the \0xECrepresentativeness of marine ecosystems restored and percentage of \0xEBno-takei zones could be more useful in monitoring progress towards  this target and Goal. 
Given this situation, DOSM is exploring the use of proxies and supplementary national indicators to better reflect baseline conditions and progress in the country. Malaysia is also committed to develop statistical capacity to measure an additional 32 indicators proposed by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to supplement the global indicators in support of more in-depth thematic analysis on education (Goal 4). Guidance for other Goals will also be considered as it becomes available. In the meantime, DOSM is engaging with data providers to better understand data capacity and needs.
Based on the preliminary assessment, 78 Government agencies were identified as data providers (Figure 21). DOSM is currently engaging in in-depth discussions with the relevant agencies, to identify national and agency priorities, especially on Tier 2 indicators. In January and February 2017, for example, DOSM was in discussion with eight ministries/agencies as part of the National Comprehensive Data Gaps Study. Similar efforts are being extended to other ministries/agencies. In addition, DOSM is compiling a list of proposed proxies or supplementary indicators that were suggested by non-Government stakeholders during the preparation process of the National SDG Roadmap in March and April 2017. In doing so, DOSM hopes to consider a wider range of feedback on indicators that would be useful for the development of SDG indicators in Malaysia. 
Figure 21: Current Data providers for SDG indicators

Key considerations moving forward	of these key considerations, while the chapter that  
In accelerating the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the 	follows describes the actions and available options for SDGs, a number of issues need to be considered carefully 	addressing them. during the next steps. This section gives a brief account  
on participation, non-Government actors are included in the SDG implementation process in the National SDG Council, the NSC and the CWCs. The non-Government actors work closely with people on the ground. Engaging them in data sharing would be an effective way of monitoring SDG progress at the local level. The key area is to develop the modality for data sharing. The same challenge is foreseen in resource mobilisation; Malaysia will need to develop mechanisms to secure partnerships for resource mobilisation to sustain SDG implementation.
The challenge also exists of ensuring that the spirit of the 2030 agenda trickles down to local levels and makes real impacts. Malaysia has established clear governance structures at the national level. However, the impact must permeate to the people. The 2030 Agenda must be localised to state levels, since the states will be implementing development plans and coordinating with development partners.
Developing useful national indicators in a timely manner is another key consideration. Malaysia has compiled a good set of time-series data. This was done through systematic, dedicated and sustained efforts of numerous stakeholders. SDG indicators measure not only targets but also processes, and non-quantifiable targets as well as peopleis perceptions. Thus, more and different indicators will be required.
Moreover ensuring the comparability of these indicators globally while also balancing the needs and costs of collecting the data and information, will be needed. Developing the SDG indicators will require a major investment of resources. Digital technology (e.g., developments in big data and open data) presents an opportunity to systematically and routinely collect information, especially since indicators are numerous.
Sustaining the commitment of numerous stakeholders, within and outside of Malaysia, likewise is a major challenge. Over a 15-year timeframe, it is important to sustain the commitment and momentum of key stakeholders and partners in this journey towards the 2030 Agenda. Internationally, Malaysia is committed to sharing experiences and technical knowledge in implementing the SDGs, not only through the United Nations System but also through other avenues such as ASEAN and South-South Cooperation.

Securing resources for SDG implementation is a key priority for Malaysia. This chapter explores the next steps for implementation and their resource needs, as well as possible means for developing stronger partnerships, innovative resource mobilisation mechanisms and data readiness necessary for better implementation

Next steps
Implementing the National SDG Roadmap
Effectively communicating the 2030 Agenda is an important step towards building ownership and participation in this development journey. The National SDG Roadmap is the first step to localising the 2030 Agenda. Implementing the Roadmap through the 11MP and existing sectoral plans will be the main step forward for Malaysia.
Localising, mainstreaming and promoting ownership and partnerships
SDG impacts must be felt where they are most needed, and that is at the individual, community and district levels, ensuring that no one is left behind. Localising the 2030 Agenda and promoting ownership among various stakeholders is therefore paramount. Awareness of and capacity to act at local levels must be enhanced to implement the agenda. Malaysia aims to achieve this at sub-national levels through: 
  	        replicating the multi-stakeholder governance structure at state levels to enhance vertical and horizontal policy coherence towards building national consensus, and to increase engagement, with civil society, businesses and individuals on the SDGs. This also would contribute to better adaptation of the SDG indicators, data collection, accountability, monitoring and evaluation, as well as to budget allocations and resource mobilisation at sub-national levels
 	       organising \0xECroad shows in all 13 states to  raise awareness, increase knowledge and create  a sense of ownership of the 2030 Agenda
translating communication materials on the 
SDGs into the national language
These efforts will be complemented by the Malaysian 
CSO-SDG Alliance, and the Global Compact Network Malaysia. The Allianceis advocacy efforts are supported  by the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute (ASLI)  and the UNCT with talks, seminars and discussions on  the 2030 Agenda.
Tools and technical support at local levels also will be needed to facilitate these processes. Inspiration can be drawn from methods already utilised in Malaysia, such as the Lab method, the NBOS and the Open Space Technology methods (see Figure 17).
Strengthen data readiness and preparing for Phase 2 implementation
On data readiness, Malaysia is working quickly and efficiently to strengthen the development of SDG indicators. DOSM will continue conducting the National Comprehensive Data Gaps Study through engagement with ministries/agencies and other third-party data providers. Joint efforts with data providers also are being undertaken to make defining relevant national SDG indicators a priority in their work plans.
In addition, Malaysia will need to strengthen the national statistical system with the development of new indicators (including global indicators not currently available, proxies and supplementary national indicators), as well as assist other agencies to expand their data coverage. At the same time, several relevant baseline studies would be undertaken. 
	MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION		61

Malaysia is also developing strategic partnerships and building a statistical learning centre that will collect, analyse and interpret disaggregated data. An integrated database system will be developed to enable systematic data compilation, monitoring, evaluation, reporting and sharing of SDG datasets and information across agencies and regions. This will contribute to more efficient and effective use of statistics, not only for development planning but also in communicating findings to the wider public.
Resources needed
In consideration of the work outlined above, Malaysia will need funding and technical assistance to develop national indicators and baselines to assess the progress of the 2030 Agenda and SDGs. Channelling resources to develop data for national indicators will be critical for evidence-based decisions and future plans. Technical assistance in developing proxy indicators may be needed in capacity building and \0xECinfo-structure development  
(e.g., using big data and open data for data collection). example in the environment sector, Malaysia is exploring alternative sources of financing through initiatives such as the Biodiversity Finance Initiative (BIOFIN), Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) and Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES). These pilot projects are instrumental to support mobilisation of additional resources.
Mobilising resources
Malaysia is committed to developing innovative mechanisms and solutions with stakeholders to achieve the 2030 Agenda. These include realignment of resources, optimising underutilised resources and encouraging resource sharing though better partnerships. collaborations with the private sector, civil society and international agencies via the following avenues  (Figure 22):
\0xEF Corporate Social responsibility (CSr) programmes n Originally started as contributions for social or environmental goods, CSRs have become ingrained in the corporate culture of many large companies. In 2007, it became mandatory for companies listed on the Malaysian stock exchange (Bursa Malaysia) to report their CSR activities. Tax incentives for businesses implementing CSR activities were also introduced. Aligning CSR programmes to national goals and the SDGs can provide additional resources to deliver  desired impacts.
\0xEF Financial institutions n Are becoming more aware of projects that have large social and environmental impacts, and of their responsibility in helping their clients achieve business and development objectives. By incorporating principles of sustainability, resilience and inclusiveness in business decisions, positive impacts of projects are expected to increase and eco-footprints reduced.
\0xEF Cooperation, support and funding from international sources n As Malaysia reaches developed nation status, overseas direct assistance (ODA) will no longer be accessible. In anticipation of this, Malaysia is exploring alternative methods to finance development needs. On the environment front, Malaysia is participating in the global BIOFIN initiative, which is aimed at estimating biodiversity expenditures and financing gaps, and at developing financial plans. Working with REDD+, Malaysia is piloting sustainable forest management and conservation. In the area of capacity-building, the Third Country Training Programme (TCTP), a joint effort between Malaysia and Japan, promotes the sharing of Malaysiais development experiences with other developing countries.
\0xEF Collaboration with Ngos, CSos, academia and local governments n NGOs, CSOs and academia have limited sources of funding. By developing better mechanisms to instil collaboration and partnerships, potential exists to pool resources and deliver positive local development outcomes.
\0xEF National Blue ocean Strategy initiatives n Implemented since 2009, this Strategy could be a way forward to better mobilise resources. Malaysia reportedly saved more than RM3.5 billion as a result of the NBOS initiatives between 2009 and 2016. For example, opening 15 Urban Transformation Centres saved RM1.5 billion by combining resources of departments and agencies, while redeploying police officers from desk to patrol work saved RM1.3 billion; policemilitary shared trainings saved RM700 million.3 These savings could be channelled to other development needs. While large savings have been reported for inter-Government agency initiatives, more than half of the NBOS initiatives leveraged resource contributions from non-Government stakeholders, including CSOs, NGOs, educational institutions and volunteers.

MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION63
Figure 22: potential Avenues to Mobilise Resources
poteNtiAl AVeNueS
for mobilising resources
While Malaysia will fund SDG programmes through existing government budgets and mechanisms, it is envisioned that funding and other resources will be further topped up through collaborations. Some possible avenues are as follows:
CSR PROGRAMMES

FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Aligning SDGs to Corporate Social Responsibility 	Awareness is growing among financial institutions that programmes has great potential to pool resources. In 	by incorporating principles of sustainability, resilience Malaysia, CSR has become a structured component and 	and inclusiveness in business decisions, they can rapidly corporate strategy of large companies.	increase positive impacts of projects they fund.
INTERNATIONAL SOURCES

NGOs, CSOs & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
While no longer qualifying for ODA, Malaysia is exploring 	Developing better mechanisms for collaboration and alternative mechanisms such as participating in pilots of 	partnerships has the potential to pool together resources or initiating projects such as BIOFIN, REDD+ and TCTP.	at local levels which may not be sufficient to deliver desired impacts on their own
NBOS

CROWDFUNDING
National Blue Ocean Strategy (NBOS) has shown positive 	Recent examples such as in the aftermath of the savings in resources since implementation began in 	Ranau earthquake has shown the potential of using 2009. RM3.5 billion reportedly have been saved in seven 	crowdfunding platforms to quickly gather needed years. Scaling-up these initiatives has strong potential for 	resources. Applying it to SDG-related work spells great improving resource sharing.	potential.
SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Encouraging social enterprises to take up SDG-related causes can leverage their position and reach specific pockets of people that are difficult to reach by Government initiatives. Improving their awareness and supporting their business development shows great potential for the SDGs.

\0xEF other innovative financing options n Apart from 	 traditional funding sources, Malaysia has been successful in raising funds, albeit on a smaller scale, using the following financing options.
o Crowdfunding n Recently applied in the aftermath of the 2015 Ranau earthquake, crowdfunding platforms were successfully used to raise money for family members of a mountain guide who perished in the earthquake while on-duty on Mount Kinabalu. While intending to raise only US$35,402, the amount pledged was 354 per cent over the goal, with 703 people pledging donations in just three days. Although these platforms are more commonly used to fund entrepreneurs, this could be a way to fund SDG implementation.
o Social entrepreneurship n Social enterprises are businesses that exist primarily to deliver a social good. By encouraging these enterprises to take up SDG-related causes, there is potential to use their positions to reach specific pockets of people previously unreached. Recently, Impact Hub KL, in partnership with University of Malaya, organised a briefing for social entrepreneurs about the SDGs and hosted business development support work sessions to encourage them to take up causes in line with the Goals. Another venue for promoting the SDGs is through the Malaysian Global Innovation and Creativity Centre (MaGIC), which launched a Social Enterprise Challenge in early 2017.



Malaysia is committed and confident in achieving the 2030 Agenda. The nation has demonstrated that it is possible to set and achieve \0xECmore ambitious targets through sustained, systematic and dedicated efforts. Malaysia has already aligned the SDGs with the 11MP and existing sectoral plans, to ensure smooth implementation. These aligned plans have been summarised in the National SDG Roadmap 2016n2020 which is designed to be the action plan for the implementation of the SDGs in the next three years. Meanwhile, Malaysia will continue to prepare needed baselines, data and information to enhance its implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
Initial efforts, as documented in this review, have been good learning experiences not only for the Government but also for partners in the private sector, NGOs and CSOs. In particular, the preparation of the Roadmap has brought these stakeholders together to review the current status, examine key challenges and craft a way forward. These experiences have clearly demonstrated that when success is understood as a journey, and not as a destination, every step provides concrete lessons for charting the way forward.
Malaysia will rely on its pragmatic, inclusive, sustainable, multidimensional, and participative approaches to development in order to fulfil its commitments and to achieve the ultimate goal of leaving no one behind. Sharing Malaysiais development experience through this Voluntary National Review is Malaysiais humble contribution to global progress.

Background on Malaysia
BASiC StAtiStiCS 2016
Population (million)  	31.7
Labour force (million)  	14.7
Employment (million)  	14.2
Unemployment rate (%)  	3.4
Nominal GDP (RM billion)  	1,230.1
Nominal GNI (RM billion)  	1,195.5
Real GDP growth rate (%)  	4.2
GNI Per Capita (RM)  	37,759
GNI Per Capita (US$)  	9,102 GNI Per Capita PPP (US$)  	26,457
Inflation (% p.a.)  	2.1
Merchandise exports (RM billion)  	785.9
Merchandise imports (RM billion)  	698.7 Current account of BOP (% of GNI)  	2.4
Exchange rate (RM/US$)  	4.148
\0xEF Malaysia covers an area of 330,323 square kilometers and lies entirely in the equatorial zone, with the average daily temperature throughout Malaysia varying between 21\0x221EC to 32\0x221EC. It is made of 13 states, namely Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Melaka, Negeri Sembilan, Pahang,  
Pulau Pinang, Perak, Perlis, Selangor, Terengganu and Sabah and Sarawak on the island of Borneo as well as  the three Federal Territories of Kuala Lumpur, Labuan  and Putrajaya.
\0xEF Malaysia is a multi-ethnic country with the predominant ethnic groups in Peninsular Malaysia being Malay, Chinese and Indian. In Sabah and Sarawak, the indigenous people represents the majority, which includes Kadazandusun, Bajau and Murut in Sabah as well as Iban, Bidayuh and Melanau in Sarawak.
\0xEF The Government of Malaysia is led by a Prime Minister and a constitutional monarchy, which employs a Parliamentary system. It has three branches of government n the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary.
\0xEF The Malaysian Parliament is made up of His Majesty the yang di-Pertuan Agong, the Senate (Upper House) with 70 members and the House of Representatives (Lower House) with 222 members. Out of the 70 senators in the Senate, 44 are appointed by His Majesty the yang di-Pertuan Agong while 26 are elected by the State legislatures. The general election for the 222 members of the Lower House must be held every five years. The last general election was held in 2013 and the ruling party is Barisan Nasional.

