eXeCUtive sUMMarY
and augurs well on the international stage. This is further substantiated by the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance which scored Namibia at 81 in 2012 and subsequently improved to 83.9 in 2016. Continentally,	this	earns	Namibia	the	fifth	highest	score in good governance out of 54 African nations. Furthermore, Transparency International recognises Namibia as the third most transparent country in Africa, while on the global level it ranks 53 out of 176 countries on Transparency Internationalis 2016 Corruption Perception Index.  However, domestically, public service delivery remains a challenge as the public	perception	index	reflects	a	low	rate	when	it	comes to the satisfaction of Namibians with public service	delivery.		Sixty-five	percent	of	Namibians	have expressed their dissatisfaction with Government efforts	to	fight	corruption	in	the	country.
With respect to access to serviced land, the supply thereof	remains	very	low	which	artificially	inflates	pricing and inhibits access by ordinary Namibians. This leads to limited access to decent housing and the mushrooming of informal settlements in urban settings. 
Promote sustainable agriculture, Combat climate change, and ensure sustainable management of water and sanitation
Namibia has performed very well regarding access to safe potable water in both rural and urban areas, where access is at 98 percent on average. Namibia continues to invest resources in building resilience in terms of agriculture and food production. This has led to an increase in areas of land under productive agriculture such as the Green Scheme. It is widely held globally, continentally and nationally that Namibia is a wildlife conservation success story, particularly through the effective implementation of the Community-Based Natural Resources Management Programme (CBNRM) which empowers communities to	meaningfully	and	legally	manage,	use,	and	benefit	from natural resources.
Namibiais vulnerability to climate change has however seen the gains made in the agricultural sector reversed as the persistent occurrence of drought and floods	have	led	to	a	reduction	in	food	production	in	the country, leaving 25 percent of the population food insecure. Moreover, climate change continues to exacerbate land degradation while also impacting on marine resources. 
Additionally, as water-borne sewerages are the main sanitation system in urban areas of Namibia while dry sanitation system is mainly used in rural areas, 
eXeCUtive sUMMarY
nationally only 54 percent of the households have access to improved sanitation. The problem is particularly acute in rural areas where only 28 percent of the households have access to improved sanitation facilities and an alarming rate of 71 percent of households practice open defecation.	Low	access	to	improved	sanitation	therefore	constitutes a serious public-health problem. 
 
strategies to address challenges
Some of the strategies adopted by Namibia to address challenges with regards to the achievement of the various SDG goals are as follows:
economic progression, inequality and end poverty in all its forms everywhere
In its efforts to address poverty, Namibia has undertaken numerous initiatives to promote value addition in order to grow the economy and thereby create employment. This is complemented by initiatives to invest in education and skills development to ensure that a large number of the population have access to employment opportunities. In addressing rural poverty which remains high, Namibia has a strategy to develop and promote community based and social enterprises through incentivising the private sector to invest in the rural economy.
achieve gender equality (including equity) and empower women and girls
In empowering women and girls, the main initiative being undertaken is to mainstream informal businesses led by	women	to	ensure	financial	inclusion	for	women	in	micro, small and medium enterprises, especially in agribusiness and extractive industries.
ensure inclusive and equitable quality education In addressing access to higher education, Namibia has instituted measures to widen access to higher education through equity and inclusion by focusing on increasing higher education institution intakes from rural areas and marginalized	groups.	This	is	done	through	intensified	public awareness programs and availability of student financing.
ensure healthy lives to promote well-being for all Namibia is strengthening the implementation of regional extension centres to ensure outreach to all districts countrywide for various types of immunization. Developing a multi-sectoral approach for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases is another strategy which Namibia is taking in an effort to promote the wellbeing of its people through strengthening medicines supply management systems and health training institutions.
Promote 	and 	build 	effective, 	accountable and inclusive public institutions for efficient governance and public service delivery Efforts to improve public service delivery are being implemented through initiatives to accelerate some basic services such as land servicing and housing supply. As part of its current plans, Namibia aims to accelerate the provision of housing processes and delivery through embracing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs)	and	sourcing	new	financial	resources	for	rural	housing schemes.
Promote sustainable agriculture, combat climate change, and ensure sustainable management of water and sanitation
Namibia is committed to building resilience to climate change through enhancing preparedness to natural disasters	such	as	flood	and	drought	impacts.	In	addressing sanitation challenges, Namibia promotes coordinated investment in sanitation infrastructure (both procurement of new and maintenance of existing infrastructure) by ensuring that resources are allocated accordingly and that advocacy to stimulate behavioural change around hygiene, especially at the community levels, is strengthened.
Affirmation of Commitment
Namibia remains committed to the realisation of the SDGs and will continue to invest resources to ensure that	targets,	as	set	for	the	specific	goals,	are	achieved.	Domestic resources and international support, in the spirit of the Global Partnership for the SDGs as embedded in Goal 17, continue to be mobilized to ensure effective implementation of national developmental programmes which will enable the attainment of the goals.



naMibiais DeveLoPMent ConteXt anD tHe sDGs
Namibiais economy has grown rapidly since independence in 1990, reaching Middle Income Country (MIC) status in	2009	and	Upper	MIC		status	in	2014.	Its	economy	has	matured	to	one	which	has	reduced	poverty	significantly	providing economic and livelihood opportunities for a critical mass/targeted population, yet it remains marked by extreme inequalities. 
During the period between independence in 1990 and 2017 the country notably reduced poverty, increased access via free education at both primary and secondary school levels, broadened health services coverage (including stabilizing the HIV and AIDS epidemic), increased the coverage and value of old age, disability and OVC social safety grants, safeguarded biodiversity and ecosystem services in protected areas, adopted legislation to improve good	governance	and	environmental	management,	and	created	specific	institutions	to	target	support	for	the	poor. 
Yet, Namibia still faces many development challenges predominantly due to an unequal society with huge social and economic inequalities. Namibiais Human Development Index (HDI) for 2015 stood at 0.640 which represents an improvement from 1990 when it recorded 0.578, ranking Namibia at 125 out of 188 countries. However, when the value is discounted for inequality, the HDI falls to 0.415, a loss of 35.2 percent due to inequality in the distribution of the HDI dimension indices. Thus, despite good economic advancement and progressive transformations through deliberate policies, strategies and programmes, there are major gaps in all three spheres of sustainable development. 
For instance, the capital-intensive nature of the sectors driving the economy such as the extractive industries, especially diamonds, uranium, and gold (with its vulnerability to external shocks and the exhaustible nature of the commodity),	created	an	economy	with	structural	rigidities	that	restricted	significant	employment	generation	and	impacted on the levels of inequality. Governmentis major shareholding in diamond mining increased revenues meaningfully through diamond export earnings. Consequently, this allowed the government to invest heavily in development projects and recurrent expenditure. Yet without robust revenue sharing formula in extractives not much has been achieved in reducing the gaps between the poor and rich, nor addressed the high inequities. These scenarios further constrained participation and, coupled with limited private sector growth (which itself is heavily dependent on Government spending), affected the countryis potential for inclusive growth and prosperity.
  
The economic slowdown and reduced donor funding forced the treasury to contain public expenditure in 2016, including the reduction of budget allocations to essential sectors such as health and education, freezing public service recruitment and halting major public works. It is expected that going forward, in the medium term, recovery in agriculture and diamond mining will support economic growth. There is also potential for improved growth in the uranium mining, manufacturing and transport and communication sectors.
Namibia joined the Common Monetary Area in 1991, which pegged its currency to the South African Rand. This arrangement	has	been	beneficial	in	terms	of	price	and	currency	stability,	but	the	recent	weakening	of	the	Rand	has	had	adverse	effects	on	the	Namibian	economy,	which	is	associated	with	volatile	inflation	rates.	This	notwithstanding,	the	net-export	base	for	Namibia	is	very	small,	which	makes	it	insignificant	to	accrue	sufficient	benefits	from	a	devalued	Rand.	On	the	contrary,	the	domestic	economic	activities	are	affected	as	a	result	of	the	high dependency on the import of essential goods and services (e.g. Namibia currently imports 61 percent of the food consumed locally as per the Annual Vulnerability Assessment Report 2017).
assessinG tHe Means of iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Namibia has domesticated Agenda 2030 and requisite indicators and targets in its national development planning documents. This will provide the basis for monitoring and measuring of progress on the implementation of the national programmes which encompass the SDGs. 
Creating ownership at all levels:
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has been promoted through awareness campaigns undertaken for	the	Government,	Local	Authorities,	Civil	Society,	Academia,	Parliament	and	Development	Partners.	This	was	accomplished through national and sub-national level consultations on the development of the NDP5, which also	reflected	on	the	SDGs	and	the	AU	Agenda	2063.	These	consultations	focused	more	on	the	sensitization	of	communities using community radio stations. More awareness campaigns are envisaged including support for the planned translation of the SDGs into local languages.
alignment of sDGs with the national vision and national Development Planning 
Namibia is committed to Agenda 2030 and has fully absorbed the SDGs into the NDP5, and the corresponding accelerating tool, the Harambee Prosperity Plan (HPP) 2016-2020. The NDP5 was launched deliberately a year after	the	adoption	of	the	SDGS	so	as	to	ensure	that	national	processes	benefit	from	the	global	discussions	on	the new development agenda. Accordingly, in implementing Namibiais national development agenda, Namibia is simultaneously working toward the realization of the global Agenda 2030, Africa Agenda 2063 and the SADCis Regional Integrated Strategic Development Plan (RISDP). 
institutional Mechanisms for sDG implementation, coordination, review and reporting 
In terms of coordination of SDGs as implemented within the framework of the NDP5, the pre-existing three-tier mechanism has been re-adopted. This consists of the Development Partners Forum at the highest level to provide coordination	oversight;	a	multi-stakeholder	National	Steering	Committee	composed	of	senior	officials	from	both	government and development partners at implementation level to provide tracking of implementation; and lastly the coordination of all developments pertaining to SDGs, through the NDP5 vehicle, which rests with the NPC as the Secretariat. 
The responsibility for the collection of data for analysis and reporting thereof lies with the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA). 
The monitoring of SDGsi progress, as embedded into the NDP5, remains the principal responsibility of National Monitoring	Evaluation	Office	in	collaboration	with	the	UN	Development	Systemis	Coordination	Unit,	which	necessarily	must be kept abreast with all developments pertaining to SDGs as it is ultimately responsible for coordination, review and thereafter reporting such progress to the institutional mechanism alluded to earlier. Both the latter Offices	are	respectively	housed	under	the	National	Planning	Commission	(NPC).
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
analyzing thematic issues
tracking Progress: status of selected sDGs in namibia 
sDG 1: enD PovertY in aLL its forMs everYWHere
Economic Growth 
Namibia	continued	to	register	significant	progress	regarding	economic	growth	over	the	past	ten	years	(2008	n	2017) averaging 3.7 percent annually. However, over the past two years (2016 and 2017), economic growth has slowed and is projected at 1.2 and 2.1 percent in 2018 and 2019 respectively, thereby negatively impacting on industrial and investment growth. To counter this the country is engaged in efforts to stimulate economic activities through government expenditure and foreign investment.
Poverty	Trends	and	Levels
The national poverty rate has continued to decrease over time falling from 28.8 percent in 2010 to 18 percent in 2016 and by 2017 poverty reduced to 17.4 percent. This is attributed, amongst others, to the pro-poor policies and programmes that target the poor segments of society, whereby people are provided with tools that build resilience and	self-sufficiency	to	break	the	cycle	of	poverty.	Social	safety	nets	are	one	of	the	measures	that	have	lifted	people out of poverty to sustainable livelihoods. 
The adopting of a social welfare approach that is based on promoting the human rights and dignity of people and achieving social justice has also contributed to the reduction of poverty in the country.  Namibia has furthermore adopted economic policies that are aimed at providing opportunities for the poor, where several credit schemes and seed support programmes are implemented to allow for micro and medium enterprise development and in turn improve their income. Namibia continues to invest in the education sector to improve the skills of its people in order to provide the skilled labour required to propel Namibia to its desired aspiration of an industrialised Nation by 2030. 
Despite progress made in reducing rural poverty, recording a reduction from 34 percent, poverty levels still remain high at 25.1 percent.  Government therefore needs to invest additional resources to ensure that the rural communities are emancipated. A substantial segment of the population remains extremely poor, suffering from multiple deprivations in the domains of material, employment, health, education and living environment.
Human Development Index (HDI)
The human development index improved from 0.578 in 1990 to 0.640 in 2015. This can be attributed to the huge investment which Namibia has made in the social sectors of health and education
Inequities	Trends	and	Levels
The	Gini-Coefficient	has	improved	from	the	past	measure	of	0.58	in	2010	to	0.56	in	2016.	This	can	be	attributed	to	the pro-poor policies and programmes which the government has put in place. Even though inequality seems to have slightly reduced there are still huge disparities in terms of who has access to sustainable income, productive assets, food, water, energy, and other basic services. Inequality is still high with Namibia ranked amongst the top ten most unequal countries in the world.
Unemployment	Trends	and	Levels
Unemployment has increased from 28 percent in 2016 to 34 percent in 2017. The increase in unemployment is	a	consequence	of	poor	performance	in	the	key	employment	sectors	such	as	mining,	agriculture,	fisheries,	infrastructure development and tourism. In addition the mechanization of production in these sectors has also 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
contributed to a reduction in the demand for labour. The growth in employment opportunities subsequently fell short of the of number new entrants in the labour market, thus there is now high unemployment rate (34 percent), impacting certain vulnerable groups more severely, including women, youth, people with disabilities, and the poor.
Current challenges to attaining the Goalsi aspirations
Even though Namibia is investing a great deal of resources to address poverty, there are still challenges that impact the implementation of interventions aimed at eradicating poverty. These include, amongst others:
 
a. Lack	of	industrialization	and	infrastructure,	which	have	contributed	to	economic	imbalance	
b. Lack	of	proper	skills	which	can	be	attributed	to	the	education	system	which	focuses	on	theoretical	subjects	with limited focus on technical and vocational training and limited investment made in early childhood development. This has led to a skills mismatch between what the system produces and what the job market requires
c. The spread of communicable diseases such as HIV has also impacted on productivity across all sectors of the economy
d. The	global	financial	crisis	has	affected	the	Namibian	economy	and	contributed	to	an	increase	in	unemployment,	in	particular	the	extractive	industry,	which	employs	a	significant	number	of	people.
e. Recurrent	natural	disasters	such	as	droughts	and	floods	have	impacted	mostly	agricultural	productivity,	leading to a decline in GDP contribution from 30 percent 2015 to 20 percent in 2016 and consequently reducing the number of people employed in the sector 
Strategies
Namibia	has	set	five	year	targets	aimed	at	addressing	the	key	challenges	under	SDG	1	and	has	also	put	in	place	strategies that will enable the government to reach these set targets, as outlined below:
strategies for attaining the targets
set national targets
A strong work ethic to be encouraged through incentives that seek to ensure that those who are capable graduate and seek employment to ease the burden on the program and avoid propagating  a culture of dependency. 
Foster collaboration and partnerships across various sectors and institutions.
Gini	coefficient-	0.500	
Head count poverty rate
(extreme poor) - 5 percent Head count poverty rate
(poor)-10 percent
National Comprehensive Social Protection Program being expanded, with added investments, to provide integrated support to the poorest and vulnerable households.
Strengthen social safety nets through expedited registration for national documents and other means.
Strengthen social protection system so that it is harmonized with existing programs, policies and laws relating to social protection. 
Enhance disaster risk governance through increased understanding of and investment in its varied dimensions, including assessment, prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and rehabilitation
Gini	coefficient-	0.500	
Head count poverty rate(extreme poor) - 5% 
Head count poverty rate(poor)-10%
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG2: enD HUnGer, aCHieve fooD seCUritY anD iMProveD nUtrition anD ProMote sUstainabLe aGriCULtUre
Namibia	is	fully	committed	to	ending	hunger;	this	commitment	is	reflected	across	all	key	development	documents	where zero hunger stands as a key priority. Amongst these key national development instruments - which includes the Vision 2030 initiative, the HPP and the NDP 5 - the Zero Hunger Strategy recognizes the importance of food and nutrition security and appreciates the contribution therein embedded in Namibiais drive to achieve SDGs 2 and 17.
In order to understand the extent of food and nutrition security in Namibia, one has to examine it from the context of	SDG	2	(Zero	Hunger)	and	its	five	pillars	as	indicated	below: access to adequate food n 
Food	access	and	sufficiency
Food insecurity affects 25 percent of the population: most low earners spend 57 percent of their incomes on food (Zero Hunger Strategic Review 2016). Poverty, income inequality, high unemployment n particularly in urban areas n, high food prices, and HIV prevalence at 13.3 percent are all major factors limiting access to food. As a result of structural	food	deficits,	Namibia	relies	on	food	imports	-	which	are	susceptible	to	price	and	currency	fluctuations	- for up to 61 percent of needs (Emongor and Kirsten 2008).  
Impact on Women 
Despite the national commitment to gender equality, women remain more disempowered and excluded than men. For example, there are higher rates of unemployment and poverty among women when compared to men and women have lower access to resources and technologies, leading to higher levels of food insecurity among women. Women play a major role in supporting household access to food by generating income from agricultural labour, production and sale of cash crops and other means, and by performing the vast majority of unpaid care and	domestic	work	(ILO	statistical	database	ILOSTAT).
Food Markets and Prices
A total of 83 percent of the population is reliant on markets for food and access to food by vulnerable households is	limited	by	high	prices.	Food	price	inflation	averaged	8.1	percent	between	2012	and	2016,	with	a	record	low	of	4.1	percent in June 2015 and a high of 12.5 percent in December 2016 (www.tradingecomics.com/world).  
Food Support 
Food assistance, remittances and social grants are an important part of peoples coping strategies and sometimes accounts	for	a	significant	proportion	of	their	income.	The	annual	need	for	emergency	food	relief	has	increased	as a result of droughts and in 2016/17 the Government supported 214,170 people with emergency food relief (OPM 2016/17).     
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
ending all forms of malnutrition 
Stunting 
Between 2006 and 2013, child stunting was reduced from 29 to 24 percent, wasting from 8 to 6 percent and underweight from 17 to 13 percent. However, in rural areas and among the 31 percent of households in the poorest quintile, stunting remains at 28 percent; in Ohangwena region rates reach 37 percent (Zero hunger strategic review 2016). 
Malnutrition challenges, particularly stunting, are rooted in various socio-economic and environmental factors, including	limited	support	for	pregnant	and	lactating	women,	poor	dietary	diversity,	insufficient	consumption	of	micronutrients, inadequate care practices, and limited access to potable water and sanitation. 
 
Breast-feeding 
Breastfeeding	is	common,	but	the	average	duration	is	decreasing	as	a	result	of	insufficient	institutional	and	socialcultural support to breastfeeding mothers and the promotion of breast milk substitutes. Of children aged 6n59 months, 48 percent suffer from anaemia; on the other hand immunization has increased to cover 90 percent of children (WHO 2015). Micronutrient supplementation increased from 52 percent in 2006 to 84 percent in 2015 (WHO	2015).	To	address	iodine	deficiency,	Namibia	launched	an	iodine	supplementation	campaign	and	passed	legislation mandating the iodization of salt for household use.  
Smallholder productivity and income 
Most smallholder and subsistence farmers live in communal areas where access to land and water is challenging. Smallholder producersi account for 54 percent of total agricultural producers of whom a share of 45 percent entities registered for communal areas are under women. In addition three-quarters of agricultural labourers are women. 
Food insecurity affects smallholder farmers who depend on rain fed agriculture because their resilience to weather-related shocks is limited; food shortages affected 76 percent of rural agricultural households in 2013 (Census of agriculture report 2013/14).  According to the census of agriculture report 2013/14, production of food and	livestock	in	communal	areas	has	remained	significantly	low,	mainly	as	a	result	of	limited	access	to	modern	farming technologies and practices, poor soil fertility, over-grazing and prolonged dry spells. Recent studies in the maize and mahangu regions showed cereal harvest losses of 15 percent among smallholder farmers resulting from limited skills and access to harvest and post-harvest technology.    sustainable food systems
Disaster Risk Management 
Namibia is mainly a dry land country with a semi-arid to arid climate. Agricultural land accounts for only 47 percent of the total area, of which only 34 percent supports economic crop and livestock production; agriculture accounts for 3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) and provides only 40 percent of cereal requirements (http://www.tradingeconomics.com/World). The agriculture sector has been negatively affected to date by the seven	major	floods	and	eight	droughts	that	occurred	between	1999	and	2016.	The	number	of	people	affected	by	drought has since increased from 25,000 in 1998 to 798,384,000 in 2017 (OPM 2016/17). 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Gaps and Challenges  
There are several gaps and challenges linked to food security in the country. The Zero Hunger Strategic review conducted	in	2015	identified	five	key	challenges.	These	include	the	following:		
1. Lack of coherent policy. The	legal	and	policy	frameworks	are	sufficient	to	aid	Namibiais	development	agenda, but coherence among sectors managed by different government agencies is a major issue. There is a need for cross-sector and inter-sector synergies and coherence to be created, together with a national system to monitor and evaluate the implementation of policies. The current food and nutrition security policy is not addressing all aspects of food security as stipulated in SDG 2 and therefore there is no framework to guide social assistance programmes in the country. The majority of the social protection interventions are sector-specific	and	are	not	addressing	cross-sectoral	issues:	they	are	neither	comprehensive	nor	integrated.
2. Capacity constraints. Institutional and human resource capacity for policy and programme design and implementation are limited. The implementation of food security programmes is affected by challenges impacting prioritization and gaps in technical and managerial capacities in government bodies at the national and regional levels. The capacity of government institutions and personnel involved in designing, planning, resourcing and monitoring must be improved to ensure higher quality, cost-effective, equitable and empowering assistance to vulnerable households and individuals.    
3. Weak evidence and monitoring. Weak research and evidence collation combined with programing challenges	makes	it	difficult	to	quantify	the	interactions	among	food	and	nutrition	insecurity,	poverty	and	HIV.	There is no food and nutrition security baseline from which to measure progress in addressing hunger. The limited information on food consumption patterns, both overall and by population group, and fragmented data	collection	tools,	approaches	and	systems	among	sectors	and	ministries,	makes	it	difficult	to	obtain	a	comprehensive outlook of the food and nutrition security situation so as to inform programme design, policy and provide timely government response. 
4. fragmented social programmes. Namibia has one of the most comprehensive social protection systems in sub-Saharan Africa: it supports elderly people, orphans and vulnerable children, people with disabilities, war veterans, school children, marginalized communities and populations affected by hunger. However, the registration	and	targeting	procedures	are	not	efficient,	monitoring	needs	strengthening	as	well	as	beneficiary	selection,	which	leads	to	exclusion	and	inclusion	errors.	This	inefficiency	continues	to	contribute	to	high	administrative and delivery costs and limits scalability. Social protection programmes must be consolidated under a single registry and coordinated by a single institution to enhance their effectiveness in ensuring food security. 
5. Weak coordination. Poor coordination among ministries, sectors, agencies and public and private organizations limits progress towards zero hunger in Namibia. Coordination mechanisms such as the Namibia Alliance for Improved Nutrition (NAFIN) that promote the scaling up of food and nutrition initiatives have not been effective at either the national or sub-national levels. Communication among sectors and institutions is inadequate and there is no momentum to reinforce such linkages. It is essential to enhance the coordination of programme and policy implementation at the national and sub-national levels to address food and nutrition insecurity. 


iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Teenage Pregnancy
Teenage pregnancy increased from 15.4 percent in 2006-7 to 19 percent in 2013 according to Namibia Demographic Health Survey (NDHS).  
Child	Mortality		(	including	under-fives	and	infant	mortality)
The neonatal mortality rate is 20 deaths per 1,000 live births which is a decline from 24 per 1 000 live births.  This shows	no	significant	decline	in	the	five	years	preceding	the	survey.	The	under-five	mortality	rate	has	declined	from	69	(2006-7)	to	54	(2013)	in	the	past	five	years	and	infant	mortality	rates	does	not	demonstrate	a	significant	decline for the past ten years which by global standards still remains high.     
Immunization against Measles 
Namibia embarked upon several immunization campaigns and other strategies which led to improved coverage of 90% for measles in 2013. 
Combating communicable Diseases nHIV/AIDS
HIV/AIDS prevalence in the general population currently stands at 13.3 percent1. Prevalence among pregnant women has declined from a peak of 22.5 percent in 2002 to 17.2 percent2  in 2016. In 2016, new HIV infections have reduced by over 50 percent since 2001, while AIDS-related deaths by 48 percent since 2001.3  The overall mother to child transmission (MTCT) rate declined from 23.7 percent in 2005 to 4.1 percent in 2015, with HTC and ART coverage for PMTCT at 95 percent by 2016. MTCT rate at six weeks dropped from 13.3 percent (2005) to less than 2 percent in 2015. HTC coverage of pregnant women has increased to 95 percent and treatment of HIV positive women is estimated to be more than 95 percent.
Combating communicable Diseases n TB and Malaria
Whilst there has been success in curbing communicable diseases such as TB, the progress that was seen in 
Malaria	has	been	since	been	reversed	due	to	the	recent	floods	and	cross	border	movements	between	Angola	and	Namibia in particular.  
Combating Non-communicable Diseases
Non-communicable diseases accounted for 43 percent of the 14,000 total deaths in 2012 with Cardio-Vascular Diseases (CVD) being the most common NCD in Namibia accounting for 21 percent of mortality in 2012.  High Blood Pressure rates range from 57 percent in the Khomas Region to 30 percent in the Kavango Region (NDHS 2013). Diabetes accounted for 4 percent of all mortality in Namibia in 2012.  As of 2015, Namibia has a Health Adjusted	Life	Expectancy	of	65	years.		
Gaps and Challenges
As the country moves into the era of the SDG, a number of ambitious targets have been set to address the high burden of communicable and non-communicable diseases and reduce maternal and child mortality over the next	five-year	period	of	the	National	development	plan.		


iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 4: ensUre inCLUsive anD eQUitabLe QUaLitY eDUCation anD ProMote LifeLonG LearninG oPPortUnities for aLL
The main thrust under SDG 4 in Namibia are Early Childhood Development; Basic Education, Technical, Vocation Education and Training (TVET) and Higher Education.
Early Childhood Development 
In terms of early-childhood development, by the expiry of the MDGs, only 13 percent of children aged 0-4 years were enrolled in ECD programs (2011 National Population and Housing Census). Children in urban areas (19 percent) were more likely to receive ECD services than children in rural areas (9.8 percent).  
Basic Education 
Pertaining to basic education, Namibia has made great progress in providing access to education to over 95 percent of the learner-age population. Nevertheless, the quality of instruction is often unsatisfactory, especially in schools	serving	poor	communities.	In	2015,	only	45	percent	of	grade	5	pupils	achieved	proficiency	in	English,	whilst	63	percent	of	the	same	grade	achieved	proficiency	in	Mathematics.	Grade	7	pupils	fared	even	worse	with	just	48	percent	and	41	percent	achieving	proficiency	in	English	and	Mathematics	respectively.	At	the	secondary	school	level, there are unacceptably high rates of repetition. Of grade 8 pupils, about 30 percent repeat that grade. More than one-third of all students drop-out by grade 10.
In	the	most	remote,	rural	areas,	drop-out	rates	are	an	extreme	concern.	Only	49	percent	of	first	graders	in	extremely	remote areas will attend school up to grade 5. The quality of teaching is a major issue. More than 20 percent of teachers	have	no	formal	teaching	qualifications.	The	low	performance	of	students	on	end-of-year	tests	suggests	that teaching is not having the intended impact on student learning. The transition from secondary to higher education is very low, currently estimated at 19 percent of the grade 12 learners.
Technical, Vocation Education and Training
With regards to Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET), the percentage of TVET graduates currently stands at 55 percent of total higher education graduates. Namibia is committed to increasing that share to 65 percent by 2022.  The vocational education completion rate stands at 60 percent. 
However, the TVET sub-sector is affected by a number of challenges notably that TVET provision is inadequate in terms of access and, in many cases, quality. Furthermore, many potential TVET learners are either unable to enrol due to negative perception of TVET generally or lack of a desired course to attend.    
 
Higher Education and Training
With reference to Namibian higher education, quality and relevance of university education has been a serious concern for both private and public sector employers. Post-graduate education continues to be underdeveloped and its contribution to research and innovation remains negligible. Considerable inequalities of access to university education remain in terms of social class, geographical location, marginalized groups as well as those with special needs and disabilities. 
 
The country has only two public universities and one private university besides other private higher education institutions. Enrolment has grown exponentially since the late 2000s to almost 44,000 in 2013. As a consequence, Namibiais gross enrolment ratio in tertiary education (16.3.0 per cent in 2016) is high by sub-Saharan African standards (8.2 per cent for the region). Admission criteria, however, exclude a large share of applicants, although public universities have established bridging programmes to facilitate access by young people from disadvantaged background or with previous work experience.
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Public	universities	suffer	from	severe	shortages	of	qualified	academic	staff	(the	student/academic	staff	ratio	at the University of Namibia was 26.5 in 2016, and only 21 per cent of academic staff had PhD degrees). Internal quality assurance systems have been introduced in the public universities and in some of the private higher education institutions, but they need to be harmonized. 
Internships or entrepreneurship training have been introduced, and a few tracer studies conducted, but there are no sound policy frameworks and strategies to systematically guide these arrangements. Public universities conduct research and provide outreach services, but they lack consistent research agendas and partnerships with industries appear weak.
Science, Technology and Innovation
Namibia has a comprehensive policy and institutional framework for STI. The national system of innovation has grown	in	size	and	complexity	but	lacks	scientific	and	technological	dynamism.	investment in research and development (r&D): Dominated by public institutions, R&D suffers from low levels of funding (gross expenditure on	R&D	represented	0.14	per	cent	of	GDP	in	2010)	and	staffing	(Namibia	had	433	R&D	personnel	in	2010),	and	files	limited numbers of patents, industrial design registrations and trademarks.
A	weak	entrepreneurial	and	innovation	culture	is	a	barrier	to	job	creation	and	economic	diversification	in	Namibia.	The incoherence of policies, their long gestation and poor implementation undermine the system. Meanwhile, private sector participation in R&D and innovation is limited and often not linked to universities and R&D institutes. 
The	policy	review	identifies	six	strategic	priorities,	each	associated	with	a	set	of	policy	options:	(1)	transform	and expand VET, and diversify higher education; (2) improve quality; (3) promote research, innovation and entrepreneurship; (4) reduce inequality; (5) engage employers and enhance responsiveness to labour market needs;	and	(6)	review	the	institutional	structure	and	fill	policy	gaps.	The	sixth	strategic	priority,	on	governance	and	policy	making,	is	most	urgent	as	it	conditions	the	effective	implementation	of	policy	options	towards	the	other	five	priorities.
Key interventions supporting sDG 4
strategies and targets
strategies for the attainment of the targets
set national targets
1. 
Increase access to quality Integrated Early Childhood Development (IECD): 
Improve percentage of children 0-4 who access ECD from 13 percent (2011) to 40 percent by 2022
1. 
Improving the provision of appropriate educational facilities, teaching-learning resources and increasing child health and nutrition. 
Improve percentage of children 5-8 who access ECD from 38 percent (2016) to 80 percent by 2022
3. 
Upgrade the curriculum for 0-4 years and its implementation. 
Increase	the	number	of	qualified	caregivers	from	2	862	(2016) to 3 800 by 2022
4. 
Enhance the quality of teaching at pre-primary level. 
Improve	percentage	of	qualified	pre-primary	teachers	from 45 percent (2016) to 60 percent by 2022
5. 
Develop a strong framework to enhance core skills of literacy and numeracy.
Improve percentage of learners qualifying for university from 36 percent (2015) to 60 percent by 2022 Improve NSSCO Mathematics pass rate from 45 percent (2015) 	to 65 percent by 2022
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
6. 	Develop comprehensive planning and administration systems. 
The execution of all yearly targets through each Annual Plan, with the aim to achieve the overall implementation of the Strategic Plan
7. 	Improve learnersi transition to higher education. 
Improve NSSCO English pass rate from 28 percent 
(2015) to 50 percent by 2022 
Improve NSSCO Physical Science pass rate from 47 percent (2015) to 57 percent by 2022
8. 	Create a pool of competent and skilled workers through the transformation, upgrading and expansion of TVET institutions. 
Increase Enrolment (number) from 25 137 (2015) to 50 000 by 2022
9. 	Make TVET more accessible. Expand existing training centres (VTCs, COSDECs and SOE providers) and create new ones in areas where there are none. 
Improve Percentage of TVET graduates to total higher education graduates from 55% (2014) to 	65% by 2022
10. Offer TVET courses that improve the employment prospects of learners. 
Improve Completion rate (%) form 60 (2015) to 80 by 2022
11. Widen access to university education through equity and inclusion.
12. Improve quality of teaching and learning. Develop quality assurance systems and raise learning outcomes by providing professional development to lecturers. 
13. Strengthen research capacity at HEIs.
14. Promote private sector investment in higher education by creating conducive environment for the establishment of new institutions and by promoting and facilitating internship programs.
Increase percentage of tertiary education completion rate from 50 percent  (2015) to 70 percent by 2022
sDG 5: aCHieve GenDer eQUaLitY anD eMPoWer aLL WoMen anD GirLs
Namibia	registered	significant	improvement	in	the	promotion	of	gender	equality	and	women	empowerment	(GEWE). This is largely credited to existing legislative instruments that have been put in-place to ensure gender equality and women empowerment. In addition, there are number of programmes that have been developed for the implementation of the policy provisions. These include Article 10 of the Constitution of The Republic of Namibia which guarantees equality before the law and the right to non-discrimination on the basis of sex.
 
Namibia	ratified	the	Convention	on	the	Elimination	of	All	Forms	of	Discrimination	against	Women	(CEDAW)	in	1992 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in	2000.	Namibia	also	ratified	the	Protocol	to	the	African	Charter	on	Human	and	Peoplesi	Rights	on	the	Rights	of	Women in Africa in 2004.  Accordingly, it implemented several new policy measures, including an update of the National Gender Policy. In addition to the gender policy, Gender Responsive Budget Guidelines were adopted in 2014 alongside the National Gender Mainstreaming Programme of 2003.  
 

iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Women \0xEBs access to economic and productive resources
Womenis access to economic and productive resources has improved since independence. To date according to the Global Gender Gap Report of 2015, women account for 35 percent of the wage employment in the agriculture sector	and	51	percent	of	women	are	employed	in	the	informal	sector.	In	terms	of	business,	41	percent	of	the	firms	registered	are	owned	by	women	and	they	fully	participate	in	such	firms.	In	terms	of	access	to	land,	the	Namibia	Beijing +20 report (1995-2015) shows that 45 percent of the land rights in communal areas are registered under 
women
Womenis Poverty
Poverty rates among women have dropped from 22 percent in 2010 to 19 percent in 2016. However, 12 percent of female headed households are severely poor. 
Womenis participation in the labour market nUnemployment rate
The labour participation for women is currently at 55 percent compared to 65 percent for men. Womenis unemployment stands at 33.1 
Support for Rural Women and General Empowerment  of Women
There has been improvement in access to support services for rural women and increased participation in decisionmaking processes, due to several laws and policies that remain relevant and continue to address women issues such	as	the	Communal	Land	Reform	Act	(Act	No.	5	of	2002),	which	ensures	that	equity	is	achieved.		
Inheritance Rights and Financial Inclusion of Women
The Married Persons Equality Act (No. 1 of 1996) also provides women married in community of property with equal access to bank loans and equal power to administer joint property and stipulates that immovable property should be registered in both spousesi names.
Female Representation in Decision-Making Bodies and Occupation of Positions of Authority
Namibia	is	doing	well	in	relation	to	other	countries	when	it	comes	to	women	in	leadership	and	influential	positions.	To	date	27	percent	of	privately	owned	firms	have	female	top	managers	and	43	percent	of	parliamentarians	are	women which is an improvement from 25 percent in 2010. In addition in the public sector, women in management position accounts for 43 percent in relation to 57 percent of men. There are currently 22 women Ministers (Ministers and Deputy Ministers). This improvement is attributed to local efforts manifested in the 50/50 representation quota system adopted in the main by the governing party SWAPO across all areas of public representation, including representation at regional and local authorityis levels.
Wellbeing of Women
In general women live to a greater age than men, with a life expectancy of 60 years compared to 58 years for men. 
Statistics	from	the	Global	Gender	Gap	Report	of	2015	shows	that	malnutrition	for	children	under	five	years	of	age	is lower for females at 11.3 percent compared to males at 15.1 percent. Maternal mortality is at 130/100 000. More men tend to die from HIV/AIDS at 158/100 000 compared to women at 138/100 000. The same applies to TB where the death rate stands at 37.5 percent for men and 14.0 percent for women. This situation calls for more increased effort by all actors to address issues of health from a gender perspective, to understand that factors contributing to	disparities	reflected	in	terms	of	effect.	
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Womenis Access to Food (save and secured nutritious food)
Food insecurity affects mainly rural women who depend on rain-fed agriculture given the arid nature of the country.	As	small	holder	farmers,	women	are	mostly	affected	in	terms	of	drought	and	flood	due	to	limited	resilience.	This	affects	their	yield	as	production	decreases,	leading	to	a	food	deficit.	In	terms	of	government	efforts,	the government has put in place three food safety net programmes to provide nutritional needs for vulnerable poor and which are none discriminatory in nature (urban food bank, drought emergency food for rural areas and school feeding for grade 0-7 learners). 
 
Girlsi access to education 
Overall, Namibia has recorded an increase nationally in terms of enrolment of girls at primary school and secondary school levels. The 2013 Education Sector Management Information Report (EMIS) shows that 102 girlis per 100 boys in primary school and 113 girls per 100 boys in secondary school were enrolled, indicating higher enrolment among girls at secondary school level. Enrolment statistics from two tertiary institutions follow the same trend, with an increased female enrolment from (4397 in 2007 to 10389 in 2012-University of Namibia), which records higher than male enrolment at (3137 in 2007 to 6430 in 2012 University of Namibia). Primary education enjoys an enabling policy environment, through which education from Grade 0(pre-primary) to Grade 7 has become free for all since January 2013, and budgetary provisions have been availed in pursuit of this objective.
Even though it is still too early to assess the full impact of the introduction of free primary education, the resultant effect	on	enrolment	shows	significant	milestones	that	could	be	attributed	to	greater	access	to	education.	In	2015, free secondary education was made possible. The Education for All Policy also addresses issues related to accessing	education,	which	specifies	actual	distance	from	home	clusters	to	schools,	ensuring	that	primary	and	secondary schools are built within 5km walking distance. 
 
Girlsi education cycle completion trends ( drop-outs) and levels 
Significant	number	of	girls	still	drop-out	due	to	lack	of	conducive	learning	environments	in	some	remote	schools	where sanitation facilities, long distances from home to school and teenage pregnancy are obstacles to girls completing secondary school level. 
Teenage Pregnancies 
The effect of learner pregnancy is particularly pervasive, despite the implementation of the Sector Policy on the	Prevention	and	Management	of	Learner	Pregnancy	which	encourage	pregnant	girls	and	young	mothers	to	continue their schooling. The teenage pregnancy rate stands at 36 percent among teenagers between 15-19 years (DHS 2013) and is attributed to poverty, lack of sex education, peer pressure, substance abuse, and lack of parental guidance together with limited use of contraceptives and access to family planning services.  
Female Enrolment in Science and Mathematics
Boys/men	still	dominate	enrolment	in	the	traditionally	masculine	fields	which	are	associated	with	better	paying	jobs. Hence the need for consistent efforts to provide opportunities and encouragement of girls to take up such fields,	this	can	be	through	career	fairs,	guidance	in	schools,	scholarships	for	girls	in	science	and	other	fields	of	profession.
Gender-Based Violence against women and girls
Namibia has a high rate of gender based violence (GBV) according to SAFAIDS (http://safaids.net/content/ status-gender-based-violence-namibia). According to records from the Namibia Policy Weekly Crime Bulletins, out	of	16	reported	cases	of	GBV,	the	average	are	five	rape	charges,	one	murder	of	a	partner	and	the	remainder	other forms of GBV in 2015.  The fact that such a high proportion of cases are due to GBV is a matter of concern. 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
The	Legal	Assistance	Centre	report	(LAC	2012)	estimates	one-third	of	all	rape	cases	are	withdrawn.	Considering	that there are approximately 1 600 cases of rape and attempted rape per year, this means that approximately 1 000	victims	of	rape	do	not	have	access	to	justice	each	year.	It	is	estimated	that	only	one	in	five	rape	cases	result	in conviction of the perpetrator.  
Gaps	exist	in	terms	of	inefficient	case	investigations	and	lack	of	necessary	services	to	support	victims	of	rape	and	other forms of GBV. Withdrawal of cases is attributed to family pressure, fear of social isolation, stigma, shame and bribery. Community led initiatives are needed to address the problem involving men as well as duty bearers such as	police	and	court	officials	to	increase	access	to	a	functional	justice	system.
Namibia is operating 15 Woman and Child Protection Units across the country but according to the latest review of poverty and inequality in Namibia (published by the Central Bureau of Statistics in), the average distance from a household	classified	as	\0xEBpoori	to	a	police	station	is	24.1	km.		Laws	and	policies	are	in	place,	such	as	the	Combating	of Rape Act and the Combating of Domestic Violence Act, but high levels of violence against women and girls continue to prevail.
sUMMarY of KeY GaPs
the following summarises the key gender gaps:
\0xEF Unequal access to economic resources for women and men
\0xEF Unequal access to land for women and market access for their produce
\0xEF Weak gender analysis that addresses cultural norms, poverty, and power relations  
\0xEF Lack	of	disaggregated	data	to	inform	programme	planning
\0xEF Teenage pregnancies linked to poverty and lack of resources which affects girls leading to high rates of drop-outs among girls 
\0xEF The country has strong and well-articulated policies, but there are challenges with regard to implementation and	insufficient	capacity	for	government	to	do	so
\0xEF Limited	capacity	to	investigate	and	provide	substantial	evidence	on	GBV	cases
Key interventions supporting sDG 5
strategies and targets amongst others:
strategies for the attainment of the targets
set national targets
1.	Increase	financial	and	human	capacity	of	service	providers in police, justice, security and education for integrated prevention, protection and response services	for	victims	of	GBV,	human	trafficking	and	violence. 
Reduce GBV prevalence rate from 33 percent (2013) to 20 percent by 2022
2. 	Strengthen implementation of gender responsive budgeting and planning to mainstream gender in all sector policies, programmes and budgets of OMAs. 
Improve percentage of women in politics and decision making from 47 percent (2015) to 50 percent by 2022
3. 	Mainstream informal businesses led by women by ensuring	financial	inclusion	for	women	in	MSME,	especially in agri-business, blue economy and extractive industries. 
Increase employment rate of women from 68 percent (2014) to 76 percent by 2022
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 6: ensUre avaiLabiLitY anD sUstainabLe ManaGeMent of Water anD sanitation for aLL
Safe Drinking Water Access 
Namibiais arid climate coupled with high evaporation rate makes it the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa. This has a great impact on water availability and reliability. Water scarcity continues to be a serious constraint in achieving economic, environmental and social development objectives. With highly variable and unpredictable rainy seasons, the priority is given to water for domestic purposes including livestock; and the second priority are water for economic activities such as mining, industries and irrigation. Water demand for 2015 was estimated at about 334.1 million cubic meters per year and is projected to reach 583.4 and 771.7 million cubic meters per year by 2025 and 2030 respectively. Irrigation accounts for about 60 percent of water consumption and will remain the main consumer over the next ten years. Given the trend of migration, urban domestic water demand (including manufacturing and industry) is estimated to increase.
Sanitation 
Water-borne sewerages are the main sanitation system in urban areas of Namibia while dry sanitation system is mainly used in rural areas. Nationally, only 54 percent of the households have access to improved sanitation. The problem is particularly acute in rural areas where only 28 percent of the households have access to improved sanitation	facilities	and	an	alarming	rate	71	percent	of	households	practice	open	defecation.	Low	access	to	improved sanitation constitutes a serious public-health problem. Since 2012, over 3855 sanitation facilities were constructed in all regions, except Khomas, in rural communities at household and public places.
Challenges around Water Accessibility
Aging water infrastructure and the development of the water infrastructure is one of the challenges which need to be addressed urgently. Furthermore, pollution of water courses and groundwater aquifers is a challenge that needs to be prevented to avoid contamination of potable water sources.
The	biggest	challenge	facing	the	country	is	to	make	significant	improvements	in	water	demand	management	and	promote	water	saving	measures	that	influence	changes	in	consumer	behaviour.	There	is	room	to	minimize	water	losses in pipelines, treatment facilities and distribution networks. Namibiais four perennial rivers are located at the borders	with	neighbouring	countries	and	form	part	of	shared	watercourses.	This	makes	it	difficult	for	Namibia	to	fully access the watercourses for its own use.
Moreover,	due	to	the	erratic	rainfall	conditions,	the	river	flow	in	the	countryis	interior	is	irregular	and	unreliable.		For	example, an important part of Namibiais desert ecosystem is a phenomenon known as ephemeral rivers which flow	for	short	periods	of	time	following	severe	rainstorms.	Historically,	these	rivers,	which	have	been	dammed,	have	been able to produce surface water. However, in times of drought, they do not exist at all and neither does their contribution to Namibiais water supply or ecosystem. 
 
Challenges around Sanitation
Amongst the key challenges in the sanitation area is poor coordination, lack of accountability, and spreading efforts and resource too thinly. Furthermore, there is lack of knowledge and understanding of the impact of sanitation on public health, the environment and ultimately to economic development.




iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Entrepreneurship
Namibiais unemployment rate currently stands at 34 percent which increased from 28 percent over the past five	years.	In	an	effort	to	create	employment,	the	Namibian	government	continues	to	invest	in	the	Micro,	Small	and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and to date around 129,500 people are employed in these sectors. The growth of enterprises is currently inhibited by the lack of innovation and creativity owing to the absence of a culture of entrepreneurship and particularly risk averseness. Further SMEs are unable to access the business development services	due	to	lack	of	financing	and	information.	
Youth Empowerment
The Namibian youth constitutes 37 percent of the population; however youth unemployment is still high at 39.2 percent. Because Namibia is currently undergoing a demographic transition, the country has an opportunity for an accelerated economic growth if it can leverage its large number of young workers to help build the economy. In this regard, Namibia developed initiatives such as the youth credit schemes, increased investments in vocational education and training and have also put in place measures that give youth preference in skills development and employment.
The Demographic Dividend 
The Demographic Dividend (DD) Study concludes that the key immediate obstacles to Namibiais opportunity to maximise the full potential of its youthful working-age population are the twin priority challenges of inadequate skilled human capital and job creation. 
The	large	groups	of	youth	joining	the	labour	market	in	the	country	require	to	be	sufficiently	skilled,	yet	the	quality	and relevance of education and skills training they are receiving are not satisfactory. To maximise its DD, Namibia will need to improve the quality of education at all levels, expand access at higher and tertiary levels, and make relevant vocational and skills training attractive for the youth. 
The	economy	also	urgently	requires	a	sustained	diversification	push	in	labour	intensive	sectors	that	can	absorb	the	burgeoning numbers of young people joining the labour market annually. In addition, efforts have to be stepped up to create decent work opportunities for many young adults who have already exited the education and training system yet they are not currently gainfully employed. If this is not done, then their potential to support the socioeconomic development of the nation may go to waste as will the opportunity to maximise the demographic dividend.
Rural Development 
Since the majority of the poor and those that are unemployed live in rural areas, government continues to commit resources	for	rural	economic	development.	Amongst	others,	these	include	rural	electrification	which	currently	stands at 34 percent with government setting itself to reach a target of 50 percent by 2022; expansion of water services to improve access to 100 percent; sanitation to be improved from 28 percent for 2016 in rural areas to 40 percent by 2022; and road infrastructure improvements and resilience building for rural communities. As a particular challenge that not only affects rural economy transformation, access to land remains a challenge. Other challenges are lack of skills and recently reduced capital expenditure by government. 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Key interventions supporting sDG 8, amongst others:
strategies for the attainment of the targets
set national targets
1. Increase manufacturing and value addition: 
2. Creating Value-Chains of production. 
3. Import Substitution for agro-processed goods. 
4. Improve labour productivity 
5. Develop a Comprehensive Economic Incentives Framework
Improve manufacturing sector GDP from N$17.8 billion (2016) to N$ 20.6 billion by 2022
6. 	Create a conducive business environment. 
Reduce number of days to start a business from 66 (2016)	to	five	by	2022
7.	Optimizing	and	Securing	sufficient	and	available Policy tools: 
Improve percentage of MSME contribution to GDP from 
12.0 percent (2014) to19.9 percent by 2022
8. 	Accelerate SME Development 
Improve MSME employment contribution (micro  and small) from 129 500 (2014) to 177 600 by 2022
9. 	Enhance collaboration 
Improve Real GDP growth rate from 0.2 percent (2016) to 6.2 percent by 2022
10. Market access of local goods 
Reduce unemployment rate from 28 percent  (2014) to 24 percent by 2022
11. 	Improve	access	to	financing	for	entrepreneurs
Improve percentage of manufacturing and non-
government services contribution to GDP from 45 percent 
(2016) to 60 percent by 2022
sDG 9: bUiLD resiLient infrastrUCtUre, ProMote inCLUsive anD sUstainabLe inDUstriaLiZation anD foster innovation
Industrialization
Manufacturing activities in Namibia remain highly dependent on inputs from the primary industries. The whole sector contributes just about 11 percent of GDP. The sector contracted by an average of 1.4 percent during the closing	five	years	of	the	MDGs	and	there	was	a	contraction	of	about	2	percent	in	manufacturing	products	exports	over the 2012-2015 period. 
Diversification	of	Economy		
In order to break out of the middle income trap, Namibia needs to diversify its economy while also producing a diverse range of exports at increasingly high levels of sophistication. In this regard, critical to structural transformation,	are	aspects	of	diversification,	sophistication	of	exports,	and	not	least	good	governance	that	projects a sound investment climate and business environment.
Research and Innovation
In terms of innovation, Namibia has made progress in expanding its research and innovation system since the early 1990s. The Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) as a percentage of GDP has grown from below 0.02 percent in the 1990s to 0.35 percent in 2016. The human resources base for R&D and innovation in the country has grown to about 750 full-time equivalent personnel in R&D of which about 350 are full-time equivalent researchers. The country has increased the number of trademark registrations, patent applications and registrations, and industrial design registrations since the beginning of the 2000s from one patent in 2004 to eight patents in 2014.


iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 10:  reDUCe ineQUaLitY WitHin anD aMonG CoUntries
The Republic of Namibia recognizes the role that social protection plays in wealth and income redistribution. Namibia has several 100 percent state-funded protection systems ranging from grants to none-grants safety nets, all of which have a direct positive impact on inequality and empowering the most vulnerable to transform their lives. 
To date 17.3 percent of Namibians depend on social protection, and without it, poverty levels could have been higher than the current 17.4 percent. In addition, there are several economic transformative policies and programmes that Namibia has put in place to ensure equal access to economic resources. Namibia continues to invest resources to ensure that the community is more resilient to climate change; this is more particular to the largest employing sector in the country which is agriculture.  
Rural/urban divide
Inequality remains a challenge and its impact is more in rural areas as compared to urban areas. The larger segments of the affected population which includes rural women, the elderly, uneducated youth and the minority groups are mainly in rural areas. This is mainly due to skewed development, where the urban areas are the most developed when compared to rural areas.  
Inequalities  within and between communities
On comparison, even though as mentioned earlier, rural communities are more affected by poverty, minority groups (i.e.San, Ovatue, and Ovatjimba) still remain the most affected.
Gini	Coefficient 
With	a	Gini	Coefficient	of	0.56,	Namibia	remains	one	of	the	most	unequal	societies.	These	high	levels	of	inequality	could largely be attributed to the structure of our economy which, as anchored on the capital-intensive extractive sectors (whose ownership and control strongly remains foreign-based), continues to induce jobless growth, and thus consequently fails to evenly distribute wealth across the broad spectrum of society. 
Access to basic services (including coverage of social protection system) by the marginalized Communities 
Whilst massive public investments in education and health services provided year-to-year-on-count increased, this	has	not	yielded	commensurate	benefits	in	terms	of	improved	outcomes	in	these	key	social	sectors.	For	instance, about 55.4 percent of the San population has not attended formal education at all, thus, are unable to read. Being without abilities to read could negatively impact their access to other basic services, such as having a national identity document (with correct age and information) that is necessary to make them for example eligible to receive social pension for old age or other social protection measures in times of need.   
Structure of the economy and rigidity that inhibits it from creating employment for the poor
Besides that, the mainstream structure of the economy remains centrally anchored on the capital intensive extractive sectors which only cater for a minority. Despite supporting some of the vulnerable groups through employment to generate incomes through jobs, it is limited (less than 3 percent).  Women, the poor, unemployed graduates/ youth (men and women), the marginalized and those living in rural areas remain vulnerable in terms of high social inequalities and inequities. 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Corrective Policies and Programmes
Namibia legislation enables the negative discrimination on the basis of gender, previously disadvantaged, marginalized,	and	vulnerability.	There	are	specific	strategies	and	policies	to	redress	the	social,	economic	and	environmental inequities which cut across many levels of society. Economic enabling frameworks such as the proposed	New	Equitable	Economic	Empowerment	Framework	NEEEF	;	the	Affirmative	Action	Loan	Scheme	(AALS)	for agricultural farmers in commercial and resettled areas; the zebra (i.e. 50/50) political listing, the free education to enable all children to have equal access to education at both primary and secondary levels are all directed at redressing the inequalities. 
However, there is a need for increasing targeting of those being left behind. These include the CBNRM enabling access	for	those	who	suffer	losses	from	human	wildlife	conflict,	and	to	benefit	from	initiatives	such	as	joint	venture/ concessions	or	trophy	hunting	in	conservancies;	and	the	Access	Benefit	Sharing	to	enable	use	and	benefits	to	accrue to those with longevity and generational attributes with a focus on prior informed consent. These and other initiatives also aimed at redressing the imbalances have not been adequate in reaching out. Hence, there is a need	to	apply	the	SDG	frameworks	of	LNOB	nationally	and	at	regional	level	where	the	inequities	are	more	clear,	based on data available. 
Challenges 
Despite the proposed interventions, there are other several interlinked challenges that also need targeted interventions to ensure that SDG 9 and 10 are achieved without leaving anyone behind. These are: access to productive assets; capital; land; and skills which has a negative impact on the prospcts of youth to obtain employment thereby disempowering them and making them feel left behind. As there is a direct link between the goals, youth are particularly exposed to high risky behaviour and have been impacted by high teenage pregnancies (girls are most vulnerable due to the productive roles). This makes the youth-adult dynamics particularly challenging as the former may lead to social issues that can impinge progress made on reducing inequality,  poverty and prosperity later in life. 
sDG 11: MaKe Cities anD HUMan settLeMents inCLUsive, safe, resiLient anD sUstainabLe
Housing and Serviced Plots 
The lack of housing remains an issue in Namibia. There is a scarcity of serviced municipal land and consequently high prices are charged for property in urban areas. In 2016, 19 percent of households lived in informal settlements. Provision of housing provision is more concentrated on urban areas which has resulted in an urban-rural imbalance. 
 
The housing sector in Namibia could be categorized into three market segments, namely: low-income; middleincome and the upper-class upper-income sector. The low and lower-middle earners earn less than N$4,600 per annum and constitute the income groups that are hardest hit by housing shortages. These groups do not qualify for	housing	loans	due	to	a	lack	of	collateral	and	low	disposable	income	and	are	thus	ideally	suited	to	benefit	from	low-cost/ affordable and adequate housing.
Namibia still has a long way to go in achieving sustainable housing. Since access is affected by the high prices of houses in urban areas, more still needs to be done to ensure that housing is more affordable for the majority of the poor. Additionally, the concept of \0xECgreen or eco-friendly housing needs to be encouraged in order to promote selfsustained houses. The use of solar energy for heating and electricity will help to reduce the pressure on imported energy and in turn reduce the cost associated with housing services in towns and cities.  


iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 13: taKe UrGent aCtion to CoMbat CLiMate CHanGe anD its iMPaCts
Arid Climatic Conditions of Namibia
Namibia is one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Climate variability over the medium and long term	is	likely	to	further	reduce	the	productivity	of	agricultural	land,	fisheries,	and	forestry	and	threatens	the	growth	of the tourism sector.
Management of Human Activities for environmental preservation and conversation : EIAs
In terms of managing human activities which could adversely impact the environment and trigger negative change in our climate, there has in recent years been an increase in the demand for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs). Approximately 322 EIAs were processed in 2015/6 compared to merely 120 in 2012/13. There is unfortunately limited capacity in place to enforce and inspect adherence to Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), with 57 percent compliance currently. With industrialization on the increase and towns growing faster than ever before, the management of waste and pollution has become a serious concern. 
Climate change presents Namibia with an incentive to move towards low-carbon and climate-resilient development. This transition must include the sectors of energy, transport, industrial production, agriculture, water and waste management.  
High Propensity for Natural Disasters 
Namibia	is	prone	to	floods,	droughts,	veldt	fires,	and	disease	outbreaks.	These	have	had	adverse	effects	on	the	communities, the economy, infrastructure and the environment, as well as the development priorities of the country. Between 1992 and 2004 the country experienced at least 12 events of natural disasters, while between 2009 and 
2015	there	has	been	at	least	two	major	flood	events	and	three	years	of	continues	drought,	resulting	in	increasing	food	insecurity,	displaced	population,	malnutrition	and	entrenched	poverty.	Hazards	such	as	floods,	drought	and	desertification	are	hampering	progress	in	human	development.	
The net result of these crises is that limited resources intended for development have to be diverted to disaster response, which delays planned developmental programmes. There are ongoing efforts on the part of the government to identify durable solutions to the socio-economic challenges faced by communities including disasters.		Specifically	to	disaster	risk	reduction,	the	government	has	led	the	development	of	various	instruments	including: The National Disaster Risk Management Act (2012) and associated Regulations set up the national DRM system in Namibia.
Remedial Measures and Adaptation Strategies
All these initiatives are expected to help guide and lead disaster risk reduction and management in the country. The National Policy for Disaster Risk Management in Namibia (2009) clearly states that there is a paradigm shift from the culture of responding to disasters after they have occurred. Instead, a holistic approach to disaster risk management is being promoted aimed at reducing the impacts of natural disasters and increase resilience thereto. In Namibia all spheres of public service acknowledge that the impact of some emergencies could be particularly severe or widespread and exceed the capability of a single sector, region or municipality.
Namibiais disaster risk management systems (NDRMS) brings together the efforts of government, development partners, private and civil society organizations and agencies to deliver coordinated disaster risk management across all hazards. It takes into account all the phases of disaster management from prevention through to recovery. This is a marked shift from the traditional approach to disasters which had focused mostly on disaster response.
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
strategies and targets for sDG 13, amongst others:
strategies for the attainment of the targets
set national targets
1. Strengthen environmental protection. 
2. Promote environmentally-sound investments and production systems
3. Enhance preparedness for effective response, recovery, and reconstruction to disasters
4. Promotion of planting of drought resistance crop varieties
Improve Greenhouse gas emissions (30 percent reduction against BAU projection) from 5,240 (Gg CO2 eq) (2015) to 8,708 (12,441 (BAU scenario) by 2022
Improve Number of approved waste disposal sites as per the Environmental Management Act from 0 (2015) to 15 by 2022
Improve percentage of adherence to Environmental Management Plans from 57 percent (2015) to 80 percent by 2022
Improve Revenue generated from environmental levies for reinvestment in environmental protection  from 0 
(2015) to N$ 160 million by 2022
sDG 14: Conserve anD sUstainabLY Use tHe oCeans, seas anD Marine resoUrCes for sUstainabLe DeveLoPMent
Ocean Fish Stocks
The	fisheries	sector	is	the	third	largest	earner	after	mining	and	tourism	and	contributes	about	15	percent	of	the	total exports. The annual marine landings of about 550,000 Metric Tonnes MT) valued at an average of N$10 billion 
(about	U$800	million)	rank	Namibia	as	the	nation	with	third	largest	fishery	capture	in	Africa,	after	Morocco	and	South	Africa,	and	30th	worldwide.	About	16,300	people	are	directly	employed	in	the	fishing	sector	while	others	are	indirectly	employed	in	related	activities	such	as	stevedoring	services,	fisheries-related	supplies	and	logistics.	Fisheries also constitute a vital component of domestic food security by providing a source of protein.
Namibiais share of the South Atlantic Ocean provides valuable goods and services. The Blue Economy is an important	resource	for	Namibia	and	includes	key	industries	and	resources	such	as	fisheries	and	aquaculture,	water	resources, shipping and transport, tourism, marine renewable energy, minerals genetic resources, pharmaceutical, blue carbon trading, biotechnology and general sea based products. 
Exclusive Economic Zones 
Namibiais	territorial	waters	and	its	Exclusive	Economic	Zones	(EEZ)	can	significantly	contribute	to	its	economic	transformation	agenda.	This	is	particularly	important	because	Namibiais	EEZ	could	be	enlarged	significantly	based on the countryis submission of an application to the United Nations through the United Nations Convention of	the	Law	of	the	Sea	(UNCLOS)	for	the	extension	of	its	continental	shelf.	In	order	to	capitalize	on	the	potential	of the blue economy it is essential to create a governance framework that strengthens linkages and minimizes conflict	between	fisheries,	transport,	environment,	mining,	tourism,	and	logistics	since	they	all	operate	in	the	same	coastal area. 
Management of Marine Resources
Namibia has put into place regulations and strategies to ensure the sustainable use of marine resources. These include	the	introduction	of	fishing	quotas	to	control	the	amount	of	fish	catchable	at	any	given	time,	the	control	of	


iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 15: ProteCt, restore anD ProMote sUstainabLe Use of terrestriaL eCosYsteMs, sUstainabLY ManaGe forests, CoMbat DesertifiCation, anD HaLt anD reverse LanD DeGraDation anD HaLt bioDiversitY Loss
Community wildlife conservation 
Namibia continues to champion high levels of community participation in the management of her natural resources, which has led to an increase of communal conservancies from 66 in 2012 to 82 in 2016, covering over 54 percent of communal land.  Community conservation generated approximately N$91.2 million for local communities	and	has	facilitated	the	creation	of	5,808	jobs	in	2014,	benefiting	about	170,000	local	community	members. 
Preservation of Community Forests
Community forests (CFs) on the other hand cover a total area of 3 019 592 ha.  Namibia has thus far gazetted 32 community forests covering mainly the northern communal areas with another nine to be gazetted in the near	future	covering	a	total	area	of	1	902	434	ha.		About	160	000	people	are	benefitting	from	the	forest	resources	which they are managing through the Community Forest Management Bodies. The communities in CFs generated income	through	issuing	permits,	selling	of	poles,	droppers,	thatch	grass,	seedlings,	wood	carvings,	firewood	and	devils claw. In total N$ 1 306 031.00 was collected in all community forests that participated in income generation activities.   
Freshwater	fisheries
Namibiais	freshwater	fisheries	have	the	potential	to	generate	5,000	tonnes	of	high	quality	protein	a	year	through	sustainable	fisheries	management.	In	addition,	healthy	fish	stocks	in	the	northern	rivers	of	the	country	contribute	to	ecosystem	functioning	and	biodiversity	conservation.	However,	there	has	been	a	collapse	of	the	inland	fisheries	of	the	Zambezi	and	Chobe	Rivers	due	to	overharvesting	and	commercial	fishing.
Wildlife Threats: Poaching and Human-Beastsi Interaction
Poaching,	human-wildlife-conflicts	and	the	unsustainable	utilization	of	natural	resources	remain	threatening	to	environmental sustainability.  
Wildfires	
Namibiais	wild	fires	are	directly	linked	to	the	amount	of	rain	received	for	a	specific	year.		The	total	area	burnt	during 2015 vs 2016 has reduced from 2 689 883 ha to only 762 320 ha.  The main contributing factor for this enormous reduction of 352.8 percent was the drought Namibia has experienced during the 2015/16 rainy season. The	incidences	of	unwanted	fires	was	addressed	through	fire	management	practices	such	as	establishment	of	fire	breaks	(3568	km	of	firebreaks	cleared	and	maintained),	establishment	and	training	of	community-based	fire	management	units,	and	acquiring	of	firefighting	equipment.		
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Key interventions supporting sDG 15
strategies and targets, amongst others:
strategies for attaining the targets
set national targets
1. Strengthen sustainable land management 
2. Safeguard ecosystems, species and genetic diversity
3. Enhance value addition and the sustainable utilization of biodiversity
4. Sustained natural environmental awareness campaigns
Annual revenue generated from protected areas and CBNRM programme from N$147.4 million (2014) to N$296.3 million by 2022
Percentage reduction in cases of poaching from 27 percent to 5 percent by 2022
Total	area	burned	by	veld	fires	reduced	from	3.7	Mil	ha (2015) to 1.3 by 2022
5. Strengthen environmental protection 
6. Promote environmentally-sound investments and production systems
Percentage adherence to Environmental 
Management Plans from 57 percent (2015) to 80 percent by 2022
sDG 16: ProMote PeaCefUL anD inCLUsive soCieties for sUstainabLe DeveLoPMent, ProviDe aCCess to JUstiCe for aLL anD bUiLD effeCtive, aCCoUntabLe anD inCLUsive institUtions at aLL LeveLs
Peace through regular and credible elections cycles for democratic governance
Over the last 26 years the country has maintained peace, stability and the rule of law. All elections were declared free and fair. The 2016 Global Peace Index ranked Namibia 55 out of 163 countries in the world. Namibia is a multiparty democracy holding regular and credible elections which, through a system of proportional representation, ensures that minority political parties are amply represented in the national Parliament. Namibia ranked eight out of 44 nations	in	sub-Saharan	Africa,	and	second	among	the	five	nations	in	the	South	African	Customs	Union.	
Rule of law
In terms of rule of law, Namibiais score has improved on the Ibrahim Index of Africa Governance from a score of 81 in 2012 to a score of 83.9 in 2016. This places it as the nation with 5th highest score in good governance out 54 African nations. 
Amongst the key challenges is the low case docket clearance rate that has led to an increase of backlog of criminal cases. Further, there are inadequate offender and victim rehabilitation programs leading to high rates of re-offences.
Accountability and Transparency 
In terms of Accountability and Transparency, Namibia has a free press. The international organization Freedom House awarded Namibia the status of \0xEBfreei with a score of 77 out of 100 on the 2016 Freedom on the World Index. Namibia is recognized as the third most transparent country in Africa and ranks 53 out of 176 countries on Transparency Internationalis 2016 Corruption Perception Index. Nevertheless, there is a perception among many citizens of continuing government corruption. In 2015, 65 percent of Namibians surveyed expressed the opinion that	the	government	was	doing	badly	in	fighting	corruption,	while	34	percent	felt	that	government	was	doing	well.
Strong Institutions for public service performance and delivery
As regards strong institutions for public service performance and service delivery, the Namibian public service, due to a high concentration of authority at the centre, is suboptimal for speed and accuracy of service delivery.
 
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
Inclusive Democratic Governance
Notwithstanding the above successes, there is moreover need for expedited decentralization to enable the devolution	of	functions	from	central	government	to	Regional	and	Local	authorities.	This	will	enhance	participatory	democracy, sustainable development, and the capacity of regional and local government councils to manage and monitor delivery of services for their constituencies.
strategies for the attainment of the targets
set national targets
1. Strengthen Anti-Corruption Measures 
2. Strengthen public sector auditing by aligning autonomous legal framework to the State Finance Act. 
3. Strengthen corporate governance for Public Enterprises (PEs) 
4. Strengthen the Monitoring and Evaluation System
Improve reduction of corruption perception (percentage) from 65 percent (2015) to 20 percent by 20 22 Improve percentage PE Compliance to Governance 
Framework from 15 percent (2015) to 70 percent by 2022
Improve percentage PE Performance Improvement from 10 percent (2015) to 35 percent by 2022
Improve transparency international index (score) from 53 (2015) to 65 by 2022
5. Encourage a \0xECservice mentality in the public service sector. 
6. Reduce overlapping roles in the public sector by	streamlining	it	for	organizational	efficiency.	
7. Ensure that key information about public services is available online. 
8. Annual customer satisfaction survey by business community: 
9. Empower and Build Capacity in Regional and Local	Authorities	
10. Design and implement a Decentralization Implementation Plan 
Number of decentralized functions from 11 (2015) to 39 by 2022
Improve citizen public service delivery satisfaction rate from 50 percent (2015) to 70 percent by 2022
11. Creating dedicated statistics units 
12. Develop national infrastructure for statistics and spatial data 
13. Enhance statistical capacity 
14. Improve planning, production and reporting 
of statistics 
Improve World Bank Capacity Indicator from 58.9 percent 
(2016) to 90 percent by 2022
Improve percentage of OMAs with a dedicated 
Department of Statistics from 26 percent (2016) to 100 percent by 2022
Improve data user satisfaction level  from 78 percent 
(2016) to 98 percent by 2022
 
further strategies includes:
\0xEF Strengthening anti-corruption measures by educating all stakeholders on the prevention and reporting of corruption.	Strengthening	public	sector	audit	by	aligning	the	autonomous	Legal	Framework	to	the	State	Finance	Act	to	ensure	that	the	AG	Office	has	the	capacity	to	deliver	audit	reports	and	hold	departments	to	account for no-compliance
\0xEF As	regards	the	rule	of	law	and	specifically	re-offence	rate,	which	is	worryingly	high,	there	are	concerted	efforts	promoting multi-focused rehabilitation services and the development of adequate offender and victim mediation programs through the expansion of reintegration services and policy frameworks development 
\0xEF As regards Public Service Performance and Service Delivery, there are efforts aimed at reducing overlapping roles	through	streamlining	for	organizational	efficiency	
\0xEF Through online-service, greater accessibility and convenience for the citizenry seeking public service is being given due consideration
\0xEF Building	the	capacity	of	Regional	and	Local	Authorities	is	very	important	to	service	delivery	and	critical	to	the	delivery of decentralization of key functions to all 14 political regions and their respective governing structures
iMPLeMentation of sDGs
sDG 17: strenGtHen tHe Means of iMPLeMentation anD revitaLiZe tHe GLobaL PartnersHiP for sUstainabLe DeveLoPMent
Implementation of Agenda 2030 at home
Namibia has domesticated Agenda 2030 in its development documents and as such results are tracked in terms of indicators and targets. A National Indicator Framework is being developed in this regard with a baseline report mapping the status of the indicators mapped. This will provide the basis for monitoring and measuring of progress on the implementation of the national programmes which encompass the SDGs. This means that the strengthening of the statistical system is key, for which Namibia continues to commit resources. This will ensure the regular monitoring and collection of data on the indicators mapped, to provide accurate updates on the status of implementation in relation to the SDGs.
An already existing national development coordination mechanism has been adopted for effective implementation of development programmes, including but not limited to the implementation of the SDGs. Namibia is a signatory to the Paris Declaration since 2007 which compels it to advance effectiveness of development efforts. This will be accomplished based on the principles of ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results, and mutual accountability.
Challenges
There is a general society-wide phobia for data (low levels of numeracy) that limit data usage among planners, decision-makers, and legislators. Furthermore, inadequate infrastructure and resources for statistical production affects timely production of statistics. There is further limited usage of administrative data as they do not meet the	requirement	for	data	soundness	and	\0xEBfit-for-purpose.i	Coordination	still	remains	a	challenge	as	reflected	in	the	fragmentation of government programmes.
Accurate and Reliable Data/Statistics Development
In terms of the state of Namibian statistics, as measured by the World Bank Statistics Capacity Indicator, in spite of the establishment of a statutory body dedicated to statistics and massive public investment there has not been any improvement since 2005. According to the said World Bank Indicator Namibiais average score for the past 13 years is 55.1% with the minimum of 47% in 2015 and maximum of 58.9% in 2004, 2005, 2007 and 2016. Not only is Namibiais score on that Indicator low and lower than the average score for Sub-Saharan Africa, but has been declining over the period. 
This low score is largely due to inadequate development of administrative data in sectors. Such a national state of affairs does not augur well for informing evidence-based policy, planning, decision-making, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national development plans, programs and projects at every level.
Global Partnership(s) for 2030
Namibia	aims	to	strengthen	access	to	available	global	resources	through	non-financial	sources	such	as	SouthSouth and North-South cooperation mainly for skills, knowledge and technology transfers, drawing from technology banks and personnel experiences. The country has established institutions and infrastructure through which it can access and adapt to such technology. These include the National Council on Technology, the University of Namibiais Centre for Innovation, the Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST), and a number of other local institutions of higher learning.
