NEW ZEALAND’S APPROACH 
TO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GLOBALLY IS A CRITICAL CHALLENGE FACING ALL OF US.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development serves as our collective blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. It challenges us to get serious about delivering an integrated and balanced social, economic and environmental agenda. 
New Zealand is contributing to achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through a combination of domestic action, international leadership on global issues and support for developing countries. Achievement requires a whole of government effort, working alongside the private sector and civil society.
This is our first Voluntary National Review on our implementation of the SDGs. We have chosen to address those aspects of the 2030 Agenda most relevant to New Zealand. The report captures our current initiatives and high level plans, and reflects our commitment to productive, sustainable and inclusive development as a country and as a global partner. We intend to provide a foundation for future national reporting to build on. REDEFINING SUCCESS
New Zealand’s policy direction is influenced by our position as a small independent Pacific country, deeply engaged in our region and the world. We are a nation of explorers and adventurers, and have been since the first waka reached our shores. We are agile and adaptable with a mind-set that enables us to be innovative in the face of new challenges. 
As a people we highly value our egalitarian society. But we know that despite our developed status, there are New Zealanders who struggle to achieve a decent level of wellbeing. Our success as a nation rests on far more than just economic indicators.
We are therefore taking a new approach. We are redefining what success looks  like by putting the wellbeing of all New Zealanders at the centre of everything we do. 
 
Our approach takes into account New Zealand’s unique characteristics, including the relationship between the Crown and Māori as tangata whenua. It builds on our national values, our collective responsibilities as kaitiaki of our environment and the international reputation we are proud of. TREATY OF WAITANGI
New Zealand is founded on a partnership between Māori, the tangata whenua or indigenous people of New Zealand, and the Crown (or government). In 1840 a founding constitutional document, Te Tiriti o Waitangi (the Treaty of Waitangi), was signed. The intent was to formalise an enduring partnership between Māori and the Crown. The Treaty encompasses both individual and collective rights and provides a framework for the State to promote, protect and respect indigenous rights.
The Treaty of Waitangi was signed in good faith by representatives of the British Crown and by many Māori Chiefs on behalf of their people. The Crown intended Māori to be treated fairly and honourably, particularly in the course of land transactions. However, Māori suffered greatly through the process of colonisation and the government now acknowledges that since 1840 it has breached its duties under the Treaty and has accepted a moral obligation to resolve Māori historical grievances.
Today the distinct and special status of Māori as tangata whenua is of profound importance to New Zealand and fundamental to our identity as a nation. The Treaty is recognised as a foundational document of New Zealand that has significant constitutional, historical and ongoing importance. It belongs to all New Zealanders and is a source of both individual and collective rights of Māori.
A JUST TRANSITION
Ensuring a just transition is about how we transform our economy to one that is productive, sustainable and inclusive. It is about creating new opportunities, new jobs, new skills and new investments. It is also about building an understanding of potential pathways to transform the New Zealand economy and how the impacts of the transition will be distributed across the economy. A just transition requires working alongside communities, regions and sectors to make choices about how we manage the pace and impacts of change in a fair and inclusive way. 
Achieving a just transition is a long-term process. To be successful it will require managing the pace and timing of change with a mix of policies, government support and commitment to social dialogue at multiple levels. The work of the government and its social partners will need to be underpinned by a deep understanding of which groups in our society will face the most significant challenges and the likely nature of those challenges. The government will work with sectors and communities to empower them to develop strategies for anticipating and responding to opportunities and challenges from transitions. 
PRODUCTIVITY 
New Zealand wants to be a leader and constructive partner, both nationally and internationally, in the transformation to a modern and sustainable economy. Our direction moves us away from a simple focus on Gross Domestic Product (GDP), to incorporate environmental and social factors as well as economic indicators. 
Our vision, to improve the wellbeing and living standards of New Zealanders 
7

through building a productive, sustainable and inclusive economy, echoes the objectives of the SDGs. We are embedding our wellbeing focus into our policy thinking to ensure that the direction of all government policy is consistent. This means thinking holistically about how policies and programmes impact each other and contribute to our overall objectives. To deliver higher living standards for New Zealanders, we are working to overcome some significant challenges to productivity, sustainability and inclusiveness. Productivity is a key driver of economic performance, higher wages and higher living standards. 
We are at the beginning of a period of significant change that will impact on our economy, now and for decades to come. These changes include things like our demographics, technology, the sharing economy and climate change. We also need to respond to changing financial and trade policies of major economies around the world. To meet the challenges and take the opportunities of a rapidly changing world we need to support workers and businesses to be inclusive, resilient and adaptable.
Internationally, we cooperate with partners to create conditions that enable all countries to prosper. We are committed to development cooperation that embeds the principles of the 2030 Agenda. We work for sustainable and inclusive growth globally, including through strengthened economic governance and stability. 
INCLUSIVITY 
The wellbeing of people and communities is at the centre of New Zealand’s vision. We are committed to delivering equitable outcomes and enabling current and future generations to achieve higher living standards. We are determined to make New Zealand the best place in the world to be a child and to build healthier, safer and more connected communities. Economic growth and social inclusion are interdependent. We are determined to grow and share more fairly New Zealand’s prosperity. All New Zealanders should have equal opportunities to participate in our economy. We will reduce the barriers to participation and support people and businesses to take advantage of the opportunities available. We will ensure everyone who is able to is earning, learning, caring or volunteering.
We recognise that there is disparity in outcomes for New Zealanders, particularly for Māori, Pacific peoples and women. We are committed to ensuring that all New Zealanders benefit from growth, now and in future generations.
SUSTAINABILITY 
Our natural capital, or natural resource base, is woven into the fabric of every New Zealander’s health and wellbeing, the country’s brand and Te Ao Māori. Our land, forests, waterways and oceans are the foundation of our economy. 
New Zealand is in the process of transitioning to a cleaner, greener, carbon neutral country. We must progressively reverse environmental damage and support the economy to be more sustainable through smart use of technology, education, regulation, investment and pricing. We must be resilient and able to respond to shock events and emerging stresses.
GLOBAL PARTNERSHIPS
New Zealand seeks a peaceful world in which all people live with dignity and safety, all countries can prosper and our shared environment is protected. We cooperate to advance that goal globally. We work to strengthen international rules and institutions including those relating to economic success, environmental protection and natural resource management. We work to strengthen the contribution of trade to inclusive and sustainable development. We have increased our aid and we target this to countries most in need, particularly Small Island Developing States and Least Developed Countries.
We focus our contribution on the Pacific where we have deepened our partnerships and direct 60 percent of our aid. Alongside strong market access, we have committed to provide 20 percent of our Official Development Assistance as Aid-for-Trade in the Pacific with the aim of improving two-way trade, Pacific prosperity and economic resilience. We have increased our commitment to climate related financing to $300 million through to 2022. This will include a focus on adaptation to the impacts of climate change, in line with Pacific partner priorities. 
OUR SUSTAINABLE FUTURE
New Zealand is driving transformation through collaboration and partnerships between local and central government, businesses, workers and unions, rural and urban communities and iwi, as well as with international partners. It is essential that participation across sectors, communities and agencies is developed and deepened. 
We want to build a solid and enduring foundation to achieve a more productive, sustainable and inclusive society. Every step counts. We look forward to taking ever greater strides towards improving the wellbeing of all New Zealanders, especially the most vulnerable, and to the delivery of the SDGs.
PACIFIC WELLBEING
Pacific Aotearoa talanoa with more than 2,500 Pacific people living in New Zealand have identified what wellbeing means for Pacific peoples today and for the future. These talanoa highlighted Pacific identities, languages and cultures; economic development and income; health and wellness; and intergenerational opportunities for youth as key priority areas. 
This has provided the basis to develop the Pacific Aotearoa vision for Pacific peoples: ‘Pacific values are our anchor, with each generation weaving the foundation for the next to stand on. Pacific communities are leading innovations within Aotearoa, the Pacific region and the world. We are confident in our endeavours, we are thriving, resilient and prosperous Pacific Aotearoa.’
Pacific Aotearoa places the aspirations of Pacific peoples at the centre of thinking and decision making. It recognises their leadership role and strengths to drive change from within, and for, their own communities. It is fundamental that Pacific values inform how initiatives are developed. Relationships must be effective in a Pacific community setting. This vision provides insight to tailor initiatives to ensure they resonate with and are impactful for Pacific communities. 
 
9

LIVING STANDARDS FRAMEWORK AND 
INDICATORS AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND
NEW ZEALAND’S APPROACH TO ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IS BROAD, INTEGRATED AND HOLISTIC. IT IS FOCUSED ON IMPROVING THE WELLBEING AND LIVING STANDARDS OF ALL NEW ZEALANDERS.

Our conceptualisation of sustainable development is consistent with the spirit of the 2030 Agenda, which outlines a series of interconnected goals that are people-centred and encompass a wide variety of issues affecting the wellbeing of our planet and all of humanity. 
We are redefining what success means for New Zealand. We believe that to be successful we need to build a productive, sustainable and inclusive economy, which improves the wellbeing and living standards of all New Zealanders. To this end, the New Zealand Treasury, the government’s lead economic and financial adviser, has developed a Living Standards Framework (LSF) to improve the depth, breadth and quality of policy development concerning living standards. 
The Living Standards Framework is a high level framework that emphasises the diversity of outcomes meaningful for New Zealanders, and helps the Treasury to analyse, measure and compare those outcomes through a wide and evolving set of indicators. The framework covers current wellbeing, future wellbeing and risk and resilience across a range of economic, social and environmental indicators. Distribution is important across all these three concepts.
Within current wellbeing, 12 domains reflect wellbeing at a ‘point in time’. Four capitals – natural, human, social, and financial and physical – are the assets that generate wellbeing now and into the future. New Zealand’s capital stocks include our people’s skills, knowledge, and physical and mental health; our natural environment; our social connections, communities and institutions; and the buildings, machines and other physical assets that support material living conditions. Links can be drawn between the LSF current domains of wellbeing and future capital stocks and the SDGs.
11

New Zealand’s impact on the rest of the world. The indicators build on international best practice, and have been tailored to a New Zealand context by incorporating topics such as culture, identity, land and waste. New Zealand’s official statistics agency is partnering with Māori to further develop the set of indicators based on concepts of wellbeing from a Te Ao Māori perspective. 
This suite of indicators was developed through broad and inclusive public consultation. It included input from subject matter experts across many sectors, including government, nongovernment organisations, academia, business and international wellbeing experts – all of which fed into recommendations on the indicator set. To the extent possible, the wellbeing indicators will be disaggregated to track the progress of different groups within the population. 
Indicators Aotearoa New Zealand will function as the data source that underpins government analytical frameworks and decision making. This includes supporting New Zealand’s reporting on progress on the SDGs. 
The indicators will support government strategic direction and provide the information needed to guide priorities and improve the wellbeing of all New Zealanders. The indicators will also enable local government, businesses, civil society and communities and individuals to make informed choices on wellbeing and sustainability. 
The first cut of the indicators will be released in late June 2019. It is intended that the Treasury will draw indicators and data from the indicator suite for the Living Standards Framework. More information on Indicators Aotearoa New Zealand can be found at www.wellbeingindicators.stats.govt.nz. 
 Child poverty  Low income  
 Homelessness 
 Costs of extreme weather events 
   Soil health  Productive land  Access to safe water for recreation and food gathering 
 Efficiency of land use  Land assets 
 Cultural ecosystem services 
   Provisioning ecosystem services  Active stewardship of land  Net greenhouse gas emissions  Biodiversity/native species
 Health expectancy  Health equity 
 Mental health status  Amenable mortality 
   Self-reported health status  Spiritual health Suicide  Injury prevalence  Illness attributable to air quality  Overcrowding 
   Core competencies  Early childhood education  Educational attainment 
   Education equity  Literacy, numeracy and science skills of 15-year olds Intergenerational transfer of knowledge
 Value of unpaid work  Domestic violence 
 Experience of discrimination 
   Income inequality  Net worth  Low income  Justice equity  Inequality of education outcomes  Health equity
   Drinking water quality  Access to safe water for recreation and food gathering 
   Quality of water resources  Stock of freshwater resources  Water stress 
   Waste flows into waterways and coastal marine environments  Material intensity, 
including recycling, land fill inflows, second hand 
economy
 Energy intensity  Energy resources 
 Renewable energy  Energy consumption
 Employment rate  Hourly earnings  
   Job satisfaction  Job strain  Not in employment, education or training 
 Unemployment  Work/life balance 
 Infrastructure  Resilience of infrastructure 
 Modified land  Commuting time to work 
 Costs of extreme weather events  Gross greenhouse gas emissions  Material intensity, 
including recycling, landfill inflows, second-hand 
economy  Net fixed assets   Workplace accidents  Official development assistance  Consumption of net greenhouse gas emissions
 Low income  Experience of discrimination 
 Income adequacy  Income inequality 
 Material wellbeing  Net worth 
 Democratic participation  Justice equity  Health equity
 Homelessness  Housing affordability 
   Housing quality  Overcrowding  Access to natural spaces  Levels of pollutants 
 Victimisation  Resilience of infrastructure 
 Waste generation  Heritage assets
  Material intensity, including recycling, land fill inflows, second-hand economy  Waste generation  Export of waste (net and gross)  Consumption of greenhouse gases  Energy consumption  Efficiency of land use  Productive land  Modified land
   Costs of extreme weather events  Global CO2 concentrations  Gross greenhouse gas emissions  Net greenhouse gas emissions 
 Consumption of net greenhouse gas emissions  Modified land  Renewable energy
 Fish stocks  Ocean acidification 
   Waste flows in waterways and coastal marine environments  Quality of water resources 
 Provisioning ecosystem services 
   Regulating ecosystem services  Cultural ecosystem services  Biodiversity/native species  Ecological integrity
   Biodiversity/native species  Ecological integrity  Efficiency of land use 
   Productive land  Soil health  Cultural ecosystem services  Provisioning ecosystem services  Regulating ecosystem services 
 Quality of water resources 
 Active stewardship of land
 Generalised trust  Institutional trust 
 Justice equity  Perceptions of safety/ feelings of safety  Harm against children 
 Victimisation  Experience of discrimination  Domestic violence  Sense of belonging  Loneliness   Foreign direct investment  Official development assistance  Remittances to other countries
For reasons of brevity not all Indicators Aotearoa New Zealand that relate to SDGs are shown.
13

EXAMPLES OF HOW THE SDGs MAP TO INDICATORS AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND

NEW ZEALAND’S INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
IN ADDITION TO PURSUING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AT HOME, 
NEW ZEALAND WORKS TO ADVANCE THE 2030 AGENDA IN OUR 

REGION AND IN THE WORLD. 
Sustainable development is a core foreign policy priority. It is central to the mission of our aid programme and informs our approach to trade, environment, development and security policy, as well as our domestic policy.
NEW ZEALAND 
COOPERATES FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT ACROSS THREE KEY SPHERES
1 We cooperate for global solutions to global challenges — New Zealand recognises the importance of effective global cooperation to protect and advance global public goods and to create conditions that enable all countries to realise sustainable development.
New Zealand works for durable international solutions to global environmental, economic, security and development challenges. We aim to strengthen the international rules and institutions essential to sustainable development. We are active within and support the multilateral system. We bring particular focus to global cooperation on human rights and gender equality, climate change, environmental and oceans stewardship, open and rules-based trade, disarmament and security. We seek global policy coherence including through the elimination of environmentally harmful subsidies that undermine progress toward sustainability. We advocate for global systems to work effectively for Small Island Developing States. 
2 We support sustainable development in developing countries — New Zealand recognises the sustainable development challenges facing developing countries across a range of circumstances. We recognise the risk of countries falling behind due to governance, conflict or environmental reasons. We recognise the scale, vulnerability and climate issues faced by Small Island Developing States. And the middle income country challenge of sustaining social and economic progress while making a historic transition to lowemissions and environmentally sustainable development. 
New Zealand targets its aid to countries most in need, particularly 
15



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand is a highly developed country with a high standard of living. International comparisons indicate that our low-income and material deprivation population proportions are on a par with OECD countries’ average performance, but we recognise that we have more work to do to reduce the rates. We are committed to tackling these issues and improving the wellbeing of all people in New Zealand, with a particular focus on reducing child poverty and improving child wellbeing.
WE ARE COMMITTED TO INCREASING 
THE STOCK OF PUBLIC HOUSING AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS. 
At the international level we act in many ways to end poverty. We recently increased our Official Development Assistance (ODA) significantly in order to contribute more to global sustainable development needs, particularly in the Pacific. We aim to use our ODA to support those most in need. 
CHALLENGES
Despite New Zealand’s overall high standard of living, annual household survey data tells us that a proportion of New Zealand households experience poverty or material hardship, with certain groups overrepresented. 
For example, using those households with incomes less than 50 percent of equivalised median household income as the measure, nine percent of the population were below this threshold before deducting housing costs in 2015. This increased to 15 percent after deducting housing costs. 
The proportion of those below this poverty threshold varies significantly by household type and ethnicity. Sole parent households are more likely to be on lowincomes than other types of households. Similarly, household income data shows that Māori and Pacific peoples are significantly overrepresented among low-income households, as are New Zealanders with disabilities.
Child poverty is an area of particular concern. Evidence shows that the experience of poverty, especially when that experience is severe and persistent, can have a negative impact on the lives of children. They may be more likely, on average, to experience poorer educational outcomes, poorer health and have more difficulty finding work in adulthood.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY
New Zealand has extensive social protections in place to provide support to people when needed. We are also undertaking a range of initiatives and commitments that will make a significant contribution to reducing the proportion of New Zealanders living in poverty particularly amongst groups that are overrepresented.
Social protections, including targeted financial and other supports, are available to those seeking employment, and support is provided for those people with, or who are caring for someone with, a health condition, injury, or disability. Financial support is available for sole parents along with additional support to help them find part-time work or prepare for future work. An important focus of employment related support is to provide people with more opportunities to work and earn a good living. 
We want New Zealand to be the best place in the world for children and young people. To help achieve that vision we have introduced new laws. The Child Poverty Reduction Act 2018 creates an on-going focus on child poverty, and provides for political accountability against published targets. The new legislation requires successive governments to measure and report on child poverty (using a suite of measures). The government has set ten-year targets, aimed at reducing child poverty by at least half on both low-income and material hardship measures by 2028. Intermediate targets have also been set and seek to reduce the number of children in poverty on these same measures by tens of thousands in the first three years.
19
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 1 – NO POVERTY
Alongside this, we have increased the size of our Household Economic Survey sample to 20,000, so that in future we will have better information about poverty and hardship for particular populations and groups.
Legislative changes also require successive governments to develop and publish a strategy to improve the wellbeing of all children; including children with greater needs as a particular focus. The strategy will also address reducing child poverty, and mitigating the impacts of child poverty and socio-economic disadvantage faced by children. The scope of the first strategy has been extended to include young people and is due to be published later in 2019.
These actions to reduce child poverty and improve child wellbeing will contribute to achieving the 2030 Agenda.
Our commitment to reduce poverty is also demonstrated by our recent Families Package, which includes a range of taxcredit changes and other measures that will increase the incomes of lowincome families. When the Package is fully implemented in 2021, it will boost the incomes of about 384,000 families with children, about 62 percent of New Zealand’s families with children, and reduce the number of children in poverty by tens of thousands.
Alongside the Families Package, we are acting to address household income levels. The minimum wage has been increased to $17.70 per hour, a 7.2 percent increase, and this will be further increased over the coming years as economic conditions allow. This will raise incomes derived from employment across many household types, including those with low-incomes. Many New Zealanders on low-incomes have also benefited from pay equity settlements, in particular groups of predominantly women workers.
The government established an independent Welfare Expert Advisory Group to provide advice on options that 
could best give effect to its vision for the 	BY 2021, THE 2017 	REDUCE THE NUMBER OF 
future direction of the social welfare system. 	CHILDREN IN POVERTY BY The Group has recommended fundamental 	FAMILIES PACKAGE, 
change to the welfare system, focused on 	TENS OF THOUSANDS restoring dignity to people so they can 	AIMS TO: participate meaningfully with their families and communities. The government is considering the Group’s recommendations as a valuable input to the broader work 
on overhauling the welfare system. It is 	INCREASE INCOMES FOR expected that achieving the vision will 	ABOUT 384,000 FAMILIES WITH 
require wide systemic change, involve a 	CHILDREN (62%) three to five-year work programme and is likely to take upwards of 10 years to embed.
We are also working to address the 	populations. Whānau Ora is a community 	public retirement pension, New Zealand impact of housing costs on New 	driven programme designed to support 	Superannuation, and significant assets Zealanders, including those on low-	a holistic approach to improving the 	built up by many in this age group, incomes. We are committed to increasing 	wellbeing of Māori and all New Zealanders. 	especially mortgage-free home ownership. the stock of public housing places and 	The approach supports whānau to achieve 	The voluntary, work-based KiwiSaver affordable housing over the next four 	their aspirations by placing them at the 	retirement saving scheme is also helping years. We are also focused on achieving 	centre of decision making and giving them 	people save for retirement. We are also equitable housing outcomes for Māori 	greater control of the services they need. 	developing a new strategy to prepare and other groups with poor housing 	Kaiārahi (navigators) typically work with 	New Zealand for an ageing population. outcomes. Means-tested supplementary 	whānau to identify their specific needs 	Areas of focus include housing, health, social welfare supports are available 	and aspirations and then help identify and 	financial security and work.
to those on low-incomes to assist with 	connect them with appropriate services, 
accommodation costs. 	education providers, or employment and 	We recently increased our Official 
	business opportunities. 	Development Assistance (ODA) 
For those living in rented accommodation 	significantly in response to the 2030 
we are progressing work to improve the 	Government agencies work jointly with 	Agenda and to sustainable development quality of housing and rental conditions. 	disabled people’s organisations to 	finance needs, particularly in the Pacific. This includes legislative changes aimed 	implement the Disability Action Plan. The 	From 2018, we have allocated an additional at improving security of tenure and 	current Disability Action Plan 2014-2018 	$714 million over a four-year budget cycle, implementing the Healthy Homes 	includes actions to increase disabled 	representing a 30 percent increase, lifting Guarantee Act 2017 to ensure that rental 	people’s employment and economic 	ODA to a projected 0.28 percent of Gross homes are warm and dry.	opportunities, and testing a new support 	National Income. 
system that empowers persons with 
We know that debt is a factor for many 	disabilities to make decisions about 	We focus our ODA on the challenges families experiencing poverty and hardship. 	how they spend their disability support 	of countries most in need, including A number of initiatives are underway that 	funding. A new Disability Action Plan 	Small Island Developing States (where may help to reduce poverty and hardship by 	2019-2022 is currently being developed, 	we allocate 60 percent of our ODA), reducing problem debt. Legislative measures 	which will include an action to reduce the 	Least Developed Countries, landlocked are being introduced to address predatory 	employment gap between disabled and 	developing countries and fragile and lending, and we are exploring other ways to 	non-disabled people.	conflict affected states. We consider that enable access to affordable credit (or other 	our ODA has a comparative advantage 
support) for vulnerable consumers.	Compared to other age groups, older 	as a source of financing for countries that 
                                                                                             New Zealanders are less likely to 	struggle to access other finance and as a The impacts of poverty do not fall equally 	experience material hardship or have 	catalyst for mobilising resources for regions across population groups. We are working 	low-incomes after housing costs. This 	and groups of people most at risk of being to address the specific needs of these 	reflects the universal provision of the 	left behind. 
21

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 REDUCING CHILD POVERTY AND IMPROVING WELLBEING

TE PUNA ORANGA—ME FAMILY SERVICES

IN DECEMBER 2018 WE 
PASSED LEGISLATION TO HELP 
ACHIEVE A SIGNIFICANT AND 
SUSTAINED REDUCTION IN CHILD 
POVERTY, AND TO IMPROVE THE 
WELLBEING OF ALL CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE IN NEW ZEALAND.
The legislation requires successive governments to set intermediate (threeyear) and long-term (ten-year) targets on a set of child poverty measures. The government must report on child poverty rates each year and outline how official budget decisions will impact on child poverty.
The current government has set its intermediate targets, which aim to reduce the number of children in poverty by tens of thousands by 2021, and its long-term targets, which aim to halve child poverty by 2028 (and exceed this on some measures). To help reach these targets, the government has introduced the Families Package – a range of measures that deliver more money to families. As well as tax-credits, these include weekly payments to families of new- born children and winter energy payments to low-income families. The government has also expanded Statistics New Zealand’s Household Economic Survey, to strengthen the measuring and reporting of child poverty. 
New legislation also requires the government to develop and publish a strategy to improve the wellbeing of all children. The strategy must include a focus on the wellbeing of those with greater needs, those experiencing poverty and socio-economic disadvantage and those of interest to the New Zealand agency that administers our statutory care, protection and youth justice systems. The new legislation requires consultation with children and with Māori. It also makes explicit reference to the Treaty of Waitangi, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The government undertook extensive public engagement on the strategy in 2018, including hearing from more than 6,000 children and young people. This feedback will help inform the direction and content of the first strategy, which is due to be released later in 2019.
We have also introduced a Child Impact Assessment Tool for voluntary use by government and non-government organisations in New Zealand to assess whether policy proposals will increase the wellbeing of children and young people. 
The tool helps to provide a child-centred assessment where the best interests of the child are a primary consideration and the views of children are respected and given due weight. Guidance is also provided on how to ensure that the voices of children and young people are captured in the design, implementation and review of policy decisions.
Te Puna Oranga – ‘The Spring of Life’ – is the name of a new community garden and makerspace at ME Family Services in Māngere East. The name reflects the wairua of the space and its role in bringing to life the hopes and aspirations ME Family Services has for our community: a thriving, regenerative community where everyone and everything has value.
From a swamp, to farmland, to the muddy end of a school field in the middle of the suburbs, we wanted to capture the essence of the space and find out what its unique contribution could be to the local community. Using the metaphor of the swamp, we saw that the space had a role to play in capturing and regenerating the ‘waste’ from our neighbourhood. The space was created in partnership with MAU Studio, and with the help of local schools, locally-based architecture students and local time-traders. 
The entire site is constructed from our neighbourhood’s ‘waste’: tyres for garden beds, a shipping container for our makerspace, a pallet deck and garden shed, old bed heads for plant supports. A water tank collects rain water from our roof and connects to a rustic outdoor kitchen space, where meals can be cooked-up straight from the garden. The garden is maintained and developed by ME Family Services staff, alongside many fabulous local time-traders.
Since our official opening in November 2018, Te Puna Oranga has received many visitors, from local and central government departments, to local organisations, schools and neighbours.
TE PUNA ORANGA OFFERS 
THE KIND OF SPACE EVERY 
COMMUNITY IS IN NEED OF, 
SOMEWHERE PEOPLE CAN 
GO TO FEEL VALUED, MAKE 
A CONTRIBUTION, SHARE 
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT GROWING 
FOOD AND EATING WELL AND 
RETHINK HOW WE CREATE AND DEAL WITH ‘RUBBISH’. 
It provides a doorway in to the wraparound support offered by ME Family Services including social work support, early childhood education, driver licensing and micro-business support. Most importantly it connects people to their local community and to themselves.
23

NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand is a substantial net exporter of food products, playing an important role in global food security through the provision of safe and nutritious food products to the world. 
New Zealand’s efficient production systems and strict regulatory policy regimes ensure the safety and integrity of our products for international consumers. Meeting high standards has been driven by more than 30 years without production or trade distorting subsidies for our agriculture and fisheries sectors. This has resulted in innovative producers who strive to gain maximum value from New Zealand’s pasture-based agriculture system and quota-managed fisheries. 
NEW ZEALAND’S FOOD PRODUCTION 
CHALLENGE IS TO STAY AT THE FOREFRONT OF GLOBAL CONSUMER DEMAND FOR SAFE AND SUSTAINABLY PRODUCED FOOD.
Goal 2 seeks to double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, particularly indigenous peoples. In New Zealand, Māori are significant owners of land assets and drivers of economic activity in food production and export sectors, and in the economy as a whole. Much of the $55 billion asset base in the Māori economy is in the primary sectors, including 38 percent of all fisheries quota, 30 percent of lamb production and 10 percent of dairy production. Much of the government’s activity has been concerned with increasing Māori presence, capability and productivity in these sectors. As well as being major economic players, the principles of New Zealand’s Treaty of Waitangi guarantee a role for Māori in decisionmaking around resource management. 
New Zealand is a long-standing proponent for the removal of barriers to international trade in food products, and a strong advocate of a rules-based international trade system aimed at ensuring people have affordable access to that food. New Zealand also actively engages in international forums and through multilateral research to raise onfarm productivity (including through the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases) and international cooperation on food supply chain efficiency and integrity.
Food security is a global challenge and New Zealand is a small country. But this does not mean our role is a small one: through international collaboration we can share our expertise with the world in areas such as productive and resilient food production systems, supply chain integrity and biological greenhouse gas emissions research. This, combined with strong advocacy for the removal of harmful barriers to trade, can allow New Zealand to play a significant and positive role in global food security and sustainable agriculture.
CHALLENGES 
New Zealand’s food production challenge is to stay at the forefront of global consumer demand for safe and sustainably produced food while developing innovative ways to assure consumers of the safety and integrity of our products. 
A major challenge for agriculture systems is climate change. We need to find ways to reduce the greenhouse gas footprint of food production to support New Zealand’s transition to a low-carbon economy and commitments under the Paris Agreement, whilst also ensuring that 
25
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 2 – ZERO HUNGER
food production systems have the built-in resilience and adaptive capacity to deal with a changing climate.
How we tackle agricultural emissions is perhaps New Zealand’s most challenging climate change issue. The agriculture sectors are an intrinsic part of our economy, communities and identity. Emissions from agriculture also make up almost half of our annual greenhouse gas emissions. Decisions about agricultural emissions need to be based on good science that supports effective adaptation and a just transition, and present opportunities for other countries to follow our lead.
While the vast majority of New Zealanders have secure access to safe and nutritious food, obesity is a major health concern for New Zealand, particularly for Māori and Pacific peoples. There is an ongoing focus on reducing obesity rates and increasing the quality of New Zealanders’ diets, especially for the most vulnerable such as children and youth.
Māori-owned land productivity is reported to be at 60 to 70 percent of the national average with the Māori economy facing unique challenges due to the legislative system Māori land operates under. Decision making can be more complex and take more time given communal ownership, land blocks may be small and fragmented hindering profitable development and access to capital investment can be difficult, as Māori land cannot be used as collateral. 
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
New Zealand has committed, under the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, to reduce emissions on an economy-wide basis to 30 percent below 2005 levels over the period 2021 to 2030 (11 percent below 1990 levels by 2030). We are also committed to making decisions that show global leadership, and 
enable the transition to a low-emissions 	FRUIT IN SCHOOLS
economy. We have established an Interim 
Climate Change Committee. Part of its 	the widest reaching health initiative across scope is to progress work on agricultural 
emissions, before we pass legislation 	One piece of mostly 
Change Commission. The partnership 	549	each school day for to establish an independent Climate 	locally grown produce between our agricultural industry groups and government officials coupled with 
international collaboration through the 	low decile primary and intermediate 	118,000 Global Research Alliance on Agricultural 	schools, vastly improving health and 	 
Greenhouse Gases and other partners 	education outcomes for students. 	students  has enabled us to establish an evidence base that will support decisions on what actions farmers can take now, and in the future, to reduce emissions, and assess the 
costs, opportunities and benefits of doing 	80%	90%	83%
so. These efforts have benefited both 
domestic sustainable food production as 	principals reported 	of principals reported a 	of principals said overall well as assisting global food security.	their school	sense of equality between 	health of students would
had fewer hungry 	students, regardless of 	decline if the programme children 	their family circumstances 	ended.
THERE IS AN ONGOING FOCUS ON REDUCING 
OBESITY RATES AND INCREASING THE 	for every New Zealander, applying new 	programme (which provides children at 
QUALITY OF NEW ZEALANDERS’ DIETS, 	digital tracking, reporting and monitoring 	eligible primary schools with a free piece 
	of commercial activity and developing 	of fresh produce daily) and provides 
ESPECIALLY FOR THE MOST VULNERABLE innovative trawl technologies. funding support to other programmes, such as KickStart Breakfast and KidsCan.
SUCH AS CHILDREN AND YOUTH.	We are developing a population-based 
approach to obesity policy. The overall 	Our Māori Agribusiness programme aim of this approach is for the population 	seeks to support Māori to make informed to achieve and maintain a weight in the 	decisions to increase the sustainable 
New Zealand takes a leading role in 	healthy range, as measured by population 	productivity of Māori primary sector addressing agriculture subsidies in the 	body mass index. The approach will 	assets. The programme provides access WTO. This includes our strong advocacy 	recognise the importance of creating 	to information and expertise to increase for a meaningful agreement in the WTO 	healthy environments across a range of 	Māori participation across the primary to address harmful fisheries subsidies 	settings, for example in work places and 	industries and delivers economic, by the deadline of 2020 set in Goal 14. 	education locations. There will be a focus 	social and environmental outcomes New Zealand not only does not subsidise 	on children and young people, as well as 	to New Zealand. its fisheries sector, but it also levies the 	on achieving equity for Māori and Pacific 
commercial sector for the costs of fisheries 	people by designing and tailoring actions 	Finally, New Zealand has also taken action management and operational research to 	together with them where feasible. 	to expand international cooperation and 
establish sustainable catch limits. 	capacity-building through partnerships 
	We provide funding to a number of 	and aid provided to numerous Pacific 
Our Fisheries Change Programme 	programmes in schools that provide 	island countries. Much of this cooperation is working to ensure the sustainable 	access to food in order to improve 	focuses on increasing the economic economic, social and cultural value of 	nutritional intake and reduce food 	and food security benefits derived New Zealand’s fisheries. This programme 	insecurity amongst students. The 	from agriculture, renewable energy and is set to ensure sustainable fisheries 	government funds a Fruit in Schools 	building resilience.
27



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand is committed to improving health and wellbeing across all our population. We have already achieved a large number of Goal 3’s targets at the aggregated level and we are well placed internationally.
We also recognise that achieving health and wellbeing for all requires a comprehensive approach. Making progress across the breadth of the agenda will be necessary as many of the Goals contribute to the broad determinants of health. Similarly, a healthier population will be better placed to support the achievement of the SDGs as a whole. We recognise that improving health requires actions across the broad determinants of health including social, cultural, environmental and economic conditions. We will strive to achieve changes in those determinants that may currently be a barrier to good health and wellbeing.
THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH IS CONSIDERING 
THE STRATEGIC DIRECTION FOR IMPROVING HEALTH EQUITY FOR PACIFIC PEOPLES.
We have four key health priorities, which closely align with Goal 3: achieving equity; child wellbeing; mental health; and primary health care. In addition to these priorities we are pursuing a set of health system enhancements that will also support implementation of this Goal.
CHALLENGES 
While New Zealand is relatively well- placed in terms of achieving Goal 3 by 2030, this is at the total population level. At the disaggregated level strong inequities still exist between subpopulations. This is particularly so for Māori and Pacific peoples and for low socioeconomic groups, who bear a greater burden of health problems and disease. 
Achieving equity across population groups is therefore a major priority for the health sector. This will be New Zealand’s greatest challenge in ensuring healthy lives and wellbeing for all, particularly for non-communicable diseases, mental health and tobacco use where substantial inequities exist. These examples cause a large burden of disease, and reducing the inequities here has the potential to produce large health gains for New Zealand. As we work towards achieving Goal 3’s vision, we will need to make sure that all relevant measurements are able to be disaggregated by subpopulations to ensure all populations in New Zealand are able to enjoy healthy lives.
Another particular challenge for New Zealand is achieving universal health care coverage. Although all New Zealand citizens are covered by a public health system, challenges still remain in accessing primary care and dental care, with a fee-for-service structure presenting a barrier to many. Recent New Zealand Health Survey data reports that approximately 15 percent of adults did not visit a general practitioner in the previous year due to cost. This problem is particularly acute for Māori and low socio-economic families.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
Achieving equity is a priority goal for the government. A strategic framework is being developed to guide this work and better understand equity problems. It is expected that the equity focus will overlap with other strategic priorities, such as improving child health, primary 
31

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 3 – GOOD HEALTH AND WELLBEING
WE’RE DELIVERING THE GOVERNMENT’S PRIORITIES

	Achieving	Child	Mental	Primary
	equity	wellbeing	health	health care
OTHER IMMEDIATE PRIORITIES

Drinking DHB Maternity Planned Capital water performance care and care asset
	regulation	framework	midwifery	management

health care and mental health.	mental wellbeing being supported.
Our primary health care work programme 	In December 2018 we completed an aims to provide people with greater 	inquiry into mental health and addiction, access to primary care. Some changes 	with the purpose to identify unmet needs have already taken place that have 	and develop recommendations for a improved access, including extending 	better mental health and addiction system. access to low-cost and zero-fee general 	This has resulted in a wide-ranging set practice visits, and reducing prescription 	of recommendations aimed to provide charges for children under the age of 	real and enduring change, including for 14. These changes have seen the cost of 	individual, family and whānau support. We visiting the doctor fall for up to 540,000 	expect that there will be improvements New Zealanders, while an additional 	for mental health outcomes (including 56,000 13 year olds now receive free 	those emphasised in Goal 3) as a result of primary care visits. This is a step towards 	implementing the government’s response improving universal health care coverage.	to these recommendations.
More generally, child and youth wellbeing 	A new National Cancer Action Plan is a cross-government priority, with 	is being developed by the Ministry of the Department of the Prime Minister 	Health in close partnership with Māori and Cabinet leading development of 	leaders, communities and other sector a strategy to improve the wellbeing of 	representatives. Currently, cancer is children and young people. Our Ministry 	unevenly experienced in New Zealand. of Health is contributing to initial 	Māori, Pacific people and those living policy work, with a focus on children 	in rural areas who suffer from cancer experiencing optimal development in 	generally have poorer health outcomes their first 1,000 days and on children’s 	than the rest of the population. When adjusted for age, Māori females have four times the rate of lung cancer compared to non-Māori, and Māori males have three times the rate of lung cancer compared to non-Māori. The plan will bring the Māori world view to strategic decision-making and service delivery by ensuring all work is undertaken as a partnership, and embed Māori leadership in the design of health programmes. Through previous, similar initiatives, New Zealand has already achieved equity in survival outcomes for children with cancer. We have demonstrated that integrated, persistent focus can increase Māori participation in screening and outcomes.
WE HAVE FOUR KEY HEALTH PRIORITIES – ACHIEVING EQUITY, CHILD WELLBEING, MENTAL HEALTH AND PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.
The Ministry of Health is considering the strategic direction for improving health equity for Pacific peoples in New Zealand. This may include developing new strategic priorities and actions to improve Pacific health. The Ministry is also considering working with relevant agencies whose work also impacts on Pacific people’s health. Any new strategic direction for Pacific health would need to involve Pacific communities and the Ministry would need to ensure this takes place. The Pacific Aotearoa Vision, led by the Ministry for Pacific Peoples, articulates Pacific aspirations for the future across a range of social and economic domains. A key goal of the vision is having resilient and healthy Pacific communities and any strategic priorities or actions developed by the Ministry of Health would closely align with this work.
New Zealand has initiatives aimed to reduce the burden of communicable diseases. The New Zealand AIDS Foundation has developed an Ending HIV campaign. This has the ambitious goal of no new transmissions of HIV in New Zealand by 2025. We have seen progress already. In March 2018 we were one of the first countries in the world to publicly fund the HIV prevention drug preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP), meaning those at high risk of HIV have another way to protect themselves.
New Zealand has a number of other priority initiatives underway that support the targets of Goal 3. We are pursuing a set of health system enhancements including drinking water regulation, improving maternity care and strengthening the midwifery workplace, strengthening our District Health Board performance framework, road safety planning and enhancing capital asset management. 
New Zealand is currently undertaking a Health and Disability System Review, with the purpose of future-proofing New Zealand’s health and disability services. It will conclude in 2020 and provide a set of recommendations on how to achieve better health and wellness outcomes for all New Zealanders, improve health outcomes for Māori and other population groups, reduce barriers to access to health and disability service to achieve more equitable outcomes for all parts of the population. 
On the international front, New Zealand’s international development cooperation for health seeks to ensure access to essential and quality health services so that Pacific people can achieve their potential, and to contribute to prosperity, safety and stability in the region. Our focus is on improving health outcomes through increasing the capacity of country systems. Our priority areas are prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases, sexual and reproductive health and rights, child health and nutrition and prevention and control of communicable diseases.
33



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand has a quality, highperforming education system that reflects our unique and diverse society. It is modern and responsive, combining traditional principles with innovation, creativity and fresh thinking. Young people in our system are taught how to put knowledge to work in the world and are equipped for the 21st century. We focus on maximising students’ participation, progress and achievement, responding to the identity, language and culture within their family or whānau context.
We want a public education system that provides all New Zealanders with lifelong learning opportunities so that they can discover and develop their full potential, engage fully in society and lead rewarding and fulfilling lives. We are in the top half of OECD countries for participation in early childhood education and schooling is compulsory from ages six to 16. Schooling is free between the ages of five to 19 at state schools for New Zealand citizens and permanent residents. Amongst OECD comparators, we are above average for adults with a tertiary degree or higher, and have the highest rate of participation in adult learning.
IN 2017/18, WE SPENT OVER $14.7 BILLION 
TO ENABLE OVER 1.5 MILLION CHILDREN, YOUNG PEOPLE AND ADULT STUDENTS TO LEARN AND ACHIEVE.
Our schools are self-managing enabling them to develop locally-relevant learning programmes, based on our National Curriculum. There are two statements of this: one for English-medium schools and one for Māori-medium schools. They are designed to be non-sexist, non-racist and non-discriminatory. The National Certificates of Educational Achievement (NCEA) are outcomes-based qualifications for secondary school students that can be achieved in a variety of settings. For early childhood education our curriculum framework (Te Whāriki) provides clear and empowering learning outcomes.
CHALLENGES 
Although many of our young people achieve at high levels in some areas, evidence shows that our education system is not delivering for all. Inequity remains a persistent and serious issue, with insufficient progress toward equity of educational outcomes, particularly for Māori and Pacific students and those with disabilities and learning support needs.
Our education system is facing increasing pressure on teacher supply in certain locations, subjects and parts of the sector. As this hinders our ability to plan for the future, comprehensive workforce planning tools and an education workforce strategy are being developed. 
Our devolved school governance system enables strong community ownership and decision making but can also lead to challenges with collaboration, alignment and coherence within the education system. We recognise the need to strengthen connections between parents, whānau, families, employers and communities and to focus on supporting educationally powerful partnerships. Our comprehensive reform programme intends to address these challenges and aims to create an end-to-end pathway from early learning through to tertiary study.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY
To further lift our performance, we are undergoing a process to fundamentally reshape our education system. We aim to build a shared vision amongst stakeholders of a system that serves all learners. We are undertaking this through wide-reaching engagement as part of an ongoing national Education Conversation (Kōrero Mātauranga). 
These inputs will inform our major reform programme, which includes a number of significant reviews. We are reviewing our school governance model and the way administration and management of the schooling system works. Our secondary school qualifications are being reviewed so they provide meaningful pathways, give personalised learning and build capability for lifelong learning. 
37

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 4 – QUALITY EDUCATION
The reform of vocational education aims to ensure we have effective public regional vocational education, which is adaptive and supports the changing world of work. School property management is also being reviewed. New strategies are in development, including long-term approaches for Māori and Pacific learners, a plan for early learning and an education workforce strategy. The reforms will shape a 30 year strategic plan for New Zealand education to support learners, deliver improved outcomes and meet the needs of the modern world. The changes will also link closely with cross-government work to develop a strategy to improve the wellbeing of children and young people, which has a strong focus on education.
We acknowledge that our education system has underserved Māori learners and work is ongoing to support equitable access, inclusion and outcomes. We are committed to continuing efforts to support Māori to participate, achieve and enjoy education success as Māori.
While there are ‘pockets of excellence’ supporting Māori to succeed, Ka Hikitia (Māori Education Strategy) and Tau Mai 
Te Reo (Māori Language in Education Strategy) have not been consistently implemented as intended and will be refreshed in 2019. We have developed a number of measures to strengthen the engagement between schools and whānau. Better partnerships can help the achievement and wellbeing of Māori students by strengthening the cultural responsiveness of teachers, embedding Māori identity, language and culture into local curricula, and supporting families to engage. 
The work we do must have explicit consideration for Pacific learners. The Pasifika Education Plan sets out our strategic direction for improving Pacific student outcomes. It acknowledges that the education system has not always served Pacific people well and is being updated to outline actions to ensure that Pacific learners and their families are valued, safe and equipped to achieve their education aspirations. We are working to ensure teaching is more culturally responsive and we have recently released Tapasā, a framework for teachers to strengthen their Pacific cultural competencies. 
Almost all children in New Zealand have participated in early childhood education (ECE), with providers including Māori immersion services, services run by parents, and services provided in private homes. We help reduce the cost barrier to ECE in a variety of ways, including by funding 20 hours of ECE per week for three to five year olds. ECE participation rates for Māori and Pacific children are slightly lower than the national average, so we run targeted programmes to raise participation in these communities.
Teachers in New Zealand are well-placed to educate students for the future, and we are working to address the pressure on teacher supply. We are developing a future-focused Education Workforce Strategy 2032 that aims to achieve our vision of a quality, trusted, and respected teaching profession. It focuses on attracting, recruiting and retaining a high quality education workforce, which will ensure that every learner achieves education success.
We are strengthening digital competencies in the curriculum to prepare students to meet the demands of an evolving digital world. Teachers need to understand digital tools and weave them into their teaching, which requires a fundamental re-think of how we train teachers, and support their ongoing professional development. Almost all schools are connected to ultrafast broadband via a fully-funded and managed connection. We are upgrading school buildings and facilities to ensure they are fit-for-purpose, adaptable, and well-maintained. 
It is crucial to the future of education that we not only make the best use of technology but that we have students with soft skills who are empathetic, adaptive, able to think critically, and ready to learn. We focus on the progress and achievement of all learners across the curriculum. This acknowledges the different ways and pace at which children learn, and supports teachers to provide more learning opportunities including a focus on soft skills.
Teaching sustainable development and global citizenship is important for New Zealand’s future. Our curriculum supports holistic teaching programmes and pathways that enable engagement with the environment and sustainability. NGOs work directly with schools to enhance this learning. One of the desired outcomes of the New Zealand International Education Strategy 20182030 is that all students develop the skills, knowledge and capabilities they need to live, work and learn across national and cultural boundaries.
IT IS CRUCIAL THAT WE NOT ONLY MAKE THE 
BEST USE OF TECHNOLOGY BUT THAT WE 
HAVE STUDENTS WITH SOFT SKILLS WHO 
ARE EMPATHETIC, ADAPTIVE, ABLE TO THINK CRITICALLY, AND READY TO LEARN. 
We recognise there should be equal and affordable access to tertiary education and that workers will need to be adaptable with a diverse range of skills. Over $4 billion is currently allocated each year for tertiary study financial support. We provide allowances for low-income students and interest-free student loans. One of the aims of our tertiary Fees-Free policy is to make starting study or training more affordable for first-time tertiary students. 
Secondary-tertiary programmes provide learning opportunities for students (aged 15–18) who might otherwise disengage with education. We support young people who have left school without qualifications and adults with low literacy or numeracy to re-engage in learning. We are also reforming vocational education and training to achieve an even more responsive system, and are updating our approach to careers guidance. Adult and community education contributes to people being able to find better and more rewarding work and participate more fully in society. We support lifelong learning opportunities, including universal literacy and numeracy achievement through the Workplace Literacy and Numeracy Fund and Adult Community Education programmes. 
In New Zealand, one in five young people need some kind of additional learning support. We want those with learning support needs or disabilities to be present, safe and included in their learning environments. A Disability and Learning Support Action Plan is due to be finalised in 2019 and will set out first steps towards improving learning support. More than $1 billion is spent each year on learning support. A new Learning Support Delivery Model will be in place by the end of 2019 with schools and communities collaborating with local education offices. In addition, we will be employing approximately 600 new dedicated Learning Support Coordinators to work alongside classroom teachers.
Goal 4 expressly addresses the need to eliminate gender disparities in education. In New Zealand, women are gaining qualifications at a higher rate than men. However, there is still a disparity in tertiary-level STEM fields, where only a third of all students are women. Targeted scholarships have been introduced to help address this, and a cross-government initiative aims to encourage better STEM engagement, including for girls and women. We also acknowledge the need to address discrimination experienced by LGBTQI+ students and have developed guidelines to ensure inclusivity.
Finally, our education system needs to continually adapt in a rapidly changing and increasingly globalised context. Our comprehensive Education Work Programme will continue to drive us forward toward a quality, lifelong, inclusive and equitable education system for all in New Zealand.
39

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
	-	-
THE EDUCATION CONVERSATION | KORERO MAUTAURANGA
We have set out an ambitious work 	AS PART OF THE EDUCATION programme for our education system. 
At the core of this work programme is 	CONVERSATION, TWO EDUCATION 
our long term vision for education in 
New Zealand to meet the needs of all 	SUMMITS TOOK PLACE IN 2018. 
learners, no matter who they are, or 
where they come from. To build a THE EVENTS WERE ATTENDED BY shared vision amongst stakeholders OVER 1,400 PEOPLE, INCLUDING 
of a system that serves all learners, 
we are undertaking wide-reaching CHILDREN AND YOUTH, WITH THE engagement as part of an ongoing 
national Education Conversation. REACH BEING EXTENDED The Education Conversation | Kōrero THROUGH SOCIAL MEDIA.
Mātauranga is a collaboration between government and New Zealanders across 
the education sector and community to 	Important lessons in collaborative design make education fit-for-purpose and build 	were learnt from the Summits. The the world’s best education system. It aims 	dialogue, themes and materials from to provide a unique opportunity to hear 	these are being applied to all of the key from those most affected by how our 	education review sand consultations. education system performs.
Alongside the Summits, the Ministry of 
Learners from all ages, needs, abilities 	Education engaged with diverse and cultural backgrounds have engaged 	stakeholders, as well as conducting an with the Education Conversation. We 	online survey. A conversation with Māori have received feedback from teachers, 	whānau and communities highlighted principals, parents, caregivers, school 	what matters most in the education of support staff, social workers, employers, 	Māori learners. A series of well-attended children and youth, iwi, Māori and Pacific 	engagements were also held with Pacific people, the LGBTQI+ community, and 	peoples and migrants, where they people with disabilities and learning 	provided views on what education should support needs. We have also heard from 	look like in New Zealand. Three teenagers in the corrections system, 	workshops were held in 2018, focused on community leaders, refugees, migrants, 	co-designing the future of our secondary public policy experts and education 	school qualifications. We have been scholars. The Minister of Education 	forging new ground in how we work with appointed several advisory groups, 	the education sector and leading the way an independent taskforce and a 	towards best practice engagement.
‘Guardians’ group, who are responsible 
for drawing on the feedback received to 	We are continuing to partner with produce a 30-year vision for education 	the sector and community to bring 
in New Zealand. 	together the expertise and views of a 
diverse range people to make meaningful improvements and co-design the future of New Zealand education. 
 
GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP EDUCATION
Image with permission of New Zealand National Commission for UNESCO
THE NEW ZEALAND NATIONAL 	Students can choose a specific area of interest under that theme, which 
COMMISSION FOR UNESCO HAS 	then forms the basis of the student’s personalised learning pathway.
IDENTIFIED GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP 
The model is embedded into the school 
EDUCATION AS A TARGET AREA curriculum, learning assessment and TO SUPPORT NEW ZEALAND’S everyday operations. For example, in one 
                                             school term the inquiry topic was “How EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE THE SDGs.	do I make a difference?” Five-year old students researched and raised funds In 2018 the Commission launched a 	for their chosen local charities; 13-year national Award in Global Citizenship 	old students researched and sourced Education, recognising education sector 	sponsorship for care packs for the or community groups who were doing 	homeless; and 15-year old students chose outstanding work to encourage New 	inquiry topics such as seabed mining and Zealanders to become responsible and 	its impact on the local environment. active global citizens. The award also 
encourages the sharing of good practice 	The school’s initiative is reflected in in the global citizenship education space.	its vision statement of ‘Growing good people for a changing world’. It has led 
The 2018 school sector award was 	to an overall rise in students’ learning won by Pātea Area School, which has 	outcomes, with the model ensuring established a learning model that embeds 	that everything they do as a learning global citizenship in the whole school’s 	community is empowering, experiential, curriculum delivery, rather than as a 	authentic and connected to the wider one-off project. The school developed an 	world around them. 
inquiry programme focused on different local and global challenges, selecting a different theme for each school term. 
41
NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
In 1893, New Zealand led the world as the first country where women won the right to vote. Since then, progress towards women’s full participation at all levels has continued. New Zealand women enjoy the protection of full and equal rights under the law. We have come a long way, however challenges remain.
We are aiming to develop an economy that is growing and working for all of us, to improve the wellbeing of New Zealanders and their families, and to make New Zealand proud. We want New Zealand to be a great place to be a woman or girl in all their diversity, where wāhine Māori succeed as Māori, and where gender is not a barrier to success and wellness. We also want New Zealand to be a place where the contribution of all women and girls is valued, that all women and girls are financially secure and can fully participate and thrive, and that all women and girls are free from all forms of violence and harassment.
WE WANT NEW ZEALAND TO BE A GREAT PLACE TO BE A WOMAN OR GIRL IN ALL THEIR DIVERSITY.
As a matter of priority we are working to address gender inequalities that exist around pay equity, the gender pay gap, family and sexual violence, and economic outcomes for women, particularly Māori and Pacific women. 
CHALLENGES 
While the gender pay gap has narrowed over the past 20 years, it is persistent. We have a national gender pay gap of 
9.2 percent. Some population groups, 
such as Māori, Pacific and migrant women, face greater gender pay gaps.
New Zealand women continue to suffer from high levels of domestic and sexual violence and we continue to rank high in OECD statistics on violence against women. Family violence is the largest driver of violent crime in New Zealand. Current data shows that one in three women experience physical, emotional and/or sexual violence from a partner in their lifetime – twice the rate for men. Women are also more likely to be killed. Women living with a disability, young women, Māori women, queer and transgender women experience higher rates of violence and are also more likely to be re-traumatised by our current systems.
While New Zealand has made good progress towards equal representation on state sector boards, women remain underrepresented on private sector boards. Women hold only 19 percent of board positions and senior leadership positions in New Zealand Stock Exchange (NZX) listed companies. More generally, women of Māori, Pacific and Asian ethnicities remain under-represented in the top tiers of management and overrepresented in lower paid occupations.
In 2018, the United Nations Convention of the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Committee’s concluding observations on New Zealand set out 78 recommendations for improvement. The concerns ranged from improving women’s access to justice, access to health care services, implementing pay equity, developing a gender budget, and initiating a national action plan for the advancement of women.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
One significant step we are taking in order to address the gender pay gap is the Equal Pay Amendment Bill, currently 
43





NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
Improving the sustainable management of freshwater resources and improving water services for communities are clear priorities for New Zealand. New Zealanders highly value clean and healthy water ecosystems, with kaitiakitanga or the responsibility to provide good environmental stewardship being a defining tenet for Māori and the wider community. While New Zealand is blessed with many exceptional freshwater ecosystems, some are also degraded or at risk. Many significant community and iwi-led initiatives are taking direct action to protect and restore these ecosystems alongside projects led by the government.
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED A TASKFORCE TO 
DEVELOP POLICY THAT WILL HALT FURTHER 
DEGRADATION OF WATER QUALITY AND SEEK RAPID IMPROVEMENTS IN CATCHMENTS  AT RISK.
Existing regulation under the Resource Management Act (RMA), Health Act and several pieces of new policy under development will make New Zealand well-placed to meet many of the targets relevant to Goal 6. However, it is worth noting that New Zealanders’ expectations of freshwater management are higher than what is required to meet the SDGs in many cases, and we are seeking improvements that exceed the SDG targets for both ecosystem health and the management of drinking water, sanitation and stormwater services.
Key targets that New Zealand is taking action on relate to water quality, sustainable use and support for community engagement in water management – all of which are being progressed by amendments to the National Policy Statement (NPS) for Freshwater Management, other regulation under the RMA and our national Environmental Reporting Programme. This regulatory approach is somewhat unique internationally in the degree to which it requires localised integrated catchment planning, and participatory democracy. This creates a relatively strong role for local government in environmental management. In addition, a significant policy project is underway to improve the national regulation of Three Waters services (drinking water, wastewater and stormwater) to ensure high-quality services that are consistent with community expectations and international best practice.
CHALLENGES 
While New Zealand already meets or exceeds many of the indicators related to Goal 6, indigenous communities and the wider public, government and industry bodies all have high ambitions for improving stewardship of freshwater ecosystems and resources. The biggest task for New Zealand is related to reducing key sources of pollution, both from farming activities (which make up a significant part of New Zealand’s economy) as well as from urban land use. This will be necessary to protect the health of water ecosystems and provide many ecosystem services that New Zealanders value, such as recreation and traditional food sources.
Another key goal is to create a system in which well-informed communities are able to meaningfully engage both in integrated catchment planning and the management of water services. New national monitoring metrics related to both environmental health and the quality of water services are being considered that might help both inform communities as well as track progress over time.
49
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 6 – CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION

There are two main areas where New Zealand risks falling short of expectations. Firstly, there are challenges in relation to protecting and restoring water ecosystems by 2020. National monitoring indicates that we are far from meeting this target, due to historic degradation and a high proportion of threatened aquatic species. Ongoing policy development is aimed at preventing further degradation and improving ecosystem health to meet Goal 6, however it may take decades to restore some ecosystems to meet domestic expectations.
Wetlands are one of the habitats at greatest risk. New Zealand has lost 90 percent of its natural wetlands and the remaining areas continue to decline. Some of the degradation is relatively recent with significant losses occurring within the last decade. 
Secondly, in relation to the achievement of universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water, there are currently some inequities in the performance and cost of rural and urban water supplies in New Zealand. Compliance information indicates that small and rural water supplies do not meet the Drinking Water Standards as consistently as large supplies, and for small communities, affordability is a common challenge.
There are also some specific challenges where New Zealand is not currently capturing data in line with some internationally recommended methods. Both our national environmental reporting programme and Indicators Aotearoa New Zealand are currently working to define a core set of indicators that will ensure we can better meet our international and domestic reporting requirements.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
A key government initiative to ensure access to drinking water and adequate sanitation is the ongoing review of Three Waters service regulation. This programme is working to strengthen the existing regulatory framework to enhance transparency and accountability and promote proactive risk management. While existing data suggests that New Zealand service providers already largely meet the Goal 6 targets, regulatory improvements are being considered to ensure that there is appropriate oversight over the system.
A SIGNIFICANT POLICY PROJECT IS 
UNDERWAY TO IMPROVE THE NATIONAL REGULATION OF DRINKING WATER, WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER.
As part of our efforts to improve environmental outcomes related to water management by 2030, we established a taskforce to develop policy that will halt further degradation of water quality and seek rapid improvements in catchments at risk. This Essential Freshwater policy programme is seeking to strengthen many aspects of our existing water policy, some of which are highlighted below.
In line with Goal 6, New Zealand also has an ongoing policy project to improve water use efficiency and fair allocation. Some water resources are currently overallocated in New Zealand and significant efforts are underway in both government and with private sector groups to improve resource use efficiency and the adoption of Good Management Practices, particularly regarding irrigation in the agricultural sector. While the current allocation system aims to set catchment limits to preserve environmental values, this system operates on a first-in firstserved principle that creates some inefficiencies. We are exploring ways to amend the allocation framework to 
82%
of survey respondents want to see water quality 
improved.
improve dynamic efficiency and reduce levels of water stress.
New Zealand is on track to implement integrated water resources management at all levels by 2030. Since 2011 New Zealand has had a requirement for integrated catchment management through the NPS for Freshwater Management. This national regulation requires that all regions should have integrated and collaborative water management plans in place by 2025.
This same piece of regulation is also driving the protection and restoration of water ecosystems; however for many waterbodies it will be impossible to restore them by 2020 due to legacy impacts and hydrological lag times. That said, many restoration projects are underway all over the country, with some financed by our $100 million Freshwater Improvement Fund and  others being championed by industry and community groups.
The NPS for Freshwater Management also has secured a strong role for public participation in setting freshwater policy. Through this regulation, local governments are required to work with communities to identify their values 
and aspirations related to waterbodies and establish plans based on this input. Through these planning processes, New Zealanders have become increasingly engaged in water governance issues. In one survey, 82 percent of respondents indicated that it was very or extremely important to improve New Zealand’s water quality.
In order to address the impact that nutrient runoff has on fresh water quality, we have established new rules that require local governments to set limits to manage nutrient pollution. The Living Water partnership between the 
Department of Conservation and Fonterra (New Zealand’s largest dairy cooperative) is working with farmers, scientists, councils, mana whenua, and communities to design and test scalable solutions to accelerate sustainable dairying (reducing nutrient pollution), restore freshwater habitats, and build ecosystem resilience. 
Outside of the Essential Freshwater policy programme, New Zealand also has a strong environmental reporting programme in place that provides robust and independent information at regular intervals, improving transparency and supporting decision-making. The latest information on a wide range of metrics for freshwater ecosystems can be found in the 2017 report Our Freshwater, and the 2019 synthesis report Environment Aotearoa, which covers all environmental domains.
New Zealand has also taken action to expand international cooperation and capacity – building on water and sanitation-related activities, in particular through partnerships and aid provided to numerous Pacific island countries. 
51

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 PARTNERING FOR FRESHWATER IMPROVEMENT
TARANAKI REGIONAL COUNCIL RIPARIAN 
MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME—TARANAKI REGIONAL COUNCIL

Improving freshwater quality is a priority for New Zealand. In recent years we’ve seen an increase in public interest in the safety of those swimming in our rivers, streams, lakes and at beaches, and overall water quality improvement. The government is working with stakeholders across various sectors that contribute to freshwater quality through a range of initiatives that focus on stopping future degradation, reverse past damage, and address water allocation issues.
One such initiative is the Freshwater 
Improvement Fund, which committed $100 million over 10 years from 2017 to facilitate partnerships that generate on- the-ground action for the management of New Zealand’s lakes, rivers, streams, groundwater, and wetlands. 
THE FUND SUPPORTS 34 
PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS AROUND 
NEW ZEALAND, TOTALLING 
$47 MILLION IN GOVERNMENT 
FUNDS, WHICH ARE MATCHED BY PROJECT PARTNERS.
Projects demonstrate co-benefits for ecosystem services and involve Māori cultural perspectives and input. The majority are run by local council and involve the community, industry bodies, the Department of Conservation where needed, and a range of expert bodies in cross-sectoral approaches to freshwater improvement. Projects are also expected to involve communities in the restoration of the health of their rivers, streams, and wetlands.
To make the best use of available resources, we take an (investment) data driven approach to identify strategic opportunities to improve environmental outcomes. In the case of Freshwater Improvement, we are targeting vulnerable catchments, where pressures such as land use are increasing but water quality had not yet crossed the ‘tipping point’ where restoration becomes more difficult or expensive. 
A variety of interventions specific to each project are supported through these projects. This includes on-theground community initiatives such as planting, monitoring and implementing mātauranga Māori principles in water management, and also technical solutions such as sediment traps, constructed wetlands, and wastewater management systems. These freshwater improvements are expected to have positive effects downstream into the estuarine, coastal, and marine environments.
TARANAKI REGIONAL COUNCIL’S 
RIPARIAN MANAGEMENT 
PROGRAMME IS TRANSFORMING 
THE LANDSCAPE ON A SCALE NOT SEEN ELSEWHERE IN NEW 
ZEALAND, AND IMPROVING FRESHWATER HEALTH AND NATIVE HABITAT. 
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) scientists confirm the voluntary restorative programme is likely one of the biggest and longest-running restorative freshwater projects in the world. Covering over 15,400 kilometres of streambanks, the $100 million programme has been built on hard work and investment, largely funded by landowners, with 10 percent public funding.
Freshwater is valued culturally and socially and is a driver of Taranaki’s economy. More than 300 rivers and streams flow from Mount Taranaki to the sea, across the volcanic ‘ring plain’, which is covered by intensive dairy farming. Stream health in the region was deteriorating due to pressures from diffuse pollution from pasture run-off, along with industrial and municipal wastewater discharges. 
In the early 1990s, the council identified the need to protect and enhance the region’s many waterways in a comprehensive and integrated way, and developed the Riparian Management Programme. The council has worked with landowners on the ring plain and coastal terraces to develop riparian management plans, recommending fencing and planting streambanks, and supplying suitable native plants to plan holders atcost (around 500,000 plants per year in recent years). 
Fencing riparian margins prevents livestock access, and planting traps and filters silt and nutrients from pasture run-off, provides shading, reducing water temperature and improving instream and streambank habitat. 
At June 2018, 99.9 percent of Taranaki dairy farms had riparian plans. More than 5.1 million plants have been planted along streambanks, with this number set to reach 6 million by completion of the programme. 13,207 km (86 percent) of streambank on the ring plain is now protected by fencing, with an additional 8,399 km (72 percent) of streambank requiring vegetation protected by riparian vegetation.
An independent NIWA study (March 2018) found the programme has correlated with improved ecological health and reduced bacterial levels in some Taranaki streams and rivers.
53

NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealanders have near universal access to modern energy. Apart from rare outages, supplies of electricity and fuel are secure and reliable, although ongoing investments in infrastructure development will be needed to ensure future energy security and sustainable energy for all.
New Zealand is undergoing a transition towards a low-emission, inclusive and productive economy. Improving the sustainability of New Zealand’s energy supply and meeting our international commitments under the Paris Agreement go hand-in-hand. We intend to introduce and pass the legislation, which will include a goal to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This will strengthen New Zealand’s overall domestic policy alignment with Goal 7.
OUR ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IS DOMINATED BY 
HYDRO-POWER, WHICH ALONG WITH WIND 
AND GEOTHERMAL POWER GENERATION, CONTRIBUTES TO ENSURING OUR SUPPLY IS 85 PERCENT RENEWABLE.
Whilst the majority of our electricity is already generated from renewable sources of supply, there are opportunities for improving energy efficiency and increasing reliance on low-emission energy sources, particularly in relation to transport and process heat. For example, New Zealand’s transport-related greenhouse gas emissions are higher than many other OECD countries, and over half of process heat demand is met by burning coal, natural gas, and liquid fossil fuels (e.g. diesel).
In New Zealand energy affordability has become more of an issue in recent years. For example, our inflationadjusted residential electricity prices are 79 percent higher than in 1990, and have risen faster than most other OECD countries since 2000. Also, there appears to be a trend of steadily rising importer petrol and diesel margins since 2008. We are actively monitoring these developments and looking into ways to address them. An Electricity Price Review is underway, and the Commerce Commission is undertaking a market study into the supply of retail petrol and diesel used in land transport in New Zealand.
CHALLENGES 
Whilst the New Zealand population primarily depends on clean fuels and technology for household needs, such as cooking, lighting and heating, there is not a high reliance on clean fuels and technology across all sectors. In 2017, only 11 percent of New Zealand’s total final energy consumption came from renewable sources, and our overall energy intensity is high (almost 20 percent higher than the OECD average).
The majority of industry, manufacturing and agriculture continue to rely on fossil fuels such as natural gas and coal for process heat applications. This is our second largest source of energyrelated greenhouse gas emissions behind transport. Recent analysis shows that some process heat users are not making decisions that maximise energy efficiency.
Though viable opportunities for process heat users to reduce emissions already exist and can be deployed in a relatively short timeframe, these users often face barriers to the adoption of new technology. Historically, lowemissions prices in the New Zealand 
Emissions Trading Scheme (NZ ETS) 
55

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 7 – AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY

have had a small or negligible impact on the economics of firm-level decisions regarding the renewable and efficient use of process heat.
Additional challenges include gaining access to capital, with renewable energy or efficiency improvement projects having to compete with other private sector capital investment projects. Users may also have an aversion to disrupting their production. A lack of information about efficient or low-emissions technologies, their costs and benefits, as well as users’ own energy use, are also important challenges to increasing access to more sustainable energy in the process heat sector.
The transportation sector is still dominated by fossil fuel use and contributes the most greenhouse gas emissions across New Zealand’s energy sector. This stems from a heavy dependence on road vehicles across our sparsely populated country. There are 792.5 light vehicles per 1,000 people in New Zealand, which is among the highest levels of light vehicle ownership per capita worldwide. In addition, public transport use is low and the vehicle fleet is old with poor fuel economy when compared to other countries.
We face a number of challenges related to the decarbonisation of our transport sector. The NZ ETS plays a very limited role in encouraging emissions reductions as the emission price only comprises a small component of fuel prices. Historically, this has skewed land transport investment decisions in favour of roading, instead of public transport infrastructure investments.
The price of electric vehicles, as well as their limited travel range, also remains a barrier for many New Zealand consumers, though uptake is rising. We risk inheriting highemissions vehicles from other countries due to our lack of vehicle emissions standards. We are investigating this including vehicle fuel efficiency standards as part of the lowemissions vehicles programme. 
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY
Our electricity supply is dominated by hydro-power, which along with wind and geothermal power generation, contributes to ensuring our supply is 85 percent renewable. Domestic policymakers and the Interim Climate Change Committee are investigating pathways to achieve our 2035 goal to make electricity supply 100 percent renewable.
As we transition towards a low-emissions economy and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels in the energy sector, New Zealanders will need to adapt. A Just Transitions Unit has been set up to ensure that the transition is fair, equitable and inclusive in partnership with iwi, communities, households, regions and sectors. This approach seeks to ensure that energy remains affordable, reliable and modern in New Zealand as we move towards a more sustainable, lowemissions future.
With respect to energy affordability, an Electricity Pricing Review is currently underway to assess the affordability of electricity for all New Zealanders. At present, industry standards apply to assist vulnerable or medically dependent consumers in order to minimise and avoid disconnection as a result of non-payment for electricity. A Winter Energy Payment is also available to help vulnerable consumers with the cost of heating their homes in wintertime. In the transport sector, the Commerce Commission is undertaking a market study into the supply of retail petrol and diesel used in land transport in New Zealand.
Poorly insulated housing stock creates significant demand for relatively inefficient and expensive electrical heating. In 2018, we launched a four-year Warmer Kiwi 
A JUST TRANSITION
TO A LOW-EMISSIONS ECONOMY 
Inclusive
Sustainable
Productive
Homes programme, which will provide 	In 2018, the Ministry for Transport grants to low-income New Zealanders for 	announced an updated Government improved insulation and heating.	Policy Statement on land transport, which 
increased spending on public transport, 
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation 	rapid transit for cities, as well as walking Authority (EECA) is currently working 	and cycling infrastructure to shift with the government on a joint action plan 	New Zealanders towards less emissionscalled Process Heat in New Zealand. The 	intensive modes of transportation. To aim is to understand the opportunities 	support this there was also an increase in for increasing process heat efficiency and 	Petrol Excise Duty and Road User Charges. reducing greenhouse gas emissions from 
its use. EECA also actively works with 	In the future, the electrification of industry large energy and heat-users to support 	and electric vehicle uptake are expected efficiency improvements and emissions 	to improve the share of renewable energy 
reduction, including administering grants 	in total final energy consumption and and loans.	improve energy intensity in New Zealand. 
                                             In addition, a Hydrogen Strategy is In order to reduce fossil fuel use in the 	currently under development to assess the transport sector, significant investment 	potential for the use of hydrogen as a fuel into public transport, cycling and electric 	in the transport and electricity sectors in vehicle charging infrastructure will be 	the future.
required. Some freight transport could 
also be affordably shifted from roads to 	New Zealand also has an on-going rail or shipping, although there is limited 	commitment to facilitate access to potential in this direction as most freight 	clean energy, energy efficiency and is carried over small distances. Further 	related infrastructure and technologies advances in technology will be necessary 	through development cooperation, with a to enable the decarbonisation of heavy 	particular focus on the Pacific region and transport and aviation.	Small Island Developing States.
57
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
ELECTRICITY PRICE REVIEW
In April 2018 New Zealand’s Minister of Energy and Resources commissioned an independent review into New Zealand’s electricity market. The review is investigating whether New Zealand’s current electricity market delivers a fair and equitable price to end consumers. It is also considering how to future-proof the sector and its governance structures to help ensure the electricity sector functions well during New Zealand’s transition away from carbon-based fuels – a consideration that will become increasingly important as electricity meets more of New Zealand’s energy needs, and as new technologies are utilised. 
Such reviews are not new. Since the 1970s, New Zealand has reviewed its electricity sector roughly every decade – each time substantial changes have been made to improve or correct the sector’s performance. In the 1980s and 1990s, the sector was privatised to improve commercial performance, and a light-handed regulatory regime was developed. By the 2000s, concerns about industry performance and selfgovernance arrangements resulted in further improvements being made, including developing new regulations and improving market competition to restrain retail prices to efficient levels. 
However, the current review is unique as it addresses the need for electricity prices to be fair and affordable, not just efficient or competitive. Another novel element is the review’s focus on the consumers’ point of view and their say in the direction of the sector. 
The review was split into two phases. The first phase of work focused on determining facts and building evidence of problems within the sector. These were published in the First Report for discussion in September 2019. The second phase of work focused on developing possible improvements to the problems identified in the first report. In February 2019, the review published an Options Paper which contains 41 early ideas for improvements across the entire electricity sector. The options are grouped into seven key themes: strengthening the consumer voice; reducing energy hardship; increasing retail competition; reinforcing wholesale market competition; improving transmission and distribution; improving the regulatory system; and preparing for a low-carbon future. 
NEW ZEALAND’S CURRENT 
ELECTRICITY MARKET DELIVERS A FAIR AND EQUITABLE PRICE TO END CONSUMERS.
These early ideas have been tested through a second round of stakeholder engagement. Written and oral feedback from the public, industry representatives and consumer groups will inform the review’s final recommendations, which will be delivered to the Minister of Energy and Resources in mid-2019. From there the government will consider which of| the review’s recommendations it will action, including those that industry and the public sector should progress as a high priority.
VECTOR URBAN FOREST—VECTOR
The Vector Urban Forest is an Auckland based initiative from electricity distribution business Vector that aligns with its commitment to creating more sustainable cities and communities. 
UNDER THE INITIATIVE, THE 
COMPANY PLANTS TWO NATIVE 
TREES FOR EVERY ONE TREE REMOVED TO PROTECT THE REGION’S POWER LINES.
The planting targets existing restoration schemes to maximise both the ecological and social value of the trees, including riparian planting and focusing on areas of the city where existing canopy cover 
is low. 	Photo credit: Vector Ltd
Managing tree risk is especially important 	The Vector Urban Forest plays a key given the extensive network damage 	role in educating the public about the that occurs during storms and other high 	importance of proper tree management wind events. Vector’s climate modelling 	and what their responsibilities are as projects a significant increase in the 	a tree owner. Vector has published a number of hours with sustained wind 	planting guide that shows what trees speed in excess of 70km/h – the point 	and plants are safe to plant near power where damage to the power network is 	lines. This guide promotes the planting of historically high. 	species native to New Zealand and those 
that provide habitat for birds and bees. 
Aucklanders love their trees but 
unfortunately there is a real lack of 	The Vector Urban Forest also provides awareness of the issues they can cause 	a positive initiative for Vector to engage to network resiliency if they are not 	with local communities and work maintained or planted with consideration 	together on creating a future legacy to power line proximity.	for generations to come. As part of the 
                                             initiative Vector involves local school The Vector Urban Forest is an example 	groups to provide them an opportunity of the action Vector is taking to raise 	to connect with nature and create their awareness of the issue. Each year the 	recreation spaces of the future. More Vector Urban Forest Initiative aims to 	information can be found at: www.vector. plant at least 20,000 new seedlings to 	co.nz/articles/planting-smart-to-helpmake up for the approximately 10,000 	prevent-power-outages.
trees removed from near the electricity network. The trees Vector removes are first identified as a risk by an expert and then removed with permission from the landowner. 
59

NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand’s economic goal is to build a productive, sustainable and inclusive economy. Our plan for a modern and prosperous New Zealand is supported by a comprehensive whole-of-government work programme, which includes four key economic priorities that support our economic goal: growing and sharing more fairly New Zealand’s prosperity; supporting thriving and sustainable regions; delivering responsible governance with a broader measure of success; and transitioning to a clean, green, carbon neutral New Zealand.
IN ORDER TO EASE FINANCIAL PRESSURE ON FAMILIES WE ARE TAKING STEPS TO INCREASE WAGES AND PARENTAL LEAVE.
To deliver higher wellbeing for New Zealanders, we are working to overcome some significant challenges to productivity, sustainability, and inclusiveness. Like the rest of the world, we are also at the beginning of a period of significant change driven by our demographics, technology, the sharing economy and climate change. We also need to respond to changing financial and trade policies of major economies around the world. Our government and our people are working together to shape our economy for the future so that we can make the most of the opportunities that arise from these changes and address key challenges.
In line with Goal 8, we want to transform our economy. In doing so, we will ensure the transition to the new economy is fair for our people, our places, and our businesses. Our partnerships with our businesses, our people, Māori, local government, and non-government organisations will ensure we plan and manage the economic transition so that  it happens in a way that is fair and just.
We want a productive economy that has productive and sustainable cities and regions, businesses that are innovative and internationally competitive, and people that are highly skilled working in fair, productive and meaningful employment relationships. Our aim is to grow our productivity levels so that New Zealanders are positioned to take advantage of the productivity gains from the internet of things, automation and renewable energy.
We want a sustainable economy that will be clean, green and carbon neutral. Our economy should be environmentally, fiscally, economically, socially and culturally sustainable. It must be resilient to economic and natural disasters and economic growth should be enduring and created within ecological limits. We aim to reverse much of our existing environmental damage and effectively protect our natural capital, including our native species and habitats.
We want an inclusive economy that delivers higher wellbeing and living standards for all our people. They should have a safe place to live and the opportunity to participate in meaningful and decent work and share in our prosperity. We want our people to have access to meaningful pathways into education, training and work, social support, healthcare and rehabilitation when they need it, and to be protected from unsafe, unfair and oppressive behaviour. We want to address gender inequalities that continue to exist around pay equity and the gender pay gap.
CHALLENGES 
The New Zealand economy is growing at a solid rate, our unemployment rate remains low and the outlook continues to be positive. Ongoing economic 
61

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 8 – DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

growth is expected to be supported by strengthening wage growth, low interest rates and accelerating residential investment growth. 
Nevertheless, we are preparing for a period of significant change in light of major developments that will have impacts on our economy, now and for decades to come. These include digitalisation, the internet of things, clean energy and the sharing economy, as well as global disruptions associated with policies such as quantitative easing and state control of trade surpluses that can distort markets and trigger protectionist responses.
We can expect these developments to transform our economy and our jobs on a similar scale of impact as globalisation, the internet, market-based reforms and removing subsidies did over the past 30 years. Achieving this transformation will take time and its impacts will not always be felt evenly across our country. Therefore, as our economy transforms, fairness throughout the process will be important.
Technologies such as artificial intelligence, the internet of things and renewable energy may help New Zealand in overcoming the productivity challenges of size and distance and improve our international competitiveness. To make the most of the opportunities arising from these changes, we want to take action now to support change and technology uptake in areas where New Zealand has comparative advantage.
New Zealand’s productivity levels are low relative to the OECD average. Some of the critical challenges for lifting New Zealand’s productivity performance include the small size and scale of many of our businesses, adding greater value and diversity to the goods and services we produce, overcoming geographic distance to key markets, lifting low levels of research and development, and improving trends in the availability and efficient use of capital.
In terms of sustainability, our economy’s input driven growth in recent years has put pressure on our biophysical limits, infrastructure and social outcomes. We also face the risks of climate change, natural disasters and economic shocks. In addition, some population groups and some regions have persistently experienced lower wellbeing as a result of our economy failing to deliver equal opportunities or equitable outcomes. Some key challenges to realising an inclusive economy include reducing inequality and material deprivation, improving education, health and housing outcomes, and protecting vulnerable people.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
Rather than measuring progress in purely economic terms, we are developing a broader set of success measures that will put the notion of sustainable intergenerational wellbeing at the centre of our thinking and decision making. 
We are establishing new, comprehensive measures of national achievement and redefining what success looks like, in a way that is complementary to the vision encapsulated in the SDGs. We are developing new statistical tools (Indicators Aotearoa New Zealand) which will contain wellbeing indicators tailored to New Zealanders by incorporating cultural and Te Ao Māori perspectives. These will align with our Living Standards Framework and its accompanying dashboard, which puts sustainable intergenerational wellbeing at the centre of decision making processes for policy advice, government expenditure and long term management of our assets. Where appropriate, these new tools and frameworks will also assist us in evaluating our future progress towards implementing Goal 8.
Beyond the development of new tools to measure and assess progress, we have a range of initiatives underway to build a more productive, sustainable and inclusive economy and ensure the transition to this economy is fair and just for all of our people, places and businesses.
We are taking a number of steps to grow and share more fairly New Zealand’s prosperity. We are partnering with business to encourage innovation, productivity and build a skilled workforce. This includes work to improve productivity by reforming our tax, central banking, overseas investment and commerce regulatory systems. We are also aiming to grow exports through our small business strategy and trade for all agenda, and to build a skilled workforce through reforms to vocational education and training systems, and reforms to our immigration system. We are also looking at ways to protect vulnerable workers through further reform of employment relations laws or other ways of discouraging business models, which could undermine employment standards.
We acknowledge the opportunities that are being progressed to increase the productivity of Māori-owned primary sector assets and agribusinesses. We are unlocking new growth through major infrastructure programmes in our roads, rail, schools and hospitals. We also have a number of initiatives under way to strengthen the Māori and Pacific contribution to the economy, including the Crown-Māori Economic Growth Partnership and national Māori economic development strategy, He kai kei aku ringa, which means ‘providing food by my own hands’, and employment and business support services for Pacific communities.
To meet the challenges and take the opportunities of a rapidly changing world of work we need to support workers and businesses to be inclusive, resilient and adaptable. We have tasked the New Zealand Productivity Commission with undertaking an inquiry into technological change, disruption and the future of work. Further, we have established the Future 
of Work Tripartite Forum, a partnership between government, business and workers, to investigate our institutions and programmes to ensure we are prepared to meet challenges and take the opportunities as our economy transforms. 
In order to ease financial pressure on families we are taking steps to increase wages, increase parental leave, improve early childhood education, and address the gender pay gap through an Equal Pay Amendment Bill and a gender pay action plan in the public service. We are also aiming to reform employment relations law to protect vulnerable workers.
For New Zealand, a key aspect of promoting sustained and inclusive economic growth entails supporting thriving and sustainable regions outside of our major cities. We are creating new opportunities for regional economies to grow, including by investing in them through the Provincial Growth Fund, enhancing supply chain efficiency, accelerating the rollout of rural broadband internet, better supporting the racing industry, and improving the benefits that regions receive from tourism. We are also working to boost the international value and reputation of primary sector exports from the regions, including through improved freshwater and fisheries management, strengthening biosecurity measures, and by developing partnerships between the government and food producers on key policies. 
Finally, we are working to transition our economy to a clean, green carbon neutral New Zealand with a sustainable future. We are aiming to set clear emission reduction targets, improve our Emissions Trading Scheme, and develop a low-emission vehicle programme. We are also looking at ways to more sustainably manage the extraction of our natural resources, and to support our people, places and businesses transition to a low-emissions economy.
63



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
Broadly speaking, New Zealand has a good national infrastructure base. We are focused on bolstering our infrastructure over the next 10 years to help us keep pace with our growing population and as part of an economic transition that we are going through to move towards a more sustainable, lower-emissions economy. 
WE WANT TO BETTER DIGITALLY CONNECT 
OUR MORE REMOTE, RURAL COMMUNITIES 
AND DECREASE THE BARRIERS THAT GEOGRAPHIC ISOLATION MAY CREATE.
This investment will also help us to address challenges including ageing infrastructure, ongoing affordability constraints, regional growth and decline, infrastructure pinch-points (especially in our largest city of Auckland), an ageing population and increased pressure on our natural resources.
Investment in resilient infrastructure will enable our communities to be safe, inclusive, and interconnected through reliable transport and communication networks. This will also ensure our infrastructure is robust in the face of climate change, and help New Zealand achieve our economic goals of building a more productive, sustainable, and inclusive economy. 
To support a thriving nation in the digital age, we are working to make digital connectivity part of daily life. This improvement in connectivity will lead to significant economic and social benefits, and improve wellbeing. It will also drive productivity in our provinces, enable innovation, and keep us connected to the rest of the world.
 
We want to better digitally connect our more remote, rural communities and decrease the barriers that geographic isolation may create, thereby lowering the barrier to the prosperity of individuals and businesses. We want to ensure any connectivity gaps in relation to telecommunications infrastructure are addressed, and that digital infrastructure is future-proofed to keep pace with technological changes.
We want to support our businesses to thrive and be innovative through greater investment in research and development (R&D). Approximately 97 percent of all businesses in New Zealand employ less than 20 employees, and we want these businesses to be agile and responsive to grow, thrive and be innovative.
We want to support business innovation because it supports economic diversity, raises productivity, creates highvalue jobs, and improves social and environmental wellbeing. Currently, R&D expenditure total is 1.37 percent of New Zealand GDP. To raise this to two percent of GDP over the next 10 years, a R&D tax credit has been introduced to support the combination of grants that are currently in place.
CHALLENGES 
New Zealand has relatively low levels of productivity growth and investment in large-scale infrastructure. We are continuing to work on improving the incentives in New Zealand’s infrastructure sector because we believe New Zealand’s infrastructure investment decisions could be more outcome focused than they are now. 
New Zealand’s institutional arrangements for managing infrastructure investments have strengthened in recent years. However, the system is not consistently delivering good infrastructure outcomes at a local level. The institutional settings that support infrastructure planning and delivery need to work well together to make a material difference to outcomes.
The poor management structures in New Zealand’s infrastructure system result in ad-hoc and short-term investment decisions that are often focussed on the asset solution. In part, this is because planning and funding decisions are not linked to an overarching vision and strategy.
This lack of coordination means that evidence does not always inform decisions. There are also inconsistencies in the approaches that central and local government take to the planning, 
67

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 9 – INDUSTRY, INNOVATION, AND INFRASTRUCTURE

marketing, procurement and delivery of infrastructure.
The cumulative effect of these weaknesses is a lack of visibility and certainty in the pipeline of infrastructure projects that are likely to occur in the future. This is inhibiting investment in New Zealand and its labour force. As such, a step change is required in the infrastructure sector.
In terms of information and communication technologies, extending mobile and broadband coverage further into rural New Zealand is particularly challenging because remaining areas are characterised by their remoteness and rugged terrain. The government has therefore been intervening in the market where the terrain, combined with low population numbers, makes it uneconomic for commercial companies to invest in infrastructure.
New Zealand’s science and innovation system is notably small, both in terms of private and public expenditure. Despite significant recent increases in public funding, this expenditure is still below comparable international averages, as is our number of people engaged in research.
The number of businesses that currently receive growth grants from the government for R&D is low, at approximately 300. This is partly due to the large number of small companies in New Zealand, and the average age of these businesses. For example, one third of all New Zealand companies have been in business for less than five years. The R&D Tax Incentive is going to replace growth grants but government will continue to provide a broader landscape of support, which includes grants and repayable grants.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
We have a range of initiatives underway to ensure our investment in infrastructure improves wellbeing and living standards, and grows and shares more fairly New Zealand’s prosperity. As part of this, we are working to improve the incentives in New Zealand’s infrastructure system to ensure we deliver good infrastructure outcomes at a local level. 
To support investment intentions and create opportunities for greater collaboration in infrastructure project delivery, we are establishing the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission, Te Waihanga. Through the Commission we want to foster partnerships across central and local government, private infrastructure owners, and the market. This will assist us to successfully deliver new infrastructure, and undertake maintenance and renewal activities on our existing infrastructure.
This Commission will develop a 30-year infrastructure strategy, and provide advice and best practice support to infrastructure initiatives throughout New Zealand. This strategy will work in partnership with industry to deliver resilient, sustainable infrastructure that improves the wellbeing of all New Zealanders and better enable industry to invest in physical and human capital. It will help guide our future infrastructure investment decisions, and ensure that these decisions support productivity and business growth, and create reliable and resilient networks, including our transport, energy, water, and communications networks.
The government and industry are collaborating to lift the capability and capacity of the construction workforce to ensure we have the right people at the right time in the right place with the right skills to meet our current and future construction needs. Development of human capital is essential to ensure we are able to build, maintain and replace the infrastructure we require to prosper.
Under our Urban Growth Agenda, we aim to remove barriers to the supply of land and infrastructure and make room 
BOOSTING	Fibre-to-the-premises for
BROADBAND ANDMOBILE SERVICESNATIONWIDE	87% of New Zealanders
in 390 towns and cities
	Rural broadband to more than 	Mobile coverage on approx
85,000 rural households 1,400 km of state highways & and businesses 168 key tourism locations
for cities to grow up and out. It brings We see research, science and innovation together five focus areas: infrastructure (RSI) as driving the changes necessary funding and financing; urban planning; to achieve its goal of a productive, spatial planning; transport pricing; sustainable and inclusive economy. and legislative reform to support the The government has set a goal of lifting 
programme’s objectives	New Zealand’s spending on research and 
                                             development (R&D) to two percent of GDP We are also undertaking a major upgrade 	by 2027. It is also developing a RSI strategy of our telecommunications infrastructure. 	that sets out a vision for what it wants This will boost broadband and mobile 	to achieve through RSI, and a planned services throughout the country and 	pathway for achieving the lift of R&D. significantly contribute to making 
New Zealand a world-leading digital 	The key challenges to the RSI system nation. Ultra-fast internet access will be 	are growing business R&D and improving improved, and by the end of 2022 we 	connections between publicly funded estimate 87 percent of New Zealanders in 	science and domestic and international around 390 towns and cities will be able 	partners. One of the most significant to access broadband through fibre-to-	recent initiatives to address this is the the-premises. This will place New Zealand 	commitment to implementing an R&D in the top five countries in the OECD in 	Tax Incentive with the aim of lifting terms of the proportion of the population 	private sector R&D. This is intended to that has access to fibre.	form a significant portion of the increase 
                                             in total R&D that is required to reach the New Zealanders in rural locations government’s two percent goal. have usually been limited to slower 
internet speeds and expensive satellite 	The design of the Tax Incentive will broadband. Under a new Rural 	ensure that a broader range of firms are Broadband Initiative, by the end of 2023, 	incentivised to do R&D. This initiative more than 85,000 rural households 	will be delivered in collaboration with and businesses will be able to access 	New Zealand’s dedicated innovation improved broadband services. Additional 	agency, Callaghan Innovation. Callaghan funding will also extend mobile phone 	Innovation supports science and coverage to more remote areas of the 	technology-based innovation and its country, including on approximately 	commercialisation to improve the growth 1,400 km of state highway and in 168 key 	and competitiveness of businesses. tourism locations.
69



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
We believe that a sustainable, inclusive, and productive economy provides all citizens with opportunities to engage in economic activities and social discourse to achieve their full potential. While New Zealand prides itself on having a fair society, inequalities persist. We are committed to reducing inequality and supporting and empowering all citizens to achieve their potential. 
THE CROWN-MA-ORI STRATEGY FOR MA-ORI 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (HE KAI KEI 
AKU RINGA) PROVIDES A BLUEPRINT FOR 
A PRODUCTIVE, INNOVATIVE, AND EXPORT-ORIENTATED MA-ORI ECONOMY THAT WILL 
SUPPORT BETTER PAYING JOBS AND HIGHER LIVING STANDARDS.
Our goal is to ensure that our economic and social systems work hand in hand. We want the social system to deliver equal access to opportunities for people to participate in the economic, social, cultural and political life of the community, and the economic system to ensure that people can take advantage of the opportunities, and benefit from equitable outcomes. We are also committed to maintaining well-managed immigration policies. 
CHALLENGES
Since the Global Financial Crisis, New Zealand’s real GDP per capita growth has averaged 0.8 percent per annum. The national income share of the bottom 40 percent of the population has been nearly constant at 20 percent since 1996. We recognise that our policies and strategies will need to continue to have a strong focus on raising the real incomes of lower income earners at a faster rate than the national average if we are to increase their national income share.
The make-up of the bottom 40 percent of the population varies significantly by household type, one of a number of measures that are useful to inform policy responses. Over 70 percent of sole parent households (84 percent of which are headed by women), and households of the elderly who live on their own, have incomes in the bottom 40 percent. By contrast, less than 25 percent of families with no dependent children and couples under 65 have incomes in the bottom 40 percent of incomes.
Māori and Pacific peoples are over represented in the bottom 40 percent of household incomes. Our annual household income survey data indicates that about 60 percent of Māori and Pacific peoples incomes were in the bottom 40 percent, compared to 34 percent of European/Pākehā households. Median household income trends indicate that on average there may be an income gap of about 25 percent for Māori and about 32 percent for Pacific peoples below that of European/Pākehā household incomes. 
Temporary migrants in New Zealand have the same employment protections as citizens and residents. However, there have been some instances of temporary migrant worker exploitation. We are working to better understand the extent of this issue and to identify proposals for policy change.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY
We are committed to supporting people to move into and remain in employment through a suite of active labour market programmes and policies. These include 
73

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 10 – REDUCE INEQUALITIES

employment readiness and job placement services, wage subsidies, work readiness training, and job creation. These programmes and policies are intended to prepare job seekers for the labour market and help them to find secure and suitable employment. The Social Security system provides specific support for young people to obtain full-time work and to achieve a formal industry qualification. Parents’ labour market participation is universally supported by 20 hours per week of free early childhood education for children aged three to five years old.
Our investments in increasing skills and raising productivity are contributing to reducing income inequality in lower income populations. This is being progressed by working with businesses to foster innovation, productivity and building up the skilled workforce. As an example, we are aiming to lift the capacity and capability of our construction workforce under a Construction Skills Action Plan in order to drive higher skilled and better paid jobs, with a particular focus on increasing the participation of under-represented groups including Māori and Pacific peoples. 
We are also strengthening employment law to further improve working conditions and fair wages. The Employment Relations Amendment Act 2018 is designed to improve workplace conditions and help deliver decent work conditions and fair wages. The Act will help to achieve these outcomes by improving protections for workers, especially vulnerable workers, and strengthening the role of collective bargaining. In addition, new equal pay legislation aims to address systemic sexbased pay discrimination.
Under our Provincial Growth Fund we will invest $3 billion over 2018 to 2020 to enhance economic development opportunities, create sustainable jobs, enable Māori to reach their full potential, boost social inclusion and participation, build resilient communities, and help meet New Zealand’s climate change targets. The Fund has a strong focus on helping deprived communities which should also help to reduce income inequalities. Areas with a high index of socioeconomic deprivation have been prioritised for early investment.
The Crown-Māori strategy for Māori economic development (He kai kei aku ringa) provides a blueprint for a productive, innovative, and exportorientated Māori economy that will support better paying jobs and higher living standards. It sets targets for Māori economic development progress from 2017 to 2021 – with the overarching goal of increasing Māori median income by 20 percent. 
As part of our efforts to address historic Māori grievances, a permanent commission of inquiry, the Waitangi Tribunal, was established to hear claims made by Māori against the Crown for breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi. Over the last three decades, following inquiries into historical Treaty breaches in each geographic district, the Crown has entered into negotiated settlement processes with Māori groups. These settlements aim to resolve historical claims and provide some redress to claimant groups.
Since the first settlement in 1998 there have been 87 settlements negotiated with different Māori groups and the Crown is working to complete a further 50 settlements with remaining groups. The total value of completed settlements so far is $2.24 billion. Settlements include an acknowledgement and apology for breaches; commercial redress, in the form of cash and property; and cultural redress, which helps to reconnect Māori to sites of spiritual and cultural significance. Settlements have been used to culturally and economically revitalise 
$3
BILLION
to be invested by the Provincial 	Creating jobs, leading	Increasing social
Growth Fund	to sustainable economic 	inclusion and
	growth	participation
Enabling Māori to realise 	Encouraging environmental 	Improving resilience, aspirations in all aspects	sustainability and meeting 	particularly of critical of the economy	climate change commitments 	infrastructure, and by 
alongside productive use of 	diversifying our economy land, water and other resources
Māori through commercial investments 	Many of the initiatives described in and direct investment in tribal members 	other Goals, in particular Goals 1, 4 and 5, through education and training.	will also make a substantial contribution to achieving this goal. Overall, these As for other countries, an aging 	initiatives and investments will contribute population and rising rates of long-term 	to increasing the incomes of lower conditions means that there is a growing 	income earners at a faster rate than demand for families to contribute to the 	the national average, build a more care and support of family members. 	inclusive and productive economy, Changes to funded family care are being 	and reduce inequalities.
introduced that will provide increased 	 financial support to households where a spouse or parent provides unpaid care to a family member with high care needs.
We are also developing a new Disability Action Plan, which will address issues posing significant challenges to disabled people, including education, employment, accessible information, housing, seclusion and restraint. By tackling these issues we aim to increase the incomes and wellbeing of disabled people, reduce the inequalities they face and build a more inclusive and productive economy. 
75

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 NEW ZEALAND DISABILITY STRATEGY

RED SHIRTS IN THE COMMUNITY—THE WAREHOUSE GROUP

WE HAVE A VISION TO MAKE 
NEW ZEALAND A NON-DISABLING 
SOCIETY – A PLACE WHERE DISABLED PEOPLE HAVE AN 
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY TO ACHIEVE 
THEIR GOALS AND ASPIRATIONS, 
AND ALL OF NEW ZEALAND WORKS TOGETHER TO MAKE THIS HAPPEN.
The New Zealand Disability Strategy was developed in consultation with disabled people, their families and whānau to help achieve this vision and to progress realisation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in New Zealand. The Strategy guides the work of government agencies on disability issues from 2016 to 2026. It is governed by the principle that disabled people be involved in decision-making that impacts them, as well as the Treaty of Waitangi and the CRPD. 
The Strategy is implemented through Disability Action Plans. An Action Plan covers a four-year period and is updated every two years to ensure that priorities remain relevant and in line with the Strategy and recommendations from the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
The Strategy recognises the need for a long-term approach to invest in disabled people’s whole lives using a twin-track approach to deliver outcomes via specific and mainstream services.
For example, the Strategy places a high priority on all disabled people realising: an excellent education; security in their economic situation; the highest attainable standards of health and wellbeing; and that they feel safe, understood and are treated fairly and equitably by the justice system.
An outcomes framework including indicators is being developed to measure, monitor and publicly report on progress against the Strategy. To address data gaps, indicators based on the Washington Group Short Set of questions have been included in the national census and a number of government surveys. This information will facilitate comparisons between disabled and non-disabled people, when available.
As a practical example of the impact of the Action Plan, all public sector chief executives have committed to signing an accessibility charter to ensure public information is increasingly accessible to disabled people.
Convention on the
  Te Tiriti	Rights of o Waitangi Persons
with
    Ensuring Disabilities disabled people are involved in
decision-making
that impacts
       A	them	Specific whole-of-life	and
and long-term mainstream approach support and to social services – a investment twin-track 
approach
Since 2016, The Warehouse’s Red Shirts in the Community programme has helped more than 1100 young people who are not currently in employment, education, or training, gain retail skills and experience the workforce. 
The programme is operated by The Warehouse in conjunction with the Ministry of Social Development, which recommends and provides the participants. Skills Organisation, operates as the navigator or ‘mentor’ for the participants, and also assesses adherence to New Zealand Qualification Authority standards.
Each participant is mentored through the programme by Skills Organisation, which also provides 90 days of pastoral support to the participants, with the aim of finding paid employment within three months of graduating. Participants are generally made up of young people (aged 16 to 24 years) not engaged in employment, education, or training.
The programme was developed over a period of 18 months, with three pilots taking place across a range of The Warehouse stores. The third pilot resulted in a 76 percent success rate in assisting the participants into paid employment within three months of programme completion. Alongside the hard skills learnt by the participants, an unanticipated benefit was the soft skills gained such as increased teamwork, selfesteem, respect for others, engagement in conversations, and self-confidence.
The Red Shirts in the Community programme is now the largest publicprivate partnership of its kind working on social inclusion and youth development in New Zealand. This year it is being rolled out to 57 stores nationwide.
Most recently the programme has been included in a digital platform known as Accelerator. Young people can access the platform for workplace training programmes and connect with potential employers in a blended learning environment that incorporates gamification of content and a mentoring component.
From late 2019, Accelerator will recruit participants through online platform Youth Hub, provide access to training modules needed during their three weeks in store at The Warehouse. It will also offer 90 days further follow up and pastoral care support to participants as they complete their training and prepare work-ready documents such as CVs and references.
Red Shirts in the Community will be the first training module on Accelerator. Once it has been successfully delivered as a digital programme, it will be extended to other sectors and employers who can offer on-the-job training opportunities for young people.
77

NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
The vast majority of New Zealanders live in cities and urban settings. We are therefore focused on a range of housing and urban development policies that address how cities and other urban areas deal with and adapt to change. We are seeking to end homelessness, increase housing supply (both public and private), and improve the effectiveness of urban planning systems.
WE ARE SEEKING TO MAKE LONGER-TERM CHANGES THAT WILL SEE AN END TO HOMELESSNESS.
Through our Urban Growth Agenda (UGA), we are seeking to increase housing affordability and create thriving communities by developing policy now that will have an effect across the medium to long-term. Beyond housing affordability, other objectives of the UGA include improved living standards and housing choices, improved access to employment, education and services, reduced emissions and increased climate resilience, improved infrastructure, and to provide quality built environments that avoid urban sprawl. All of these polices strongly reflect Goal 11, which seeks to make cities inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable. 
We are seeking to make longer-term changes that will see an end to homelessness, better integration of transport and urban development, climate change and disaster resilience, and improving freshwater quality in our urban areas. New Zealand’s policies on urban planning, environmental management, and emergency management are also evolving to ensure that our cities are fit for purpose in the future, are sustainable, and resilient. 
Aspects of Goal 11 relating to risk and resilience are being addressed in the policy and monitoring spheres through New Zealand’s implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Alignment between Goal 11 and New Zealand’s transport policy is also strong, with focus on the areas of transport safety, sustainability, and accessibility – including public transport being features in both. Sustainable environmental management and public participation are fundamental parts of New Zealand’s resource management legislation.
CHALLENGES
Perhaps the biggest obstacle for New Zealand to make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable are the competing challenges that these goals can present, such as accommodating population growth, managing urban expansion, and preserving the natural environment. New Zealand’s legislative framework seeks to balance these competing priorities, with the UGA pursuing improvements to how both local and central government plan long-term and how they work together to achieve the right balance.
New Zealand also faces a range of hazards and risks from natural disasters, including earthquakes. Many of these risks can be readily identified, and planning to manage them and ensure effective response and recovery from emergencies can mitigate their impact. However, we also recognise that the future is uncertain and significant, unexpected, and hard-to-predict events in New Zealand are inevitable.
We are also undertaking further work to better monitor and understand issues related to Goal 11’s aspiration of better cities. Collection and reconciliation of 
79
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 11 – SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
NEW HEALTH HOMES STANDARDS FOR NEW ZEALAND’S
 
600,000 RENTAL HOMES WILL BE IN PLACE BY 2021, INCLUDING:

All rental homes will have a 	All rental homes will have ceiling heater that can heat the 	and underfloor insulation that either main living area to 18°C.	meets the 2008 Building Code 
insulation standard, or (for existing ceiling insulation) has a minimum thickness of 120mm.

data relating to a number of the Goal’s 	alongside the 2010-2020 Road Safety targets has proved difficult. Suitable data 	Strategy that seeks affordable, accessible is unavailable or data that is collected 	and sustainable transport systems as locally has yet to be standardised to 	well as improved safety and public produce a national dataset, making 	transport. National measures for transport reporting on how we are tracking towards 	accessibility, including access to public some of the goal’s targets difficult. 	transport, are currently being developed. Work on data collection and reporting 
is ongoing, particularly around the state 	Goal 11 seeks inclusive and sustainable of housing, transport accessibility, and 	urbanisation through participatory urban natural and cultural heritage.	planning and management. Our approach 
is strongly aligned with this vision, with 
our Resource Management Act requiring 
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY	the sustainable management of resources as well as regulating urban planning. As 
                                             such, all cities and local government areas In the area of housing, we aim to ensure 	have robust direct public participation in affordable housing that is healthy and 	urban planning processes. appropriate for need, and to take steps 
to end, not just manage, homelessness. 	New Zealand takes very seriously the Work is also underway to measure 	need to protect our unique cultural and evaluate the quality of existing 	and natural heritage. We have two housing stock. In addition, new minimum 	government agencies tasked with the standards to create warmer, drier rental 	preservation, protection and conservation homes have been put in place along with 	of cultural heritage and one for natural improved building standards for housing 	heritage. These agencies, along with a being built under the government’s 	wide range of policies that support 
KiwiBuild house construction programme. 	them, evidence our strong desire to 
                                             preserve New Zealand’s heritage for The 2018 Government Policy Statement 	future generations.
on land transport prioritises both 
transport safety and access to transport, 	New Zealand has comprehensive including public transport. This sits 	alignment between national and local disaster resilience planning which is 	to waste collection and its disposal is based on a reduction, readiness, response 	set out under the Waste Minimisation and recover framework. We aim for 	Act and the Resource Management Act. cities to adopt and implement policies 	All household waste is disposed of at that support mitigating and adapting 	sanitary landfills and commercial waste to climate change, and resilience to 	is disposed of at landfills appropriate disasters. New Zealand’s monitoring 	for the waste type. We want to move of adoption and implementation of 	towards circular economy thinking so climate change and resource efficiency 	that resources are kept in the system policies and plans is a relatively recent 	for as long as possible and diverted development. Current baseline reporting 	from landfills.
shows some local authorities are well 
advanced in comprehensive planning, 	The National Environmental Standards for with many others continuing to develop 	Air Quality have set thresholds to manage their plans. On assessing the effects of 	the population’s exposure to ambient disasters we are already collecting data 	pollutants particularly in towns and cities. on our progress towards the Sendai 	Interventions to improve air quality in our Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, 	cities and reduce the effects of poor air and we are also currently establishing a 	quality are having an effect. Modelling National Loss Database which supports 	shows that estimated premature deaths 
Sendai Target reporting.	associated with air pollutant exposure decreased by eight percent between 2006 and 2016. 
NEW ZEALAND IS A LEADER OF Universal access to green and public ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE CITIES, spaces is a target within Goal 11. In line with this, we have a national programme LEVERAGING THE BENEFITS THAT CITIES supporting cities and communities to 
become age-friendly and a number 
OFFER WHILE REDUCING THE COSTS AND 	have already achieved Age Friendly 
Communities’ accreditation. We are 
IMPACTS THAT THEY IMPOSE.	also commencing a work programme to 
                                             achieve a fully accessible New Zealand for persons with disabilities. In addition many local authorities have their own plans and Local authorities have completed an 	strategies relating to public open space assessment of the amount of underground 	and how to make those spaces safe, and above ground infrastructure that 	inclusive and accessible. will be affected by sea level rise, based 
on three different scenarios. Discussions 	Internationally, New Zealand’s aid policy between local and central government are 	aims to deliver sustainable development underway to identify options for meeting 	and reduce poverty in developing the cost involved and providing councils 	countries and contribute to a more with the powers to halt development in 	secure, equitable and prosperous world, areas likely to be affected by sea level rise 	and strongly supports the SDG target in in the future.	this area.
	New Zealand’s waste management policy 	 
is aligned with Goal 11, with a particular recent focus on strategy to reduce waste sent to landfill. New Zealand’s approach 
81

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 BUILDING OUR DISASTER RESILIENCE

LIVING LIGHTLY AND FUTUREFIT—AUCKLAND COUNCIL

New Zealand is exposed to a range of significant hazards and threats, including earthquakes and extreme weather. In addition to natural hazards, we face a number of other threats which could cause disasters or major disruptions. Our economy relies heavily on primary production and is vulnerable to adverse impacts from pests and diseases. Heavy reliance on technology and just-in-time supply chains means we are vulnerable to disruption from a wide range of domestic and international sources. The shifting global geopolitical environment means threats to our trading environment, security and economy are complex and often unpredictable.
To better prepare ourselves to tackle these hazards and threats, the government, in partnership with a wide range of stakeholders, has developed the framework for a National Disaster Resilience Strategy. The Strategy is made under the mandate of the Civil Defence Emergency Management Act 2002, but has broad intent to strengthen the resilience of New Zealand, so that the hazards, crises, and emergencies we will inevitably face do not become disasters that threaten our wellbeing and prosperity. 
The Strategy proposes a three-pronged approach to improve our nation’s resilience to disasters. First it aims to minimise the risks we face and limit the significant impacts to be managed in a crisis. Second, it seeks to build the capability and capacity to manage emergencies when they do happen. Finally, it aims to enable, empower and support communities to act for themselves and others when faced with risk or disruption.
The Strategy takes a whole-of-society approach, promoting a strong message that ‘everyone has a role in a disaster resilient nation’. It describes a model of a resilient nation, as a blend of bottom-up, grassroots, community initiatives, and an enabling, empowering, and supportive policy environment at a local and central government level. 
ENSURING CITIES AND DISTRICTS 
ARE MORE INCLUSIVE, SAFE, 
RESILIENT AND SUSTAINABLE IS A KEY PART OF THE STRATEGY.
Our towns and cities are where most New Zealanders source their everyday services, and it is where they live, work, and play. Given that our towns and cities are a critical support system for individuals, families, and communities, the Strategy promotes a series of actions to improve their resilience.
Building resilience at this level is about understanding risk through assessment and mapping, reducing exposure and vulnerability through risk-sensitive economic development and growth planning, risk-informed asset and financial management, and building capacity through community development, emergency preparedness activities, and planning for recovery. 
Image credit: National Disaster Resilience Strategy civildefence.govt.nz
CHARGED WITH SHIFTING AUCKLANDERS TO A LOW 
CARBON PATH IN SUPPORT OF 
THE REGION’S 1.5°C CLIMATE 
COMMITMENT AND ITS STATUS 
AS A C40 INNOVATOR CITY, 
AUCKLAND COUNCIL’S LOW 
CARBON LIVING TEAM HAS 
DEVELOPED A SCIENCE-BASED 
PROGRAMME CALLED ‘LIVE LIGHTLY – NOHO MA-MA-’.
Based around six climate action themes 
(Move, Shop, Eat, Energy, Grow and Talk) Live Lightly quantifies consumption carbon emissions linked to over 90 lifestyle actions. It provides guidance on how Aucklanders can identify and adopt the lifestyle actions that will yield the greatest material impact, in terms of carbon reduction, and lead to improved health, wellbeing, and financial savings.
A crucial part of the programme has been to identify the barriers and triggers to climate action. A key finding of the programme is that 44 percent of Aucklanders feel overwhelmed when confronted with issues relating to climate change; that often people feel that ‘it’s too late’, ‘too big a problem’, or ‘somebody else’s problem to deal with’. The research also found that by deconstructing the ‘climate change’ issue to the household level, individuals are better able to understand, relate to, and take action. Furthermore, when the benefits of taking climate action are articulated in terms of monetary savings, convenience and health benefits, individuals are far more receptive and prepared to participate. The most powerful message that Live Lightly sends is that every individual action taken, no matter how small, yields a significant collective result, and that Aucklanders, as individuals and as a collective, do play a substantial and positive role in addressing climate change.
With the understanding that different messaging and tools work for different segments of the population, the Live Lightly Programme has been designed to use language and calls to action that resonate with each target segment of Auckland’s population. One example is the FutureFit initiative, co-developed by Auckland Council and Wellington City Council. FutureFit is New Zealand’s first gamified carbon footprint tool, which creates a fun, team challenge environment to drive collective action on climate change. FutureFit guides users to make small, meaningful changes to their lifestyles that will reduce their daily consumption-related carbon emissions.
This unique online tool is designed to empower New Zealanders to act on climate change by quantifying the carbon emissions associated with their daily lifestyle actions; and challenging individuals to reduce their carbon footprint.
FutureFit enables individuals to view and understand their personal carbon footprint; it provides a benchmark for users to track their individual footprint against that of the average New Zealander and the rest of the world; and it sets a FutureFit target for New Zealanders to work toward. More information can be found at: www.livelightly.nz and www.futurefit.nz.
Further information on Auckland Council’s broader climate work programme can be found here: bit.ly/2VLbfNu. Information on Auckland’s C40 status and commitments is available here: bit.ly/2W0X8Zq.  
83
NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand’s ambition is to lead the world in environmental guardianship. Sustainable production and consumption is a key element for this ambition. Our credentials as a significant net food producer and major international tourism destination are both heavily dependent on sustainable production and consumption.
We aim to transform how we manage resources, significantly reducing waste and greenhouse gas emissions, and laying the groundwork to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. This will take a coordinated national effort of central government, local government, the business sector, and the public.
New Zealand’s legislative and regulatory settings, and the absence of production or trade-based subsidies, are intended to promote and incentivise innovation and efficiency of production. Efficient production means a more efficient use of resources, limiting post-harvest loss and driving a greater appreciation for the value of natural resources and the environment throughout the supply chain. An example is the success New Zealand companies have had when, having faced large distances to market, they have developed innovative ways to keep food fresh, and of high quality, for longer. Under the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA) New Zealand’s natural and physical resources are managed in a sustainable framework. The RMA is based on the principle of sustainable management, which involves considering effects of activities on the environment now and in the future when decisions are made about the use of natural resources.
The New Zealand tourism sector has experienced exceptional growth in recent years. As New Zealand’s environment and scenery are the primary attraction for international visitors, it is imperative to preserve New Zealand’s unique environment. Genuine sustainable development outcomes are key to ensuring the long-term success of the tourism industry.
CHALLENGES 
New Zealand’s farming, forestry, and horticulture sectors are an intrinsic part of our economy, communities and identity, and they depend on the resources provided by biological systems. Particular challenges being tackled by government, communities and industry include maintaining community-agreed ecological limits for freshwater quality and mitigating agricultural greenhouse gas emissions while maintaining our export-led economy, which is driven by the efficient production of high quality, nutritious food. Emissions from agriculture also make up almost half of our annual greenhouse gas emissions, although to put this into context, New Zealand’s total contribution to global emissions is less than 0.2 percent. Contaminant losses attributed to intensive farming practises and urban storm water and wastewater outflows are too high in many monitored freshwater catchments around New Zealand.
The amount of waste disposed to levied landfills per capita rose by 20 percent in the three years between 2014 and 2017, and the upward trend is set to continue. We appear to be among the highest generators of household waste per capita in the OECD. A work programme is in place to upgrade the national database for waste to get a more accurate picture of commercial and industrial waste streams and recycling rates.
New Zealand’s clean green image is a key attractor of international visitors and the foundation of our tourism sector. A key challenge is to ensure that tourism activity is carried out in harmony with our sustainable development objectives.
85

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 12 – SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION

INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 	Policy Statement (NPS) for Freshwater 
                                             Management. This requires regional councils to set objectives and limits that New Zealand intends to transition to a 	reflect their communities’ desired state circular economy by transforming how 	for fresh water. Councils are at different we manage resources, reduce waste and 	stages in meeting NPS for Freshwater improve environmental outcomes. 
Management requirements. 
We are stepping up our waste 
minimisation efforts using tools that have 	The current freshwater quality reform not been used before. New Zealand is 	work programme is wide ranging. It in a unique position as it can draw on 	will consider options for: stopping and Māori knowledge systems and values that 	reversing damage in at-risk catchments; influence the progress of its transition to 	embedding good farm management 
Ōhanga Āmiomio (a circular economy). 	practice such as riparian planting and stock exclusion; better managing high 
In June 2018 the New Zealand Plastic 	risk activities such as winter grazing, Packaging Declaration was launched in 	hill country cropping, feedlots and which local and international businesses 	intensification; protecting ecosystem commit to using 100 percent reusable, 	health, wetlands and estuaries; fair and recyclable or compostable packaging in 	efficient allocation of water take and their New Zealand operations by 2025.	nutrient discharge, addressing Māori 
                                             rights and interests and regulating With a similar purpose, New Zealand 	new attributes (sediment, copper, zinc, became a signatory to the New Plastics 	dissolved oxygen). This work is likely Economy Global Commitment led by the 	to lead to changes to the NPS for 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation and UNEP in 	Freshwater Management, a new National October 2018. The commitment targets 	Environmental Standard for freshwater, eliminating problematic plastic, innovating 	and possibly changes to the Resource in packaging design and infrastructure 	Management Act 1991 (RMA).
and promoting the circulation of materials 
within the system. We are developing a 	In the primary industries sector, a good Plastics Action Plan that builds on the aims 	farming practice Action Plan for Water of the Global Commitment. New Zealand 	Quality was recently released. It commits also banned the sale and manufacture of 	to supporting all farmers and growers to certain products containing microbeads in 	implement good practice principles that June 2018, and after public consultation, 	will reduce their impact on New Zealand’s single-use plastic shopping bags will be 	fresh water. The aim is that all farmers banned from 1 July 2019. 	and growers develop and implement a 
                                       farm environment plan that identifies the With respect to waste management, 	risk areas for downstream water quality specific tools that we are looking at in the 	on their property and sets out actions short to medium term are an expansion of 	needed to address those risks. This the waste disposal levy to more landfills 	Action Plan is expected to accelerate the and a large increase in the levy rates, more 	uptake of good framing practices across strategic investment in waste management, 	the country. The dairy industry has also and promoting product stewardship 	established a Water Accord, committing schemes for more product groups.	the industry to a set of national good practice benchmarks aimed at lifting Under the Resource Management Act, the 	environmental performance on New key regulatory tool used for improving 	Zealand dairy farms.
freshwater quality is the National 
NZ PACKAGING DECLARATION
Local and international business commit to using
100% 100% 100%
reusable	recyclable	compostable
packaging in their NZ operations by 2025
The New Zealand Stock Exchange (NZX) 	We have been a leading advocate for has updated its Corporate Governance 	Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform (FFSR). Code to require more specific reporting 	The drivers for progressing this work around non-financial performance, 	are compelling; fossil fuel subsidies including on environmental, social and 	encourage wasteful consumption and economic sustainability issues. This has 	production, disadvantage renewable contributed to the rise in the frequency 	energy, and depress investment in of business reporting in New Zealand, 	energy efficiency. and over time will likely act as a catalyst 
for better business practice by raising the 	New Zealand’s advocacy has been bar on what is expected. In addition, New 	primarily through avenues such as the Zealand’s Sustainable Business Council 	Friends of FFSR, launching the FFSR (SBC) has 91 member organisations, 	Communique at the 2015 United Nations which represent 29 percent of New 	Climate Change Conference and the FFSR Zealand’s private sector GDP. When 	Ministerial Statement at the World Trade joining SBC, members sign up to reduce 	Organization’s (WTO) 11th Ministerial greenhouse gas emissions and introduce 	Conference in December 2017. We have annual reporting practices, which outline 	also been pushing for wider participation their progress on environmental, social 	in the voluntary peer review process 
and economic issues.	led through the Group of Twenty (G20) 
                                             and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Our new Tourism Strategy is proposing 	(APEC). In 2015, New Zealand was a more deliberate and active role for 	amongst the first APEC economies to government in tourism, to make sure that 	volunteer for a FFSR peer review to growth is productive, sustainable and 	identify inefficient fossil fuel subsidies inclusive. It sets out the government’s 	leading to wasteful consumption. aim for tourism, to enrich New Zealand 
through sustainable tourism growth, 	We are continuing to promote FFSR, working across central government 	raising the profile of reform as a trade as well as with local communities to 	issue amongst WTO members and achieve this. The tourism industry has 	challenging them to consider how also launched the New Zealand Tourism 	establishment of effective subsidy Sustainability Commitment, which aims to 	disciplines could contribute to the key see every New Zealand tourism business 	climate change objective of phasing out committed to sustainability by 2025, 	wasteful fossil fuel subsidies.
with a vision of leading the world in 	 sustainable tourism.
87
NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
BEEF AND LAMB PRODUCTION 
New Zealand sheep and beef farmers 	Industry bodies are taking steps to have been producing more from less and 	address these ongoing challenges. reducing their environmental footprint 	Beef + Lamb New Zealand Ltd since the 1990s. Roughly the same amount 	is a farmer levy-funded industry of lamb is produced today, but from half 	organisation representing New the number of ewes. At the same time, the 	Zealand’s sheep and beef farmers. sheep and beef sector’s contribution to 	Their 2018-2022 Environment Strategy GDP has doubled from $2.5 billion to $5 	and implementation plan lays out a billion. The reduced animal numbers have 	progressive long-term vision for the meant that the sector’s greenhouse gas 	sector based around four priority areas emissions profile has significantly shrunk, 	– healthy productive soils, thriving and the amount of nitrogen per kilogram 	biodiversity, reducing carbon emissions of saleable product has declined. 	and cleaner water.
NEVERTHELESS, THE SECTOR 	As part of the plan, Beef + Lamb New Zealand has identified two key goals 
KNOWS THAT THERE IS MORE TO 	– every sheep and beef farm having a tailored and active environment plan by 
BE DONE, ESPECIALLY AROUND 	the end of 2021, and the sheep and beef sector as a whole moving towards carbon 
REDUCING SEDIMENT LOSS, 	neutrality by 2050. Through achieving 
REDUCING PHOSPHORUS LOSS 	these goals the sector will become even more environmentally sustainable.
TO WATER, AND REDUCING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FURTHER. 
Since the 1990s, the sheep and beef sector has made major productivity and eco-efficiency gains and is producing more from less.
	Sheep numbers	GHG emissions	Lamb numbers
	-52%	-40%	-8%
	-28%	-23%	Sector	$5b
contribution
Land under sheep and	Beef cattle numbers	to GDP has doubled 
beef farming
Absolute GHG 
     emissions GHG emissions -30% -40% -21%
from sheep and beef farms	per kilogram of saleble 	Nitrate leaching per product	kilogram of saleable 
product
MINIMISING AND MANAGING WASTE IN NZ’S LARGEST CITY
Across the city, standardised domestic 
MAKE	waste and recycling services are being rolled out to create an efficient 
Design out waste
Design for long life	collection service, and help Aucklanders 
Product as a service	KEEPING RESOURCES IN USE	minimise their waste and reduce their waste disposal costs. This has been in conjunction with new region-wide 
services, such as onsite inorganic USE	collections and Community Recycling 
Centres, which have begun diverting 
	LEASING	useful materials away from landfills. 
HIRING
	SERVICING	So far these efforts have reduced 
	REPAIR	household kerbside waste by 10 percent 
                between 2010 and 2016. Given household waste makes up a small fraction of total REMAKE	waste disposed to landfill (around 15 
	ADDING VALUE	Re-use	percent), Auckland is also focused on 
	Remanufacturing	diverting commercial waste streams from 
	Reprocessing	landfill – such as waste from construction 
Recycling
and demolition.
                                             The benefits of having a zero waste city Reducing the environmental impact of 	include increased resource efficiency, cities by improving waste management 	innovation and productivity gains for practices and decreasing the amount of 	businesses, changes in household solid waste produced are a key part of 	purchasing, and reducing expenses as making cities more sustainable. Auckland, 	well as waste. New Zealand’s largest city, has been 
taking an active approach to ensure that 	For Auckland to be a zero waste city, it both better minimises and manages the 	the Plan outlines that it will need to waste that is produced in the city. 	ensure waste minimisation is integrated into design, manufacturing, retailing, 
Auckland’s Waste Management and 	and consumer choices. Materials should Minimisation Plan 2018 has a vision for 	be used in ways that preserve value, the city to have zero waste by 2040. 	minimise environmental impacts and Importantly the zero waste strategy 	conserve natural resources, and products embraces Māori perspectives and 	should be designed and used according aligns with the tradition of kaitiakitanga 	to the waste hierarchy, staying as high to sustain and restore our collective 	on the hierarchy as possible. Some waste resources. Three goals sit under the plan: 	can be eliminated before it is even made, to minimise waste generation, maximise 	by being designed out of products and opportunities for resource recovery, and 	processes, and resources can be used reduce harm from residual waste.	and reused, through better systems 
for repurposing and remanufacturing 
	WASTE MINIMISATION EFFORTS 	materials into other goods. On-shore 
                                             processing capacity for recyclables IN THE CITY HAVE ALREADY SEEN needs to be developed given the impacts of recent global restrictions 
	IMPROVEMENTS IN THE AMOUNT 	in recycling markets.
	OF WASTE BEING GENERATED.	 
89
NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand has an extensive climate policy agenda, that sees action on climate change embedded with our broader economic strategy. We are committed to making decisions that show global leadership, enable a productive, sustainable and climate resilient future, and support a just and inclusive society. New Zealand has ratified the Paris Agreement and committed to reduce our emissions to 30 percent below 2005 levels by 2030. We have also announced an intention to become a net-zero carbon economy by 2050.
MA-ORI ENJOY A SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP 
WITH THE ENVIRONMENT AND EXERCISE KAITIAKITANGA, OR STEWARDSHIP, OVER THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
On 8 May 2019, the Government announced the introduction of the Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) 
Amendment Bill into Parliament. The Bill provides a framework for reducing emissions by 2050, and achieving a climate resilient future. It establishes an independent Climate Change Commission to provide advice and hold the government to account on both of these goals, which supports the pursuit of Goal 13.
Additionally, New Zealand has one of the highest shares of renewable electricity in the world, with up to 85 percent from renewable sources such as hydroelectric, geothermal or wind. By comparison, the 2015 OECD average is 22.98 percent. New Zealand has an abundance of unused sources of renewable electricity, particularly wind and geothermal, which will experience growth as the country moves towards its 2030 targets.
In order to accomplish our ambitious emission reduction goals, the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) and a set of supporting policies will be used to drive emissions down. Reforms will also see the establishment of an independent Climate Change Committee and the adoption of the Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act (Zero Carbon Amendment Bill), to ensure that mitigating and adapting to climate change remains at the forefront of New Zealand’s policy.
CHALLENGES 
New Zealand has one of the most productive and competitive agricultural sectors in the world. Agriculture and other agriculture-related manufacturing are key economic sectors providing over 10 percent of GDP. 
We are a small, trading nation whose economy is driven predominantly by pasture-based livestock agriculture and the efficient production of high quality, nutritious food including dairy, sheep meat, beef, horticulture, and seafood. This means that almost 50 percent of our greenhouse gas emissions come from the agricultural sector with our contribution to global emissions of less than 0.2 percent. One of the challenges for agricultural nations, including New Zealand, is how to continue to produce food efficiently for a growing global population, reduce emissions and, as the climate continues to change, how to enable rural communities to adapt.
Transport is New Zealand’s second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, contributing nearly 20 percent of gross emissions; it is New Zealand’s fastest growing source of emissions. Between 1990 and 2016, New Zealand’s gross emissions grew by 20 percent. Comparatively, transport emissions grew by 71 percent. The primary source 
91

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 13 – CLIMATE ACTION
of transport emissions are from private vehicles, with high private vehicle use and low public transport use. Uptake of electric vehicles has so far been slow. However, as we electrify our vehicle fleet, there will be a further challenge in meeting the increasing demand for electricity. The dynamism of the problems represented in the transport sector – and the cultural and technical shifts they pose - exemplify a challenge to urgent action currently being undertaken to combat climate change and its impacts.
Māori enjoy a special relationship with the environment and exercise kaitiakitanga, or stewardship, over the natural environment. As with many indigenous groups globally, the effects of climate change will exacerbate the difficulties already faced by vulnerable Māori communities. The country has made significant gains in legislative reform that better facilitate Māori interests in the environment more widely, such as reform to Te Ture Whenua Māori Act 1991. Adequately safeguarding Māori cultural interests in land and natural resources as we move into an era defined by climate change presents a challenge when allocating finite resources. Difficulties will include creating a system that is more reflective and representative of Māori interests to help preserve and mitigate the impacts felt by Māori.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
New Zealand has made substantial progress in initiatives to combat climate change and its current and anticipated impacts. April 2018 saw the establishment of the Interim Committee on Climate Change, a group that is tasked with working on the nuances of future reform. The Interim Climate Change Committee is expected to transition into the Climate Change Commission in 2020, after the 
Zero Carbon Amendment Bill is enacted. 
The independent Climate Change Commission will have responsibility for providing advice to the Government on both adaptation and mitigation, and for holding the Government to account as it works towards its emissions targets and resilience goals.
At the sub-national level local government leaders have launched a Local Government Leaders’ Climate Change Declaration. The Declaration commits members to support initiatives to reduce greenhouse gases undertaken by central government and to make local commitments to respond to climate change.
An exciting future lies ahead for the electricity industry. The Interim Climate Change Committee will oversee possible system changes in the electricity sector, which will be especially pertinent where there are changes across the transport sector to lower emissions. There is potential to enhance this by further harnessing our geothermal and wind power.
The New Zealand Productivity Commission released a final report in September 2018 on the opportunities and challenges for New Zealand in becoming a low-emissions economy. The Commission identified a range of policies and institutional settings to set New Zealand on a path to a lowemissions economy. The government will be publishing its response in 2019.
As identified by the Productivity Commission and international examples, it is important that this transition to a low-emissions economy is managed in a just and inclusive way, that does not exacerbate the impacts felt by vulnerable communities. A just transition ensures environmental sustainability as well as decent work and social inclusion while moving equitably towards environmental sustainability. This is also a requirement under the Paris Agreement. At present there is inter-agency collaboration in creating pathways to ensure a just transition nationwide. 
As part of Budget 2018 we announced our intention to establish a $100 million Green Investment Fund. The Fund will be formally established as a company, which means it will operate independently from government and allow it to work in a market responsive way. We are also considering mandatory climate-related financial disclosure requirements that could encourage investment in lowemissions ventures, as recommended by the Productivity Commission.
85% of NZ’selectricity
comes from renewable sources
Wind	Geothermal	Hydro
New Zealand has a strong relationship with the Pacific, and developing island nations; in supporting developing countries in their mitigation and adaptation to climate change, New Zealand has contributed approximately $455 million in climate change related funding during 2013 to 2016. In addition, New Zealand extended the ratification of the Paris Agreement to Tokelau. Tokelau’s lowlying atolls remain extremely vulnerable to climate change, and serve as an important reminder of New Zealand’s obligation to developing Pacific nations.
New Zealand led the establishment of the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases (GRA) in 2009 to promote an increase in cooperation and investment in research to mitigate greenhouse gases from food production, while maintaining food security and resilient production systems. Today the GRA has 55 member countries from all regions of the world, and maintains partnerships with key international and regional organisations involved in agricultural development, research and agribusiness.
We want every New Zealander to have robust and trusted information on the state of their environment. Environmental reporting, conducted by the Ministry for the Environment and Statistics NZ, on atmosphere and climate enables transparency of information to the public. The upcoming synthesis report, Environment Aotearoa 2019, will focus on environmental cross domain issues, providing robust, accurate information in an accessible way.
New Zealand uses a multi-year emissions budget approach for setting and measuring progress towards our targets. New Zealand will meet its future targets through a mix of reducing emissions domestically, planting forests to absorb carbon dioxide and offsetting our emissions by buying emission reductions from overseas where appropriate. It is these initiatives and reform which will aid in the transition towards a low-emissions economy, and contribute to the pursuit of Goal 13.
93

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
CLIMATE LEADERS COALITION
We believe that New Zealand businesses can play a significant role in tackling climate change. The Climate Leaders Coalition (CLC) was launched in July 2018 to promote business leadership and collective action on the issue of climate change. Nearly 80 New Zealand chief executives have so far signed the joint statement, which commits each of their organisations to take voluntary action on climate change.
This includes measuring and publicly reporting their greenhouse gas emissions, setting a public emissions reduction target, and working with suppliers to reduce their emissions. 
The Coalition also represents a unique opportunity for business to work together and learn from each other to reduce their emissions. Organisations from all sectors of the economy are represented in the Coalition and together the signatories make up more than half of New Zealand’s gross emissions. 
THE COALITION HAS EXPLICITLY 
SUPPORTED THE PARIS 
AGREEMENT AS WELL AS NEW ZEALAND’S COMMITMENT 
TO IT.
It also supports the introduction of a Climate Change Commission and carbon budgets enshrined in law. The Coalition’s goal is to help New Zealand transition to a low-emissions economy and, in doing so, create a positive future for New Zealanders, business and the economy. 
As one example, The Warehouse Group, a member of the CLC, recently announced that it is only the third major retailer worldwide to go carbon neutral – earning official CarboNZero certification. Together, The Warehouse Group says it emits approximately 40,000 tonnes of carbon a year. This will be reduced through an internal active emissions reduction programme throughout The Warehouse Group’s operations and supply chain, with more than 25 energy and emissions saving projects. 
The Warehouse Group’s carbon emissions will be offset with carbon credits and through the planting of 2.7 million trees. The Group will also switch to LED lighting to reduce electricity use in stores, and ambitious waste recycling targets have been set by The Group. Additionally, 30 percent of the company’s vehicle fleet will be electric by 2019. 
The CLC is a positive example of private sector leadership in meeting the challenges presented by a changing climate.
RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY
—RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand 	For this to occur, two conditions need to 
(RBNZ) is the central bank of 	be met. First, there has to be proactive New Zealand and the prudential 	and effective leadership to drive our supervisor of the domestic banking and 	collective understanding of climate risks insurance sectors. It has developed and 	and to establish robust strategies to published a climate change strategy 	respond to those risks. Second, there has (available at: www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-	to be effective and timely dissemination stability/climate-change/strategy). 	of those assessments and strategies. One of the primary objectives of this 	Appropriate information will be vital strategy is to integrate climate risks 	in enabling entities and individuals to directly within the various functions of 	price and manage risks, facilitating the RBNZ, including monetary policy 	the broader transition to a low-carbon settings, financial stability analysis, 	economy, and ultimately contributing to prudential supervisory requirements 	both the soundness and efficiency of the and market operations.	financial system.
The RBNZ is also seeking to mitigate 	RBNZ is working domestically and directly its own impact on the 	internationally to help meet these environment by calculating and reporting 	conditions. At the domestic level, it is on its own carbon footprint and steps 	engaging with other public and private to reduce it. This will include focus on 	groups to drive national strategies its energy use, waste management 	and planning. This includes efforts and staff travel, as well as longer-term 	to develop and disseminate detailed consideration around how it sources and 	hazard models to drive risk informed distributes currency. It is intended that 	investment that contribute to enhanced this disclosure will act as a model for 	resilience to climate change nationally other entities in New Zealand. 	and help identify the needs of vulnerable communities.
WITHIN THE STRATEGY, RBNZ 	On an international level, RBNZ is an 
EXPLICITLY RECOGNISES 	active member of the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening 
THAT NO SINGLE INSTITUTION 	the Financial System (NGFS) and the 
Sustainable Insurance Forum. In joining 
WORKING ALONE CAN ACHIEVE 	the NGFS, it explicitly identified a desire 
to act as a global voice for the broader 
MEANINGFUL PROGRESS ON A 	Pacific region, which sits on the frontline 
GLOBAL CHALLENGE SUCH AS 	in terms of the physical effects of climate change.
CLIMATE CHANGE, AND THAT 
APPROPRIATE ACTION ON A 
NATIONAL OR GLOBAL LEVEL 
CAN ONLY BE ACHIEVED IF 
INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES ARE ABLE TO TAKE ACTION ON A MICRO LEVEL.
95

NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
As an island nation with close affinity to the ocean, New Zealand is a strong supporter of Goal 14. We played a significant role in the development of its targets and we invest in national, regional and global action to progress towards achieving them. 
There is strong domestic alignment between government policy and most of Goal 14’s targets, for example on sustainable fishing, fisheries subsidies, general implementation of international law of the sea, and fishers’ access to marine resources and markets. New Zealand’s marine and coastal ecosystems are managed and protected through a range of legislative instruments and policies implemented by multiple agencies. 
WE HAVE FUNDED A FOUR-YEAR RESEARCH PROJECT THAT WILL PROVIDE NEW KNOWLEDGE ON OCEAN ACIDIFICATION.
Ensuring that our fisheries remain sustainable and profitable remains a priority. Our Fisheries Change Programme will ensure that we have increasingly accurate and timely information about commercial fishing activity to inform fisheries management decisions and the right policy settings to protect and grow the economic, social, and cultural benefits of fisheries to all New Zealanders. New Zealand also periodically reviews its various programmes to address the impact of fishing on the marine environment, including Threat Management Plans for Hector’s and Maui dolphin and New Zealand sea lion, and National 
Plans of Action for seabirds and sharks.
A wide range of practical activities that respond to Goal 14 are under way, for example activities related to ocean acidification and marine pollution from land-based sources. Such activities are supported by our significant investment in marine science and technology. Supporting the Small Island Developing States of the Pacific region to realise the benefits from their blue economies is a priority for our Official Development Assistance (ODA). We are also focused on tackling illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing particularly in the Pacific and Southern Oceans.
Working with international partners, New Zealand will continue to support global action to enhance the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and marine resources, with a strong focus on sustainable fishing, tackling ocean acidification and marine plastic pollution and the elimination of harmful fisheries subsidies. Supporting Pacific island countries to sustainably manage their natural resources and protect the environment will remain an enduring priority.
CHALLENGES
At this point in time New Zealand cannot confidently report on progress toward all aspects of Goal 14, notably on restoring and strengthening the resilience of marine and coastal ecosystems. Crossjurisdictional management precludes easy assessment of the proportion of the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) that is managed using ecosystembased approaches. However, ecosystem considerations are evident in New Zealand legislative and regulatory frameworks, including for fisheries management, resource management and for activities in the EEZ.
Data paucity and the scale of polluting activities (for example farming and forestry) also make it difficult to assess 
97

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 14 – LIFE BELOW WATER

potential progress on preventing and reducing marine pollution by 2025. However, we are committed to progress in this area, including through investments in addressing pollution from land-based activities to improve water quality (including in rivers, lakes and coastal marine areas) and through reform of the waste management system
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY
New Zealand is making significant efforts to reduce marine pollution from landbased sources for example through banning single-use plastic bags and the sale of products containing plastic microbeads. We have also adopted a circular economy programme of work aimed at improving product stewardship, identifying changes in supply chains that can reduce waste, and decreasing the amount of waste going to landfills. 
We are undertaking a number of steps to tackle ocean acidification. New Zealand has an expanded set of measuring sites, and ocean acidification is a national indicator in our environmental reporting series on the marine domain. We have funded a four-year research project that will provide new knowledge on ocean acidification to enhance protection and management of coastal ecosystems. Policy developments also take into account the risks and opportunities for the seafood industry, with researchers having developed risk assessments for key fisheries and drafted a compendium of changes observed in New Zealand waters. Our ODA supports work in the Pacific to build resilience to ocean acidification through practical adaptation actions and capacity building. Internationally New Zealand champions action on ocean acidification as part of its support for the Commonwealth Blue Charter.
In terms of fisheries management, New Zealand has had a rights-based system in place for over 30 years. Currently, 97 percent of all commercially harvested catch comes from stocks that are managed at or above target reference points. Our Fisheries Change Programme is working to ensure the continued sustainable economic, social, and cultural value of New Zealand’s fisheries.
New Zealand does not subsidise its fisheries sector and we are an active proponent for an agreement in World Trade Organization (WTO) to discipline harmful fisheries subsidies, including those that support illegal fishing, subsidies to fishing of overfished stock, and subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing. We are committed to achieving an agreement that can be adopted by WTO members by 2020.
WORKING WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS, 
NEW ZEALAND WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT 
GLOBAL ACTION TO ENHANCE THE 
CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE USE OF THE OCEAN AND MARINE RESOURCES.
 
New Zealand currently has 44 notake marine reserves and another 1.26 million km2 under a variety of protection measures. Further work is required to achieve a network of marine protected areas and reserves that are representative of all our ecosystems. Activities are underway to provide background, analysis, and recommendations for expanding marine protection in New Zealand. Work will continue on improving national coordination, the integration of protected areas into broader ecosystem management, and improving information on the social, cultural, economic and ecological values associated with the marine environment.
Two significant regional marine protected area planning processes are underway – the South East Marine Protection process and Sea Change – Tai Timu Tai Pari process. Sea Change – Tai Timu Tai Pari is New Zealand’s first marine spatial plan. It has 181 proposals developed through a stakeholder-led process, covering a wide range of issues: marine protection, habitat restoration, biodiversity, commercial fishing, environmental and cultural issues.
Our ODA provides ongoing support to Small Island Developing States (with a focus on the Pacific) through a range of development assistance activities and technical expertise, including for fisheries management, aquaculture and tourism. There is a special focus on support to help increase the economic benefits to the Pacific from sustainable fishing, including by supporting regional institutions that provide fisheries management, development and compliance advice and services to the Pacific.
97%
of all commercially harvested catch comes from fisheries that are managed at or above sustainable limits
Finally, in terms of research, we spend approximately $1.6 billion per year on science and innovation investments and a significant amount of this budget has recently been dedicated to marine science and technology. For example, under a multi-year programme (the Marine Environment Platform) we are investing more than $100 million into research which aims to deliver benefits such as increased economic returns from marine resources while maintaining marine ecosystem integrity and biodiversity.
99





NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
SDG 15 – LIFE ON LAND
protected, while the forestry sector can utilize fast-growing exotic species which support our export-based economy and provide broader socio-economic and environmental benefits to regions and broader ecosystems. A challenge that New Zealand faces is to maintain this balance in outcomes from our forests.
One of the other challenges we face is the large number of statutes governing terrestrial conservation management, many of which are dated. This creates a complex system which hinders our ability to implement the objectives of Goal 15.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
New Zealand is developing a new Biodiversity Strategy to address the challenges of biodiversity loss. Our current National Biodiversity Strategy, adopted in 2000, expires in 2020. The new Strategy will address emerging pressures such as climate change and look at new ways of valuing our biodiversity in its role underpinning ecosystems, natural capital and wellbeing. A new strategy is also an opportunity to align related initiatives that are existing or in development.
The New Zealand Biodiversity Action Plan 
2016-2020 provides an update to the Biodiversity Strategy and includes five updated goals to achieve the Strategy’s vision. Each goal includes national targets to ensure progress, which are linked to the global strategic goals set by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).
Our sixth National Report to the CBD in 2018 shows that New Zealand has made good progress on actions taken to raise awareness of biodiversity, integrate biodiversity into planning processes and increase covenant protection on private land. However, it also makes it clear that much more work needs to be done in the face of significant pressures including changing land use and invasive species.
We are also developing a National Policy Statement on Indigenous Biodiversity, which will set out objectives and policies to improve how regional councils and territorial authorities manage and protect indigenous biodiversity on both public and private land.
Our Predator Free 2050 initiative is the world’s most ambitious predator management programme. Its goal is to rid New Zealand of introduced predators, the most significant of which are rats, stoats and possums, by 2050. Other major initiatives are focused on weeds, aiming to rid New Zealand of wilding conifers and 12 other problem weeds.
A broad range of initiatives are being undertaken by local government and communities. For example, Wellington City Council’s biodiversity strategy Our Natural Capital is designed to reduce predators and protect threatened species through mobilising community action. Since 2015 the city has experienced a material increase in native bird life including a 600 percent increase in the native kākāriki parrot population and an average of 45,000 native trees planted annually. 
New Zealand has recently launched a 
National Environmental Standards for 
Plantation Forestry under our Resource Management Act. These Standards allow local councils to better maintain or improve the environmental outcomes associated with plantation forestry activities nationally, and to increase certainty and efficiency in the management of plantation forestry activities.
We have set a goal to plant one billion trees over 10 years, called the One Billion Trees Programme. The tree planting programme will benefit regional economies, the environment and the people. It will support the commercial forestry sector, and create more jobs and training opportunities in regions where unemployment is high and there are social challenges. It will also support New Zealand’s climate change objectives as a sustainable and effective contribution towards our transition to a zero carbon economy. New planting will include both exotics and natives species, in a mix of permanent and harvestable forestry, on private, public and Māori-owned land.
In 2018, we also provided our Department of Conservation with an additional $182 million in operational funding over four years – the largest budget increase since 2002. This includes $76 million for biodiversity initiatives across land, 
We’re responsible for: → OVER8 million
HECTARES OF PUBLIC 
CONSERVATION LAND
More than one-third of New Zealand’s land area 13
NATIONAL PARKS 36
CONSERVATION PARKS 100s
OF RESERVES AND ISLANDS
freshwater and marine ecosystems aimed at ecological restoration and threatened species recovery.
Finally, New Zealand seeks to move to a stage where there is widespread, informed and effective community action to achieve biodiversity outcomes. The Predator Free 2050 programme brings together communities and wider organisations to eradicate New Zealand’s most damaging introduced predators, and initiatives such as the Department of Conservation Community Fund supports community-led conservation efforts.
 Kermadec Islands
Not to scale
Chatham Islands
Subantarctic Islands
Not to scale
105



NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand has a strong and independent system of justice. We perform well on transparency and accountability, as well as the promotion of the rule of law and equal access to justice. Transparency International has ranked New Zealand as one of the least corrupt and most trustworthy countries in the world. We are well aligned on participatory and representative decisionmaking, legal identity and ensuring public access to information, and have policies and practical actions in these areas. We are committed to significantly reducing the flow of illicit finances and arms, and have specific policy, legislation and practical actions in place.
FRONTLINE SOCIAL SERVICES WORKING 
WITH FAMILIES IMPACTED BY FAMILY VIOLENCE HAVE BENEFITED SIGNIFICANTLY FROM INCREASED FUNDING.
The Treaty of Waitangi is central to New Zealand’s constitutional arrangements and the government’s obligation of active partnership with Māori. This is vital to ensure that our society is inclusive and our institutions are legitimate and accountable.
We aim to make New Zealand the best place in the world to live and raise a family, which cannot be achieved without transformational change to our justice system. We are determined to ensure that New Zealanders can live free from violence and abuse and are committed to working with Māori and communities to reduce offending and introduce safe and effective justice for all.
CHALLENGES 
We face several challenges in order to fulfil the vision encapsulated in Goal 16. We know that some New Zealanders face more barriers accessing justice and participating in democracy than others. Māori and Pacific peoples have experienced longstanding disparities. Our LGBTIQ+ community, new migrants to New Zealand, and the many New Zealanders with disabilities also face discrimination and challenges that many others do not. We also have work to do to ensure there is active partnership between the government and Māori, consistent with the Treaty of Waitangi.
 
New Zealand has amongst the highest reported rates of family and sexual violence in the developed world, which remains a major human rights challenge. Around 12 percent of New Zealanders – over half a million people – are directly affected by family violence each year. Violence disproportionately affects some parts of New Zealand society. Women are seven to ten times more likely to be seriously injured by partner violence than men, and women also experience more repeat incidents of interpersonal violence by family members. Māori are disproportionately represented as people who are harmed and who cause harm. 
In addition, Māori are and have been severely overrepresented in New Zealand’s prison population for several decades. Māori make up only 15 percent of our population, but approximately half of New Zealand’s prison population. Māori are also 38 percent of the people proceeded against by the Police and 42 percent of the people convicted. Other challenges facing our justice system include high rates of imprisonment and reoffending.
INITIATIVES UNDERWAY 
New Zealand is focused on the wellbeing of children and whānau and is dedicated to a long term and systemic approach to end family violence and sexual violence. We acknowledge that responses to family and sexual violence have been inadequate, and we are committed to making improvements for victims, perpetrators and their families. 
We are creating a joint-venture tasked with building a cohesive, whole-ofgovernment response to family violence and sexual violence. We are also aiming for significant improvements through the implementation of new laws and policies, a national strategy for the prevention of family and sexual violence, an investment 
109

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019 SDG 16 – PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS

strategy for family violence and sexual violence services, better cross-government coordination and improved data.
Since 2015, the National Collective of Independent Women’s Refuges has delivered Whānau Protect, New Zealand’s nationwide home safety service. Whānau Protect supports victims of family violence who experience repeat victimisation, are at high risk of serious assault or death, and are leaving an abusive relationship. Practical safety improvements are made to houses, leading to a greater sense of security. 
E Tū Whānau is a long-standing national whānau violence prevention programme. It is a Māori response, supported by government, to unacceptably high levels of violence within whānau. It utilises a strengths-based approach to increase protective factors (such as cultural identity, social capital, family stability and community cohesion) and decrease risk factors for family violence.
Frontline social services working with families impacted by family violence have benefited significantly from increased funding, as have sexual abuse and treatment services to better support victims, deliver medical treatment, forensic services and referrals. 
The Family Violence Act 2018, which takes effect from July 2019, introduces new offences, supports new ways for collecting evidence, enables judges to refer people to broader services and makes changes to civil orders to improve safety. The Act also criminalises coerced marriage or civil union. New resources will help victims of sexual violence understand the justice process.
Beyond the issue of family and sexual violence, we have commenced a comprehensive and ambitious programme of reforming the criminal justice 
system. Our goal is to reduce the prison population by 30 percent in the next 15 years and address the disproportionate representation of Māori. Achieving this ambitious target will require widespread public buy-in for a new purpose for the criminal justice system. We are undertaking an extensive national public conversation about the justice system, including local and national engagement events, and significant opportunities for Māori and victims to share their perspectives. The goal of this engagement is to establish a sustainable public mandate for significant change.
In 2018, a new agency, The Office for Māori Crown Relations – Te Arawhiti was established. Part of the role of this agency is to increase government capability in engaging and partnering with Māori, with the intention of improving shared outcomes such as over-representation in the justice system.
We are working on ways to deliver a safe and effective justice system including greater use of alternatives to imprisonment and therapeutic and restorative justice processes to reduce imprisonment. A specific kaupapa Māori rehabilitation and reintegration pathway for wāhine Māori has been established for all women’s prisons. We are also investing in improving social outcomes, for example addressing socioeconomic disadvantages experienced by children, which will have long-term benefits for Māori children. 
New Zealand is committed to combating people trafficking in all its forms and at all levels. Victims of trafficking are treated as people in need of protection and provided with a range of support services through a whole-of-government approach. Our response to people trafficking is outlined in a Plan of Action to Prevent People Trafficking, which aims to prevent people trafficking, protect the human rights of trafficking victims and prosecute people traffickers. Recent legislative changes have strengthened our ability to prosecute those responsible for exploiting people through forced labour, slavery and like practices, and servitude, with New Zealand’s first conviction for people trafficking occurring in 2016. Internationally, New Zealand is an active participant in the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime.
Aim to reduce the prison population by 30%
over the next 15 years
We know that democracies thrive when people trust and participate in their government. To promote greater public access to information, transparency and open government, we have committed to proactively releasing all Cabinet papers and minutes, which record the decisions of New Zealand’s senior ministers and key policy directions. From 2019, all Cabinet material must be released and published online within 30 days of the decision being made, unless there are good reasons not to. This recognises that achieving public accountability and transparency requires constant effort and not only making information publicly available, but also easily accessible. Proactive release of information will work to promote good government and transparency, and will foster public trust and confidence in our institutions.
Improving access to justice is one of the key challenges facing our justice system. Access to justice is fundamental to the rule of law and protected by our Bill of Rights Act. We know some New Zealanders are less likely to seek help when they have a problem that would benefit from legal services. In 2018, we reviewed the legal aid system to assess whether the current settings were appropriate. The review included examining the income thresholds for eligibility and the need to repay legal aid. The review specifically looked at the impacts on different population groups, including women. The government is considering what changes to implement based on the outcome of this review. 
New Zealand is dedicated to putting in place practical measures to protect businesses and make it harder for criminals to fund and profit from illegal activity. Legislation was passed in 2009 to assist in detecting and deterring money laundering, contributing to public confidence in the financial system and upholding our reputation as a good place to do business. This law was amended in 2017 to extend its reach to cover more businesses, who are required to conduct extensive due diligence on customers and report suspicious activities to the Commissioner of Police.
New Zealand is committed to contributing to peace and promoting cooperation, transparency and responsibility in the international arms trade. We are a leading supporter of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which we ratified in 2014. We have undertaken initiatives to support universalisation and implementation of the ATT, including the production of model implementing legislation and a model ‘export control list’ for Pacific Island countries. In 2018, New Zealand hosted the Pacific Conference on Conventional Weapons Treaties to promote uptake and implementation of the ATT in the Pacific region. We also enacted legislation in 2018 to support our commitments under the ATT and introduce more comprehensive controls around global weapons brokering. 
111

NEW ZEALAND’S PROGRESS TOWARDS THE SDGs – 2019
TE ARAWHITI
In late 2017, the government established a 	under the Treaty, and foster a strong new ministerial portfolio, the Minister for 	Māori Crown relationship. Therefore, a key Māori Crown Relations – Te Arawhiti. This 	focus of the office is assisting agencies to portfolio will grow and support the unique 	build capability across a number of areas: relationship between Māori and the Crown 	Māori language, tikanga Māori and Māori that arises out of the Treaty of Waitangi. 	worldviews; New Zealand history and Shortly after the establishment of the 	the Treaty of Waitangi; understanding portfolio, the Minister undertook 33 hui to 	institutional racism; how to engage seek input from around the country on the 	effectively with Māori on policy and portfolio’s areas of focus.	other proposals, and making the most of opportunities to partner with Māori. One suggestion from those hui was for 	These work areas reflect the Crown’s a standalone agency to support the 	intention to build a forward-looking Minister’s work. A new Office for Māori 	relationship with Māori and shift away Crown Relations – Te Arawhiti was 	from the grievance-focused approach established and became operational on 	of the historical Treaty of Waitangi 1 January 2019. The office incorporated 	settlement process.
some existing functions, such as 
completing historical Treaty of Waitangi A strong relationship will help ensure that settlement negotiations, as well as new responsive, inclusive, participatory and areas of work. representative decision-making occurs 
                                             at all levels. It will also mean that in areas The new work areas of the office largely 	where Māori interests are significant, reflect the other key themes heard 	the Crown and Māori will partner to through the hui, in particular that the 	determine the issue and develop solutions Crown has to build its capability for 	together. Māori and the Crown can then engaging and partnering with Māori to 	work to maximise future opportunities better enable it to fulfil its responsibilities 	for wider New Zealand through true partnerships. 
ULTIMATELY THE CROWN’S GOAL 
IS TO CREATE A THRIVING, 
SUSTAINABLE AND FUTURE 
FOCUSED ECONOMY AND ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL NEW ZEALANDERS.
The Crown recognises that it must honour its Treaty of Waitangi obligations and, in partnership with Māori, increase the wellbeing, community connection, health and educational outcomes of Māori people in order to achieve this. Te Arawhiti is a new vehicle to assist government agencies to make this happen.
INTEGRATED SAFETY RESPONSE TO FAMILY VIOLENCE 
New Zealand has unacceptably high 	The ISR process is initiated in two ways: levels of family violence. Due to the 	by the Police referring a Family Harm high number of incidents, there is a real 	episode to ISR following an emergency risk that families will slip through the 	callout, or by the Department of cracks and not receive all of the support 	Corrections identifying and referring a available to them through the multiple 	high-risk prison release. agencies that deal with the consequences 
of family violence. Those affected by 	A multi-agency group made up of a team family violence are required to navigate 	from Oranga Tamariki, the Police, the a complex system made up of many 	Department of Corrections, Ministry of agencies in order to receive support 	Health, specialist NGOs and Māori service such as child counselling, alcohol or 	providers hold a Safety Assessment drug interventions, or employment and 	Meeting, triage and risk assess all family 
budgeting support.	violence episodes and allocate responses 
                                             to agencies. Agencies work with the To combat this, in 2016 the government 	family to provide help and support committed funding to pilot a new 	so that they can stay safe. Features Integrated Safety Response (ISR) model 	include specialist services for victims for an enhanced response to family 	and perpetrators (including independent violence episodes and high-risk prison 	victim specialists and perpetrator releases. ISR aims to ensure victims, 	outreach for high risk cases), daily risk perpetrators, families and whānau receive 	assessment, family safety plans, and an appropriate and tailored responses 	electronic case management system. according to risk levels.
As at February 2019, ISR had 75,500 
EIGHTY PERCENT OF FUNDING IS 	individuals and 31,381 family safety plans 
                                             in its case management Family Safety SPENT ON SERVICE PROVISION FOR FAMILIES AND WHA-NAU. System. To date, $26 million has been 
                                       allocated to continue funding the pilot, and over half this funding went to Māori providers, who supply key support The pilot currently operates in two major 	services to families to address violence districts. ISR is a multi-agency project 	among their whānau. hosted by New Zealand Police to ensure the immediate safety of victims and children and to work with perpetrators to prevent further violence. It aims to put families and whānau at the centre by listening to the victim’s voice and creating Family Safety Plans based on individual risks and needs. Information is shared efficiently with relevant agencies to facilitate improved outcomes for families while respecting their privacy and dignity. ISR aims to coordinate all relevant agencies to enable them to work together to ensure that those effected by family violence receive a co-ordinated and tailored response that addresses their individual risks and needs.
113
NEW ZEALAND CONTEXT
New Zealand and New Zealanders are open and outwardly engaged in the world and in our region. As a small independent country and trading nation our own sustainable development relies on this engagement. As a Pacific country we are invested in the sustainable development of our region. As a global citizen we have a deep stake in global progress on the 2030 Agenda for people, planet, prosperity and peace. 
We are committed to playing our part as a reliable, principled and trusted partner. 
WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMBER OF TRADE 
MEASURES TO SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT. WE 
HAVE PROVIDED 100 PERCENT DUTY-FREE, QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (LDCS) SINCE 2001.
New Zealand partners widely for sustainable development – we partner with Pacific and developing countries, with the regional organisations we are members of, and with the multilateral system. We partner with New Zealand public sector agencies and with private sector, civil society and academic organisations to draw on the full spectrum of expertise and to increase our impact. We coordinate closely with other development partners.
CHALLENGES
Goal 17 commits countries to a partnership that strengthens the means by which the SDGs can be implemented globally and in developing countries. 
It calls for commitments to finance, technology, trade, a stronger global system and policy coherence.
These face headwinds. Development finance efforts have yet to yield the scale up of the finance required by developing countries. The contribution of trade is hindered by a rise in protectionist policies. A real global partnership is constrained by political and economic uncertainty. New Zealand is active in addressing these challenges on which much progress hinges.
INITIATIVES
New Zealand’s development assistance is focussed on the Pacific where we have deep connections and where we can have the greatest impact. We have long advocated for greater recognition of the unique development finance challenges faced by Small Island Developing States (SIDS), something that is strongly reflected in the 2030 Agenda. In 2018, we increased our Official Development Assistance (ODA) in response to the 2030 Agenda and to the sustainable development finance needs of developing countries, particularly in the Pacific. We allocated an additional $714 million over a four year budget cycle, representing a 30 percent increase, lifting ODA to a projected 0.28 percent of GNI. 
In 2018, we also significantly increased our contribution to the Global Environment Facility. This was in recognition of the need to increase funding for developing countries to respond to environmental challenges. 
We provide a range of support to drive sustainable economic development in the Pacific. We assist partners to strengthen their private sector, both through activities that use our aid money to leverage private sector finance and expertise, and through technical 
115


