Voluntary National Review at the 2016 High-Level Political Forum  
On the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
PHILIPPINES 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Philippines is one of the 22 countries that will present a Voluntary National Review at the HighLevel Political Forum (HLPF) on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in New York on July 11-20, 2016.  As the country gears up for the initial year of the SDG implementation, which coincides with a new administration, the  national review will highlight initiatives that provide policy and enabling environment for the implementation of the SDGs.  This review report covers the following:  a) lessons from the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) experience;  b) national priorities in relation to the SDGs;  c) policy and enabling environment for the SDGs as well as challenges (building and raising awareness level on the SDGs; incorporating the SDGs in national frameworks including integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development; developing and fine tuning SDG indicators; and clarifying institutional mechanisms); d) means of implementation; and  e) next steps.  
 
1.1 Philippine Experience on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
In September 2000, the Philippines is one of the United Nations (UN) member states that adopted the Millennium Declaration and the MDGs, committing to reduce poverty and the worst forms of human deprivation in the country.  Much progress has been seen in terms of achieving the MDGs in the 15 years of its implementation but there remain disparities across geographic locations and population groups in most of these targets.   At the national level, the country has already achieved the target of halving the proportion of people with no access to basic sanitation. The Philippines is also on track in meeting the following MDG targets: 1) providing universal access to primary education; 2) providing educational opportunities for girls; 3) reducing infant and under-five mortality; 4) reversing the incidence of malaria; 5) increasing tuberculosis detection and cure rates; and 6) increasing the proportion of households with access to safe water supply.  However, it has fallen short of the targets in the following areas: 1) gender equality, in terms of women’s political participation, and boys’ elementary and secondary education participation; 2) prevalence of underweight preschool children; 3) maternal mortality; 4) access to reproductive health; 5) HIV/AIDS; 6) incidence of income poverty, and 7) elementary education in terms of cohort survival rate and primary completion rate1. 
1.1.1 	Lessons from the MDGs 
The Philippine report2 on the MDGs to the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in 2015 cited lessons from the experience of implementing the MDGs for the past 15 years, to wit:   
Good governance is a key lesson where the attainment of the MDGs requires a sustained and consistent commitment from all stakeholders, e.g., the government, private sector, civil society, and the development partners.  Government must pursue economic growth with a steadfast commitment to the social development agenda, as this enables a more effective and efficient allocation of limited resources. 
There should be a clear implementation plan that covers institutional arrangements, communication and advocacy strategies, and financing plan.  Further, given the country’s vulnerability to natural and man-made disasters, the plan should also include programs to build resilience against hazards and shocks, especially for the poor and near poor, to sustain the gains from development.  
An appropriate data monitoring system to support the accountability mechanism should be in place.  It must be responsive to the demand for disaggregation of data and must ensure the timeliness of data collection so that policies and program designs benefit from up-to-date information. 
1.1.2 	Moving Forward: From the MDGs to the SDGs 
In September 2015, the United Nations Member States has adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to guide international, regional, and national development efforts for the next 15 years. 
The agenda, as contained in the outcome document, "Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,” has 17 SDGs and 169 targets that cover the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development.  
Compared with the MDGs, the new SDGs have a more ambitious agenda. While they identify eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions as the greatest global challenge, they also see it as an indispensable requirement for sustainable development. Thus, with bolder targets on health, education and gender equality, the aim is to eliminate rather than reduce poverty. The SDGs also seek to incorporate a larger concept that extends well beyond the social sector – that is, sustainable development that weaves a comprehensive agenda of economic development, social inclusion, and environmental sustainability.  
The SDGs and the targets are also integrated, global in nature and universally applicable. While the MDGs are formulated through a top-down process, the SDGs are developed through the most inclusive participatory process of face-to-face consultations and citizen inputs on websites. They take into account different national realities, capacities, and levels of development while respecting national policies and priorities. Thus, the SDGs are more inclusive, providing solutions to the root causes of poverty and the universal need for development that works for all people and all countries.  
In this regard, as the new agenda builds on the UN Millennium Declaration of 2000 and the recently concluded MDGs, the country remains committed to address the unfinished business of the MDGs while making a transition toward the implementation of the SDGs. 
1.2 National Priorities in Relation to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and SDGs 
The Philippine priorities with respect to the 2030 Agenda are based on the new administration’s tenpoint socioeconomic agenda, the Philippine Development Framework, the Long-Term Vision (LTV) dubbed as “Ambisyon Natin 2040”, and the results of national and local consultations for defining the Post-2015 Development Agenda.     
1.2.1 	New Administration’s Ten-Point Socioeconomic Agenda  
The ten-point socioeconomic agenda under the administration of President Rodrigo Duterte “emphasizes the need to maintain accelerated economic growth while ensuring that gains are broadly shared by the Filipino people”. It prioritizes the agriculture and manufacturing sectors of the economy where the marginalized thrive..  
In detail, the agenda includes the following:  
1) Sustain current macroeconomic policies, including fiscal, monetary and trade policies; 
2) Institute progressive tax reform, including a more effective tax collection and indexing of taxes to inflation. A tax reform package will be submitted to Congress by September 2016. 
3) Increase competitiveness and the ease of doing business by drawing upon successful models used to attract business to local cities., Moreover, pursue the relaxation of the Constitutional restrictions on foreign ownership, except land ownership, to attract more foreign direct investments. 
4) Accelerate annual infrastructure spending to reach 5 percent of the gross domestic product, with public-private partnerships playing a key role. 
5) Promote rural and value chain development to increase agricultural and rural enterprise productivity and rural tourism. 
6) Ensure security of land tenure to encourage investments and address bottlenecks in land management and titles. 
7) Invest in human capital development, including health and education systems, and match skills and training to meet the demands of businesses and the private sector;  
8) Promote science, technology and the creative arts to enhance innovation and creative capacity towards self-sustaining and inclusive development. 
9) Improve social protection programs, including the government’s conditional cash transfer program, to protect the poor against instability and economic shocks; and  
10) Strengthen the implementation of the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Law to enable Filipinos, especially poor couples, to make informed choices on financial and family planning. 
1.2.2 	The Philippine Development Framework 
The overarching strategic framework of the Philippine Development Plan 2011-2016 Midterm Update underscores inclusive growth as the desired outcome. Inclusive growth is defined as poverty reduction in multiple dimensions and massive creation of quality employment.  This will be achieved through rapid and sustained economic growth, complemented by the provision of equal development opportunities, and sustainable and climate-resilient environment. This framework works on a platform of good governance, ecological security, and national security.    
1.2.3 	Long-Term Vision (LTV): AmBisyon Natin 2040 
The country is currently working on a common vision and a set of goals for the Filipinos and the country over the long term.  The long-term vision or LTV will serve as an anchor to medium-term development plans in the next 25 years to ensure continuity of policies, programs and projects across political administrations.   
The vision of the Filipinos for Self is:  
In  2040, we will all enjoy a stable and comfortable lifestyle, secure in the knowledge that we have enough for our daily needs and unexpected expenses, that we can plan and prepare for our own and our children’s future. Our family lives together in a place of our own, and we have the freedom to go where we desire, protected and enabled by a clean, efficient, and fair government. 
The Filipinos’ vision for Country is: 
The Philippines shall be a country where all citizens are free from hunger and poverty, have equal opportunities, enabled by fair and just society that is governed with order and unity.  A nation where families live together, thriving in vibrant, culturally diverse, and resilient communities.” 
1.2.4 	Results of Consultations for the Post-2015 Development Agenda 
The Philippine priorities are also based on the outputs of the national and local consultations for the Post-2015 Development Agenda.  Five pillars or themes were identified where progress is most needed to build a rights-based, equitable and sustainable society, namely:  
a) Poverty reduction and social inclusion (inclusive growth and job generation; asset reform; social protection; equitable access to basic services);  
b) Environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster risk management (urban and land use planning; reduce vulnerabilities to risk sources in the environment; green growth strategies to address pollution and environmental degradation);  
c) Accountable, responsive and participatory governance (institutional reforms; values and behavior reforms; strong leadership in government; strong citizen engagement);  
d) Fair and stable order based on international rule of law (global efforts for environmental sustainability; global partnerships for fair trade and just economic order; accelerated industrialization and job creation); and  
e) Peace and security (armed conflict resolution; ending political violence; internal stability and international accord; indigenous peoples concerns; culture of peace; women’s participation in peace building).  
Based on these results, priority areas were identified and  presented by the Philippines before the UN General Assembly in September 2015.   In this global event, the country joined the UN member states in supporting the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and pledged “to make the 2030 Agenda a reality and leave no one behind.” The country also welcomed the inclusion of the following Philippine priorities in the 2030 Agenda: the recognition of the rights of migrants, the urgent need to address climate change, the need for collective action for conservation, and equality of opportunities. 
On migration, the Philippines advocated that the 2030 Agenda recognizes the positive contributions of migrants to sustainable development in countries of origin, transit and destination. It called on member nations to mainstream migration in the development process, to reduce remittance costs, and to fully respect the human rights of migrants. 
 
To combat climate change, there is a need to put in place climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, particularly at the local levels, and increase investments towards a climate-resilient economy. As one of the most disaster-prone countries in the world, the country committed to work and ensure the adoption of a new legally binding, universal and equitable climate agreement in the Conference of Parties (COP) in Paris last year. Specifically, the country aims to limit the increase in global average temperature to below 2 degrees or 1.5 degree Celsius, above pre-industrial levels. 
 
On the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources, oceans and seas, there is a need to seriously acknowledge challenges to conservation, such as destruction due to massive reclamation, as a common concern among community of nations.  These challenges need to be collectively addressed using a rules-based approach in international law as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; and 
 
On equality of opportunities, the Philippines stated its aspiration to achieve education for all, universal health coverage, food security, and social and economic inclusion supported by quality infrastructure. There is also a need to ensure financial inclusion for all. Further, the country is committed to address maternal and reproductive health and accelerate the fulfillment of women’s rights. 
  
 
2. METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS FOR PREPARATION OF THE REVIEW 
This review highlights the efforts that have been made by the government and its partners in putting up the policy and enabling environment for the implementation of the SDGs.  It is based on the results of technical workshops on the assessment and identification of SDG Indicators conducted by the government, through the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA3 and the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) held in April and May 2016 and widely participated in by stakeholders from the government, non-government organizations, civil society, academe, business sector, and the United Nations Country Team (UNCT).  These workshops also discussed strategies in incorporating SDGs in the planning process such asthe matching of the SDG goals with the LongTerm Vision.     
The review also benefited from the outputs of the recently held workshops and fora in 2016, e.g., SDG framework and child protection, mechanisms for integrating SDGs in local level planning and budgeting, among others. The following documents and reports have also been useful in the preparation of the Voluntary National Review: 
a) National Report of the Philippines on the Progress Towards Achieving the MDGs, which was submitted to the UN-ECOSOC for the 2015 Annual Ministerial Review; 
 
b) Philippine Presentation and Statements (Associated Event on National Voluntary Reviews held in Bangkok in April 2016; Multilateral Posts Consultative Meeting in January 2016; Fifth Monitoring and Evaluation Network Forum in November 2015; 70th Session of the UN General Assembly in September 2015; UN-ECOSOC Annual Ministerial Review in July 
2015);  
c) Philippines Long-Term Vision 2040Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan 2011-2016; 
 
d) Minutes of the Multi-Sectoral Committee on International Human Development 
Commitments (MC-IHDC) meetings; and  
e) The Country Report on the Second Round Monitoring of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation.  
The government’s MC-IHDC, which is under the NEDA Board Social Development Committee (SDC), also held a consultative meeting among various stakeholders on July 7, 2016 to discuss and provide further inputs to the report prior to its finalization.    
 
3. POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  
The Philippine report on the MDGs submitted for the UN-ECOSOC Annual Ministerial Review in 2015 has cited the country’s accomplishments in creating a policy and enabling environment for the MDGs, among others.  Learning from the MDG experience, the government enhanced efforts toward building awareness on and ownership of the SDGs and the incorporation of the SDGs in national frameworks including policies, programs and projects.     
3.1 Building Awareness on the SDGs 
The country’s work on building awareness and ownership for the SDGs began during the consultation processes for the preparation of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.  The government has engaged different development stakeholders in discussions and dialogues to gather insights and inputs for the crafting of the Post-2015 Development Agenda, and to generate awareness, interest, and ownership.   
Within sectoral committees of government, the MC-IHDC has regularly discussed the new agenda in its meetings. During this transition period of government, it also coordinates the SDG-related initiatives by reporting and elevating SDG-related matters to both the SDC and the Human Development and Poverty Reduction Cabinet Cluster (HDPRCC). The Subcommittee on International Migration and Development (SCIMD), also under the SDC has discussed migration-related targets and indicators for the SDGs. Beyond the social development-oriented committees, the NEDA Infrastructure Committee has also discussed targets and indicators for SDG 6 on water and sanitation.      
Outside these committees, the government has conducted briefings on the SDGs for various government agencies, the academe and civil society organizations which include the following: 
National government agencies: Department of Health (DOH), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Department of Education (DepEd), Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC), National Commission on Disability Affairs (NCDA), Commission on Population (POPCOM), and Office of one Senator. 
Subnational government agency: Department of Social Welfare and Development-National Capital Region 
Academe: University of the Philippines-Los Baños (UPLB),  University of the PhilippinesNational College of Public Administration and Governance (NCPAG), University of Santo Tomas (UST), De La Salle University (DLSU), Philippine Economic Society, and UP College of Public Health Alumni Association. 
Civil Society Organizations: Visayan Forum Foundation, Plan International Philippines, World Vision, Philippine Business for Social Progress, Philippine Business for Environment, Foundation for the Philippine Environment,  Lopez Group Foundation, Philippine League of Local Environment and Natural Resources Officers,  National Confederation of Cooperatives, and Union of Local Authorities in the Philippines (ULAP). 
The briefings focused on the progress on meeting the MDG targets, lessons from the MDG implementation, salient features of the 2030 Agenda, and the planned strategies to achieve the SDGs.   It is noteworthy that ULAP4  was one of the organizations that were given early orientation on the SDGs as it has a critical role in mobilizing the LGUs to help the national government in mainstreaming SDGs into the local development processes.   
The government also tapped radio guesting and attendance to special events to reach the public. Resource persons from the government discussed ending hunger and all forms of malnutrition in the radio show, Radyo Mo sa Nutrisyon.  Special events like the Scaling-Up Nutrition Philippine Gathering and the Philippine launch of the 2015 Global Nutrition Report likewise provided opportunities to inform the audience about the significance of addressing malnutrition issues within the SDG context.   
The CSOs have also provided significant support to the SDG campaign through theme- and sector- focused fora and workshops on how the SDG framework could be utilized in identifying issues and interventions for specific sectors and themes (Table 1).  Worth noting is the Visayan Forum-organized workshop on child rights and SDGs, where the SDG framework was used in identifying advocacy opportunities to influence decision-makers in addressing priority issues on child protection.  The Philippine Legislators’ Committee on Population and Development Foundation (PLCPD) also organized a Voters’ Education Forum on Food and Nutrition Security in the Next Administration to identify food and nutrition security (SDGs 2 and 3)  policy proposals that need to be prioritized in the agenda of the next Congress.  Workshops on the SDG indicators related to Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights, and migration also served as venues for advocacy to gather momentum and commitment to the SDGs. 
The Social Watch Philippines (SWP), in cooperation with the UNDP Manila, also produced a spotlight report “For Justice and Sustainability: The Other Philippines 2030 Agenda”.  The report presents the SWP’s view of the Philippine development dilemma and how it may be overcome. It also seeks to further understand the sustainability problem and find lasting solutions to the cyclical problems of poverty, inequality, and continuing environmental degradation despite economic growth. 
Similarly, the youth sector has also been active in the SDGs campaign.  In September 2015, the Youth Empowerment Summit for the SDGs was held which resulted in the signing of the Manila Declaration for the SDGs and the launching of the SDG Youth National Convergence. The Convergence consists of youth leaders from different sectors committing to work towards the SDGs. At present, the group is conducting a survey among the youth to find out the top six goals/issues (out of the 17 SDG goals) they want to be addressed in their local community. Subsequently, the results of the survey will be used to engage the youth in the SDG action campaign. 
Assistance from development partners have also been helpful in the SDG information campaign of the government. The UN country team supported the UN Civil Society Advisory Committee (UNCSAC) with its information and advocacy campaign to national and subnational CSOs and CSO networks in the country. Meanwhile,  UNDP Manila discussed the role of business in nation-building and in achieving the Global Goals at the last annual meeting of the Philippine Business for Social Progress (PBSP) which resulted in the group’s mapped out activities vis-a-vis the SDGs.   
Table 1.  Theme- and Sector- Focused Fora/Workshops on the SDGs 
Sector or theme Purpose Organizer Participants 12th Community-based Monitoring System (CBMS) National 
Conference To provide orientation on the SDGs  PEP-CBMS 670 participants from national and local  
government, 	non-
government 	organizations 
(NGOs), private corporations, development partner agencies, academe 5th Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
Network Forum To discuss and disseminate evaluation findings of  programs and projects, and to generate policy agenda for action. NEDA Implementing and oversight government agencies, civil society organizations (CSOs), academe, development partners, M & E 
practitioners Children’s Rights and 
SDGs 	in 	the 
Philippines To acquaint CSOs in the child rights sector on the SDGs; build capacity of CSOs to advocate for child protection using the 
SDG framework  Visayan (NGO) Forum Government, 	NGOs, 
development partners Food and Nutrition Security in the Next 
Government To identify food security concerns that may be included in the next 
legislative agenda  Philippine 
Legislators’ Committee 
Population 
Development 
(PLCPD) on and National and local government, NGOs, academe, House of 
Representatives 	technical staff RTD Discussion on 
Integrating Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights (SRHR) in SDGs To discuss issues and challenges on SRHR-
related SDG targets and 
indicators  Likhaan Center for 
Women’s Health National 	government, 
CSOs, academe, development partner 
agencies Workshop 	on 
Migration-Related 
SDGs To identify the specific indicators for migrationrelated provisions/targets of the SDGs Center for Migrant Advocacy National 	government, CSOs, development partner agencies Technical Workshop on the SDG Indicators To assess data of the global SDG indicators, PSA, 	NEDA 	and UNDP Government 	agencies, 
NGOs, private and business provide proxy indicators and identify additional indicators sectors, 	academe, Country team UN  
With the country currently in transition to a new administration, this is an opportune time to converse with the newly elected leaders on the national development priorities and the SDGs.  In the next few months, the following activities would be good venues for advocacy and broad-based quality consultations on the SDGs:  a) the alignment of the SDGs with the national priorities in the LongTerm Vision (Filipino 2040); b) the formulation of the next Medium-Term Development Plan, its Subnational Plans and accompanying Investment Program; and c) the finalization of the SDG indicators for national monitoring. To complement these efforts, there is a need for a vigorous government-led SDG campaign through a coherent and integrated communication and advocacy plan that will gather and harness all efforts from stakeholders.     
3.2 Initiatives to Integrate the SDGs in Plans and Programs: Political Commitment 
3.2.1 	National Level 
A new administration was ushered in during the first year of the SDG implementation and this paved the way for a synchronized conduct of significant development planning processes in the Philippines.  The  confluence of these events namely, the continuing work on the LTV, the development of guidelines and other preparations for the successor Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, and the updating of the Philippine Statistical Development Program,  formed an enabling  environment for the integration of the SDGs in the national development frameworks.  
3.2.1.1 	Long-Term Vision or LTV (Ambisyon Natin 2040)   
The government through NEDA, embarked on the formulation of the LTV, which articulates the aspirations of Filipinos for their self and the country in the next 25 years. As such, the document will serve as a guide in development planning across four administrations. The vision was based on a series of focus group discussions and a national survey commissioned by NEDA in 2015.   The results showed that majority of the Filipinos aspire for a simple and comfortable life. This is described as owning a medium-sized home and at least one car, having enough earnings, having enough money for daily needs, with all children having finished college, owning a business, relaxing with family and friends, and being able to take occasional trips around the country.  When asked about their dreams for the country by the year 2040, the Filipinos mentioned eradication of poverty and hunger, having adequate jobs within the country, elimination of corruption and achievement of peace and security.  These collective aspirations were then summarized into the Vision of Filipinos for Self and for the Country.  
Studying the possibilities and constraints of attaining these aspirations are experts who are working with NEDA in preparing technical papers on health, education, employment, infrastructure, environment, energy, science and technology, financing, and governance, among others.  Another component of the LTV exercise is the development of an integrated long-term model for sustainable development using the Threshold 21 (T21) model. This allows for the simulation of long-term scenarios and integrates into a single framework the economic, social and environmental spheres of sustainable development.  It is deemed to help decision-makers and planners in identifying policies and strategies to realize the desired outcome and goals.  The current version of the T21 model contains SDG-related indicators and can be further customized once national-level indicators have been finalized. 
In general, the SDGs match well with the vision of the Filipino people.  Ending Poverty and Hunger (Goals 1 and 2) are prominent in the vision while good jobs and economic growth (Goal 8), good health (Goal 3), and responsible consumption (Goal 12) correspond well to the requirements of a simple and comfortable life that majority of the Filipinos aspire for.  The preference for business entrepreneurship informs Goal 4 (quality education) on the need to review the school curriculum. Sustainable cities and communities (Goal 11), clean water and sanitation (Goal 6), and renewable energy (Goal 7) respond to the choice of the Filipinos to live in the cities. 
Thus, the integration of the SDGs into the LTV will ensure that these will become part of the succeeding medium-term development plans, provided that the LTV will be recognized by the succeeding administrations.   
 
3.2.1.2 Successor Medium-Term Development Plan   
The Philippines stressed the need to mainstream the SDGs in the country’s next medium-term development plan as well as the long-term developmental program in a press briefing for the Highlights of the UN Summit and the SDGs held in 2015.  The government, with NEDA as the lead agency for development planning, will ensure that the SDGs shall be mainstreamed in the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2017-2022, the accompanying Public Investment Program (PIP), the yearly Budget Priorities Framework and various Subnational Development Plans.  Some specific strategies to operationalize integration of SDGs  in the medium-term plan include integrating the SDGs in the planning guidelines for the Successor Medium-Term Plan, identifying baseline and annual/midterm targets for SDG-related indicators through the Planning Committees. Also included are ensuring that SDG indicators are in the Results Matrix of the Successor Development Plan and  ensuring that programs and projects in the PIP contribute to the goals and outcomes identified in the Results Matrix, among others.   
3.2.1.3 Sectoral Plans 
Some sectors have either formulated or started formulating their medium-term plans using the SDG framework. These sectoral plans will serve as inputs to the forthcoming preparation of the Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022.  For instance, the employment and labor sector has drawn up the Philippine Labor and Employment Plan (PLEP) 2017-2022 guided by an Administrative Order (AO) issued by the Department of Labor and Employment. The AO stipulates that the PLEP will anchor its goal on the UN-SDGs, which is “to promote sustained inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all”.   For the health sector, the Department of Health which leads the formulation of the National Objectives for Health 2017-2022 takes into consideration the lessons from the MDGs and the challenges of the SDGs.  Using the SDG framework, various sectors have to align their targets with those of the SDGs.  To ensure the attainment of the SDG targets, the government and other stakeholders have to make sure that the right policies and programs are implemented.  Consequently, all possible resources have to be mobilized to support the implementation of these policies and programs.  
3.2.1.4 Chapter on the SDGs in the Philippine Statistical Development Program (PSDP) 2011-2017 Update 
Statistics plays a vital role in the realization of the SDGs given the emphasis of the Agenda 2030 on the need to establish a culture of evidence-based decision-making. In December 2015, the PSA Board endorsed to the Philippine President the updated PSDP 2011-2017, which converges stakeholders in the Philippine Statistical System (PSS) to produce and deliver timely, relevant and quality official statistics that will be used in development planning and decision-making. The updated PSDP has a chapter on the SDGs and includes the consideration of various sources of data, including big data for SDGs monitoring. In this regard, statistics shall serve as bases in designing policies and programs, as well as in monitoring the progress of the SDGs. Inclusion in the PSDP ensures that data generation on the SDG indicators will receive strong political support and resources from the government.  
3.2.2 	Subnational and Local Levels 
Mainstreaming Gender and Development (GAD) in subnational development plans.  In April 2016, the First Mindanao Development Forum was conducted in Cagayan de Oro City to prepare for the formulation of the successor Medium-Term Subnational Development Plans. With participants coming from NEDA Regional Offices IX, X, XI, XII, and Caraga,, the discussion focused on mainstreaming gender and development (GAD) in planning vis-a-vis the SDGs with particular attention on poverty, inequality and injustice, and climate change.  The Mindanao group of NEDA regional offices also called for greater involvement with the NEDA Central Office in the localization and mainstreaming of the SDGs in the subnational and local development planning and budgeting.  Mindanao is the second largest among the three island groups in the Philippines and is home to a sizeable Muslim population.  However, it  has a high poverty incidence in most of its regions and provinces.  Given the interest and level of participation in this forum, GAD mainstreaming-related fora and workshops may be viewed as an important point of entry and strategy in raising awareness level on the SDGs across the country.  
In view of the above, the government must gather all the support and commitment to the SDGs in facing the following challenges:   
a) Ensuring strong ownership and buy-in of the long-term vision by the leaders and stakeholders over the next 25 years;  
b) Translating the vision into specific goals and milestones;  
c) Aligning the long-term vision with the SDGs as well as clarifying institutional arrangements; 
d) implementing the SDGs through the next medium-term development plans; and  
e) Empowering the local governments (capacitating, providing resources, and putting in place effective institutions) to fulfill their roles especially in incorporating the SDGs in the local plans and policies.  
3.3 Goals and Targets: Development of SDG Indicators  
3.3.1 	Global Level Participation 
Since the implementation of the MDGs, the Philippines has been actively engaged in the global discourse on improving monitoring indicators.  Through the PSA and in cooperation with the UN Statistics Division, Asian Development Bank, and other international organizations, the country has hosted two international conferences on the MDGs in 2007 and 2011. The events served as venues among countries to share best practices and identify  areas where capacity building or other form of assistance is needed.  The PSA has also been actively participating in the activities of the ASEAN Community Statistical System (ACSS) particularly in the updating of the ASEAN Database and Report on MDGs. 
With the transition to the SDGs, the Philippines has become more active in the global discussion on the SDG indicators through its participation in various international activities beginning in 2014 toward the development of the SDG indicator framework: 
Accomplishment of questionnaires for the development of the SDG indicator framework.  The Philippines participated in accomplishing questionnaires sent by international organizations, which served as inputs in the development of the SDG indicator framework. The Survey Monkey5 sent by the Friends of the Chair on Broader Measures of Progress6 obtained information on the availability of an initial set of indicators to measure the SDGs and associated 107 substantive targets agreed upon by the Open Working Group. The results served as background document during the 46th UN Statistics Commission Session held  in  March 2015. Meanwhile, the Assessment on the Proposed Preliminary UN Indicators for the Post 2015 sent by the UN Statistics Division intended to evaluate around 300 proposed indicators according to feasibility, suitability and relevance.  Responses of countries served as inputs to the SDG indicator framework developed by the International Inter-Agency and Expert Group (IAEG) on SDGs. 
Participation in international fora.  The Philippines also participated in the following international fora on SDGs: a) ESCAP/ADB/UNDP Sub-Regional Workshop on Accelerated Achievement of MDGs and the Post 2015 Development Agenda in Southeast Asia held on 21-23 November 2012; b) Side event: Special Event of the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century 
(PARIS21) on post 2015 and the Global Partnership for Development Data held on 26 September 
2013; c) Expert Roundtable Discussion on “Designing Indicators for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): Collecting Comprehensive, Timely Data”  on June 2014; and d) Trade Union Development Cooperation Network General Meeting: Focus on Agenda 2030 Monitoring Framework and Trade Unions Engagement on 6 April 2016. 
Co-chair of the International Inter-Agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs).  The PSA National Statistician Lisa Grace S. Bersales, as representative of the Southeast Asian countries, was elected as Co-chair of the IAEG-SDGs established by the UN Statistics Commission. The country participated in a number of consultations in 2015 and 2016 leading to the final list of the SDG indicators submitted to the 47th Session of the UN Statistical Commission and which was subsequently adopted in March 2016. 
As co-chair of the IAEG-SDGs, the Philippines will participate in the following activities of the expert group until 2017: a) defining global reporting mechanisms; b) establishing a tier system for indicators based on the level of methodological development and data availability; c) reviewing the data availability for Tier I and Tier II indicators; d) coming up with work plan for Tier III indicators; 
e) establishing procedures for methodological review of indicators; f) developing guidance on data disaggregation; and g) continuing discussion on interlinkages across targets and goals, and use of multi-purpose indicators. 
3.3.2 	National Level 
3.3.2.1 Lessons from Generating and Monitoring MDG Indicators 
For the past 15 years, the Philippines has benefited from its rich experience in monitoring the implementation of the MDGs. .  Data users and data-producing agencies have recognized the important role and contributions of the PSA in coordinating the generation, improvement and monitoring of MDG-related statistics.The PSA serves as the official repository of the MDG indicators and is also responsible for the installation of the MDG Watch6 (http://www.psa.gov.ph/mdgsmain/mdg-watch).  Noteworthy is the good coordination that the PSA has  maintained with NEDA,  providing the latter with all the needed data  in  the preparation of the past five Philippine Progress Reports. NEDA, as overall coordinator for the MDGs, led the government in preparing all the Progress Reports and provided analysis on the status of achieving the MDG targets.  
The following are lessons from the monitoring of MDGs which would be useful as the country moves forward to implement the SDGs: a) preparedness of national statistical systems: investments on statistics and information as well as statistical capacity building of both producers and users are  important; b) clear numerical targets: 18 MDG indicators have no clear numerical targets, e.g.,  measures of inequality;  c) linking the post-2015 development agenda framework with an accountability framework: this should be raised as a governance issue at the global, regional, national, and local levels; d) consider relevance in the identification of indicators: in assessing goals and targets, consider targets that are tailored to country realities;  e) identification of policy-relevant indicators: choose indicators that will and can actually be translated into useful policies;  f) responsiveness to emerging concern: include if possible under the goal on poverty and hunger, or in the goal on reducing inequality within and among countries, indicators on inequality such as Gini ratio, share to GDP, share of bottom to top income quintile in terms of income; and g) proposed SDG indicators should be specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time-related (SMART) and data should be disaggregated by geographical location, sex and sector/subpopulation, among others. 
3.3.2.2 Policy Updates on SDG Monitoring 
The PSA Board approved a resolution in its meeting on May 12, 2016 which enjoins government agencies at the national and subnational/local levels to provide the necessary data support in monitoring the country’s performance vis-à-vis the SDGs based on the indicator framework that shall be determined by NEDA, PSA and other government agencies.  The Resolution also contains the following provisions: 
The PSA shall: serve as the official repository of SDG indicators in the country; develop mechanisms by which all concerned data-producing agencies and LGUs will be able to generate and regularly provide timely and accurate statistics and indicators for the SDGs, other than those already being generated by the PSA; and call on the international community, private sector, and civil society to provide assistance/support to statistical activities towards the monitoring of the SDGs; 
The Philippine Statistical Research and Training Institute (PSRTI) to conduct capacity building activities to help PSA and other agencies generate the indicators to monitor the country’s/region’s performance vis-à-vis the SDGs, archive data on such and conduct methodological researches to address issues in generating the SDG indicators; 
Oversight agencies and the LGUs to provide the necessary resources/assistance in ensuring the generation of data on the SDGs; and  
Concerned PSS agencies to monitor and implement PSDP activities geared towards the generation of SDG indicators, incorporate in their budget the necessary funding to support the generation of SDG indicators, and discuss statistical issues and data gaps on SDGs through relevant Inter-Agency Committee or Technical Committee (IAC/TC). 
As mentioned in the previous section, a separate chapter on the SDGs was included in the Philippine Statistical Development Program to highlight the current situation, key activities, as well as issues and challenges in monitoring the SDGs.  This will ensure the operationalization of the data collection and the appropriation of corresponding budget.     
The PSA proposes the following activities to strengthen the mechanisms for SDG monitoring and reporting: a) inclusion of an SDG webpage where users can view the metadata, database, SDG watch and other related links; b) development of the SDG Watch that is similar to the MDG Watch, which will monitor the relevant and available indicators;  c) identification of SDG Focal Point from each data-source agency to facilitate coordination and data gathering of the indicators; d) use of relevant IAC/TC as venue for the resolution of statistical issues and data gaps on SDG indicators; and e) monitoring of the implementation of identified PSDP activities to address the data gaps on SDGs.  
3.3.2.3 Updates on the Identification, Assessment and Prioritization  of SDG indicators  
At the national level, seven technical workshops on the SDGshave been conducted toassess, identify and prioritize SDG indicators based on the country situation (Table 2).   
 
Table 2. Technical Workshops on the SDG Indicators 
Technical 
Worksho
p Date Objectives Participants 1st September 2013 Review and discuss the initial global goals and targets proposed by the UN High-Level Panel of Eminent 
Persons on the Post-2015 
Development Agenda Government agencies; academe; UNDP 2nd September 2014 Initially  identify data that are needed for the monitoring of the initial 17 SDGs Government agencies; academe; civil society; private sector; NGOs; UN agencies 3rd June 2015 Review and discuss the zero-draft of the outcome document for the UN Summit Government agencies; civil society; NGOs; UNDP 4th October 2015 Assess  initial list of SDG indicators NEDA and PSA 5th October 2015 Assess  initial list of SDG indicators; identify relevant SDG indicators to be monitored in the Philippines Government agencies;  academe;  civil society;  private sector; NGOs;  UN agencies 6th April 2016 Conduct initial assessment of the agreed global SDG indicators in preparation for the Multi-Sectoral Workshop NEDA and PSA 7th May 2016 Validate the initial assessment of the global SDG indicators; identify priority indicators from the tier 2 & 3 global SDG indicators; identify additional indicators deemed relevant Government agencies; academe; civil society; private sector;  NGOs;  UN agencies 8th 5-6 July 2016 Organized by PSA, Funded by WHO, a 
DEDICATED Workshop on SDG Goal 6 WASH Indicators 6.1 – 6.3. To make the Philippines ready for SDG 6 WASH monitoring; computation of baseline data for Indicator 6.6.1; plan of action to generate data in support to WASH indicators and areas for collaborative arrangements Concerned national government agencies on WASH, development 
partners (WHO. UNICEF., 
UNDP)  
The results of the workshops conducted from 2013 to 2015 served as inputs to the Philippine Position on the Zero Draft of the Outcome Document for the UN Summit.  Following the adoption of the global SDG indicators (Table 3) at the 47th session of the UN Statistical Commission in March 2016, the PSA and NEDA steered the consultations with stakeholders inApril and May 2016  to generate an initial list of national SDG indicators in time for the High-Level Political Forum in July 2016. The consultation process has taken into consideration the following imperatives: a) the overarching principle of data disaggregation to cover specific population groups and other disaggregation elements; this will also allow data users to see at what level, accountability of responsibilities can be tracked;  b) for national ownership, data production will be done by national statistical systems; and c) specific means of  operationalizing  data disaggregation.    Table 3.  UN-Approved SDGs, Targets and Indicators 
GOALS TARGETS INDICATOR
S Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 7 12 Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 8 14 Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 13 26 Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitably quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 10 11 Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 9 14 Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 8 11 Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 5 6 Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 12 17 Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 8 12 Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries 10 11 Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 10 15 Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 11 13 Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 5 7 Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 10 10 Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 12 14 Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 12 23 Goal  17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 19 25 Total 169 2417  
Result of the Multi-stakeholders’  Technical  Workshop on the SDG Indicators held in May 2016 
The PSA and NEDA, in cooperation with UNDP Manila, conducted a technical workshop on May 1112, 2016  to:   a) assess data availability and relevance of the Global SDG Indicators based on the Philippine context; b) provide initial proxy indicators to supplement Tier 2 and Tier 3 indicators;  c) identify priority global SDG indicators classified as Tier 2 and 3; and d) identify additional indicators, if deemed necessary, to the initially identified global list of indicators.  A total of 313 participants from the government sector,  civil society, NGOs, academe, and the UN agencies participated especially in the parallel small group/sectoral sessions.  
Prior the event,the PSA and NEDA conducted a small consultation workshop which resulted in a preliminary review of the list of indicators according to relevance, availability and feasibility., . The group also did informal consultations with concerned agencies while some sectors conducted their own preliminary workshops to discuss relevant SDG indicators such as  sexual and reproductive health and rights-related indicators, and migration-related indicators. Similarly, the infrastructure sector convened a meeting to discuss SDG targets and indicators for SDG 6 on water and sanitation. 
● Data Availability 
Based on the results of the May 2016 workshop, Table 4 shows the classification of the SDG indicators in the Philippines by tier.  More than half of the total indicators (121 out of 241) have data which are not regularly produced (classified as Tiers 2 and 3) and only 96 out of the total 241 indicators have data which are regularly produced (classified as Tier 1). Goals 12 (sustainable consumption and production patterns), 14 (conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development), 6 (water and sanitation) and 10 (reduce inequality) have the most number of  Tiers 2 and 3 indicators suggesting that more efforts have to be made to improve data production .  Also, most of the indicators classified as Tiers 2 and 3 (88 out of 121) are deemed priority indicators by the workshop participants implying the need for resources and technical assistance  and/or develop methodology and standards to generate data for these indicators.  A total of  74 additional indicators, mostly for Goals 3 (health) and 4 (education) were also recommended as they were  deemed relevant based on national conditions. 
Table 4. Classification of Indicators by Tier9 and Proposed Additional Indicators 
GOALS Total number of indicators Number of indicators 
  
 TIER 
1 TIER 
2 TIER 3 Not applicabl
e Priority Tier 
2 & 3 indicators Additional indicators Goal  1 12 7 1 4  4/5 2 Goal  2 14 5 6 3  6/9 5 Goal  3 26 13 2 11  No 
prioritization 20 Goal  4 11 6 4 1  5/5 13 Goal  5 14 3 4 3 4 5/7 4 Goal  6 11 1 2 6 210 2/8 Not specified Goal  7 6 2 2 2  4/4 0 Goal  8 17 9 1 5 2 5/6 9 Goal  9 12 6 1 5  6/6 8 Goal  10 11 2 4 4 1 6/8 1 Goal  11 15 6 6 3  8/9 0 Goal  12 13 1 3 9  9/12 6 Goal  13 7 3 0 2 2 2/2 0 Goal  14 10 1 3 5 1 8/8 0 Goal  15 14 10 1 1 2 2/2 Not specified Goal  16 23 6 10 5 211 14/15 6 Goal  17 25 15 1 1 8 2/2 0 Total 241 96 51 70 24 88/121 74                                                           
9  Tier 1 refers to indicators that are conceptually clear, established methodology and standards available, and data regularly produced; Tier 2 refers to indicators that are conceptually clear, established methodology and standards available but data are not regularly produced by countries;  Tier 3 are indicators for which methodology and standards are not yet established or are being developed/tested. 
10 For validation 
11  For validation 
 
 
 
● Issues and Concerns 
The issues that were raised during the discussions were on data availability, data disaggregation, unclear definition of technical terms, overlaps of indicators across SDG goals, measurement of indicators, accountability of concerned agencies, and the need to encourage more players/stakeholders to participate in the consultation process (Table 5).   
Table 5. Issues raised on SDG indicators and data  
Areas of Concern Issues raised Data availability ● There is a need to harmonize data that come from different/multiple sources, e.g., labor productivity 
● Estimation methodology is not yet established, e.g., damage assessment in critical infrastructure and basic services sectors 
● There is a need to capture programs & projects implemented by the private sector 
● Some data are collected but not processed Data Disaggregation ● Full employment and decent work indicators need disaggregated data by sex, migrant status and disability 
● There is a need for disaggregated data for tax indicators and basic sectors 
● There is a need to disaggregate some data by sexual orientation  & gender identity (SOGI) 
● Disaggregated data at the local level come from different sources. There is a lack of mechanism to collect data at the local level Lack of clarity of technical terms used/ no clear definitions of terms used for the indicators  ● There is no clear definitions of terms in the indicators and targets, e.g.: social protection floor, vulnerability, ethnicity, multidimensional poverty index, basic services, suicide mortality, slums, accountable agencies,  small-scale producers, productive agriculture, global citizenship, land consumption versus land use.  
● The criteria in classifying “direct poverty reduction programs” for determining budget is unclear;  classify disability based on the Washington Group guidelines 
● There is a lack of standardization of age groups relevant  to poverty indicators, e.g., under 18 years old for children, 15-30 years old for youth, etc. Need to check overlaps and inconsistencies of concepts of indicators across 
Goals  ● There is a need to clarify the context of trafficking in Goal 16 with Goal 5 
● There are overlaps in the following: targets in Goal 5 vis-a-vis Goal 11; Goal 12 with Goals 2,4,8,9 and 17; and between Goal 7 and 9 on international cooperation to support developing countries on facilitation of clean energy usage 
● CO2 emissions (9.4.1) may be derived from indicator 7.3.1 
● For target 14.c (implementation of relevant international laws such as UNCLOS), global metadata seems disconnected with the target and indicator as it reflects seafarer/maritime labor concerns under ILO Convention. This has to be cross-referenced with SDG 8 on decent work and with SDG 10 on reducing inequalities. Measurements ● Identify how to measure “extent of mainstreaming” of global citizenship and education for sustainable development in national education policies, curricula, etc Accountability 	and ownership ● Engage concerned agencies for accountability (e.g., agencies involved in remittances, macroeconomic dashboard, road traffic crashes) 
● Secure official endorsement from department heads on identified indicators   
● Organize follow-up consultations involving more government agencies, CSOs and private sector organizations in the review of SDG Indicators Additional indicators ● Include Gini coefficient as an indicator under Goal 10 (Inequality) 
● No indicators are identified for culture and cultural heritage  Budget ● Lack of budget support for data monitoring  
● Possible Venues for Technical Support 
The workshop participants identified the following areas where technical assistance are needed: capacity-building on generating statistics and refinement of indicators; improvement of information/data systems; enhancement of tools and questionnaires; regular conduct of surveys; and need for human resources in generating data (Table 6).  Specifically on Goal 6, it was recommended that the PSA, in coordination with NEDA and supported by the World Health Organization (WHO), lead another inter-agency workshop to further discuss and enhance SDG 6 indicators.  
The vital role of global development partners like the WHO, UNICEF, UNDP, PARIS21, Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation  in developing methodology or in the enhancement and standardization of data capture forms for administrative-based data for indicators that are classified as Tiers 2 and 3 may be tapped to make the country ready for the monitoring of these indicators.   
 
Table 6.  Technical Support for SDG Indicators  
Technical  Support Needed Specifics Capacity building ● Statistical capacity at subnational/local level ● Developing and fine tuning indicators on employment and decent work (assistance from ILO & UNDP) ● How to ensure timely and reliable data collection Improvement 	of 	 	data 
system/data generation ● 
● Enhance administrative-based data for SDG monitoring 
Explore/utilize alternative sources for SDGs, e.g., big data for official statistics in the context of the SDGs ● Institutionalize regular generation of data on “direct disaster economic loss as percent to GDP/GRDP” ● Set-up a management information system  for SDGs (national and subnational) including monitoring of government expenditures ● Obtain technical support in operationalization and measurement of Tier 3 indicators ● Establish private sector participation in data collection, e.g., thru data sharing mechanisms Improvement of instruments ● Enhance survey questionnaires for SDG subnational monitoring for subnational and local level monitoring ● (e.g., PSA surveys, CBMS, admin-based) 
Enhance Annual Poverty Indicators Survey (APIC) and Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES) questionnaires to capture additional data, e.g., on water and sanitation  Advocacy/IEC  campaigns ● Mount advocacy campaigns for SDGs Conduct of research/studies ● Conduct poverty-related studies (e.g. social protection floor, poverty thresholds for senior citizens, MPI, vulnerability, basic sectors) Conduct of regular surveys ● Regularity and scope of sampling and data collection of national surveys ● Institutionalize surveys on victimization (crime/human rights); governance/ corruption survey Human resources ● Cross-post PSA employees to agencies that would require assistance in generating/improving data, e.g., on full employment and decent work indicators  
3.3.2.4 Forthcoming Activities 
The government, through the PSA, will lead continuing consultations with relevant agencies and organizations on the SDG national indicators to ensure ownership and accountability.   Table 7 shows the activities that the PSA will have in the next six months. 
 
Notable in the list of activities for 2016 is the National Convention on Statistics which shall have plenary and parallel sessions focused on the SDGs, big data, and data revolution. A side event on the development of a data revolution roadmap for the SDGs will also be held in partnership with PARIS21 and the Global Partnership on Sustainable Development Data. 
 
Table 7. Timetable of Activities  in the SDG Indicators Development 
Target Date Activity 11-12 May 2016 Multi-Sectoral Technical Workshop on SDGs 22-23 June  2016 Conduct of a “Country Workshop on Access to New Data Sources for Official Statistics: Business Models for Big Data  in collaboration with the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century (PARIS 21) July – November 2016 Sectoral Worskshops/consultations on SDG Indicators: 
a) Goal 6 – WASH Indicators 6.1 tp 6.3 sponsored by WHO (5-6 July 2016) 
b) World Food Program Indicators (TBA) 
c) Discussion of SDGs to the regions (thru the Regional Statistics Committee, RSC, chaired by NEDA Regional Director) like the Regional Consultations in Selected Regions back to back with PSDP dissemination forum 
d) Consultations/discussions with Inter-Agency Committees/Technical Committees under the PSA Board, and source agencies 
e) Formulation of metadata  
f) Consultations with the IACs/Technical Committees on metadata 11-20 July 2016 Presentation of SDGs to High Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (c/o NEDA) August 2016 Establishment of SDG Steering Committee under the PSA Board 
Coordination with data source agencies and identification of SDG focal points 3-4 October 2016 13thNational Convention on Statistics with the theme “Sustainable Development: Making Statistics Count” December 2016 Finalization of the list of the national SDGs indicators and metadata  
3.4 Institutional Mechanisms 
3.4.1 	Existing Mechanisms for the MDGs 
The government has established coordination and monitoring bodies for the MDGs.   At the national level, existing high-level bodies serve as avenues for discussion and decision-making  for MDG concerns, to wit: 
  
The Cabinet Cluster on Human Development and Poverty Reduction focuses on improving the overall quality of life of the Filipino and translating the gains of good governance into direct, immediate and substantial benefits that will empower the poor and marginalized segments of society. 
 
The Social Development Committee (SDC) advises the President and the NEDA Board on matters concerning social development. It coordinates the activities of government agencies involved in social development, and recommends appropriate policies, programs and projects consistent with the national development objectives. 
For program and project coordination, the Multisectoral Committee on International Development Commitments (MC-IHDC) is a subcommittee of the NEDA Board’s SDC, that was created to monitor, report, review, and evaluate the Philippine compliance to international commitments on human/social development including the MDGs. 
The Cabinet Cluster on Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation focuses on the conservation and protection of the environment and natural resources.  It takes the lead in pursuing measures to adapt and mitigate the effects of climate change and undertakes all the necessary preparation for both natural and man-made disasters. 
 
The Philippine Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD) formulates policies and recommends new actions to appropriate bodies on Sustainable Development (SD) issues focusing on the environment dimensions of social and economic interventions; review and monitor plans, policies, program and legislation on SD; reviews and ensures the implementation of the commitments made by the Philippines in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) and its follow-up process. 
 
The Cabinet Cluster on Economic Development focuses on the promotion of rapid, inclusive and sustained economic growth. 
 
There is explicit support from the legislative branch in the implementation of the MDGs. The House of Representatives (HOR) created the Special Committee on the MDGs that function as an oversight body of the HOR in attaining the MDGs.  The Committee’s mandate includes the following: a) ensure the passage of MDG-supportive bills;b) study and assess the effectiveness of MDG-supportive laws;c) institute a progress review of the MDG policy agenda every eighteen (18) months; andd) ensure budget allocation in the annual General Appropriations Act (GAA) for MDG-supportive programs. On the other hand,the Congress is foreseen to create a Special Committee on the SDGs anew. 
At the subnational levels, the Regional Development Councils and its various subcommittees such as the Regional Social Development Committee have been tasked to monitor the MDGs.  
3.4.2 	No Centralized Coordinating and Reporting Body for the SDGs 
Given the wider scope of the SDGs, which will require the participation of all key government agencies, it is crucial that a centralized coordinating and reporting mechanism be in place.  However, none of the bodies that were tapped for the MDGs have the mandate to subsume the themes and areas of concern of the SDGs.   The creation of a dedicated oversight committee and its technical secretariat is being proposed under the NEDA Board to spearhead the national implementation of the SDGs in the Philippines and to promote rapid, inclusive, and sustained economic growth. The proposed Committee shall be composed of the heads of the various concerned national government agencies with the Socioeconomic Planning Secretary as the Chair. The horizontal (intersectoral linkages and linkage with the high-level committees in planning, budgeting, and investment programming) and vertical (linkages among national, subnational and local levels) coordination of the proposed oversight committee with other institutions/mechanisms will have to be clarified.     
3.4.3 	Establishment of Mechanism for the SDGs at the Subnational Level 
At the subnational level, the NEDA Subnational Offices in Mindanao have  passed a resolution requesting for the establishment of an operational and integrated mechanism within the NEDA in the localization of the SDGs.  This mechanism will define the development actions and commitments at the subnational/local level to contribute to the attainment of the SDG targets.  The resolution is also calling  for the NEDA Central Office to ensure a highly participative and consultative process by involving the subnational level in SDG-related activities through the existing Regional/Subnational Development Councils. The resolution was the outcome of the 1st NEDA Mindanao Development Forum on mainstreaming GAD in planning held in April 2016.  The flow of SDG implementation from the subnational to the national and back will have to be considered in the discussion of the functions of proposed oversight committee for the SDGs.  
4. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION  
The means of implementation (MoI) describes the mix of  financing, technology development and transfer, capacity-building, and multi-stakeholders partnership, among others, required to support the implementation of the SDGs.  
4.1 	Financing  
 
4.1.1 	Financing plan 
 
One of the lessons learned from the MDG experience that should serve as valuable input in implementing the 2030 Agenda, is the importance of  a financing plan which considers domestic and foreign sources, including the private and business sectors  as well as innovative sources of financing.  Though the influx of ODA in the country shows a declining trend, its development impact in the context of the new Agenda  remains significant.  The government’s  affirmation of support for the  SDGs will  be backed by fiscal measures and identified national strategies thatwill be linked to the budgetary processes and  investment programming.   
 
In addition, access to adequate long-term financing for disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation measures is vital for vulnerable countries like the Philippines which will enable them to cope and build resilience against hazards and shocks.  While the government has a calamity fund, more often this is not adequate to cover actual costs of disaster. Thus disaster-risk financing may be pursued, wherein disaster insurance will cover the expenses of reconstruction efforts after disasters. The country may urge other countries to join its cause in pushing for the creation of this global disaster insurance to make it financially viable for countries to access.  This may also be accompanied by disaster-risk financing for LGUs that will allow them to respond to calamities.  
 
4.1.2 	Effective Development Cooperation8 
 
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will not simply require more resources, but also collective efforts to increase the effectiveness of development cooperation based on the basic principles of country ownership, results focus, inclusive partnerships, transparency and accountability. The Philippines has demonstrated its strong commitment to strengthening the effectiveness of development cooperation through its  participation in the first and second monitoring rounds of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC).  The following are highlights of the latest country report on effective development cooperation in relation to the implementation of the SDGs:       
 
4.1.2.1 ODA to the Philippines is decreasing, as the country has achieved its middle-income status, but can still be a relevant source of development finance especially for the SDGs. ODA can have more strategic and catalytic role as it can be used to mobilize other sources of development finance. Redefining ODA to sharpen its focus on poverty eradication, and inequality and sustainable development will retain its importance especially in implementing the SDGs. 
 
4.1.2.2 There is a good indication on the use of country results frameworks (CRFs) and country Public Finance Management (PFM) among development cooperation providers in the Philippines. A number of these providers have demonstrated mutual accountability through joint reviews and dialogue with government. More work is needed along: aid predictability; development cooperation information in budget documents; tracking of gender and empowerment allocation; improving publicprivate dialogue; and enabling environment for CSOs. There are also encouraging signs of support and commitment among stakeholders to bring the data collection and analysis phase of this exercise to a higher level of  discussion on improving systems and operations, particularly in the context of supporting the SDG implementation. 
 
4.1.2.3 Multi-stakeholder mechanisms organized as well as collected information in the GPEDC can be maximized to inform the SDG means of implementation. GPEDC can support the data generation for SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development.  
 
4.1.2.4 GPEDC monitoring is seen as an instrument that ultimately aims to cause behavior change of development providers and the government in terms of public development practices and operations.  
 
4.1.2.5 While the link of GPEDC and the SDG is clear conceptually, GPEDC stakeholders have to be engaged in the SDG-country activities to establish the role of the GPEDC mechanism in mainstreaming the SDG at the country level. 
 
4.2 	Capacity-building 
 
The  assessment of the SDG indicators led by the PSA has led to the discovery of gaps in data collection and the unavailability of data for some targets.  Results of the recent national workshops on SDG indicators show that demand for technical support from national and international sources are along the following areas:  a) funding and technical assistance in producing data and/or developing methodology for data collection for Tiers 2 and 3 indicators; b) improving data generation especially at the local level; c) enhancing survey questionnaires for local level monitoring; d) conduct of poverty-related studies to improve definitions and measurements; and e) institutionalization of surveys, e.g., on governance.   
 
To support the localization of the SDGs, LGUs need assistance in building their capacities on local governance along the areas of development planning, monitoring and evaluation, fiscal administration, accountability, and service delivery. 
 
4.3 	Technology 
 
4.3.1 	Technology Self-Sufficiency9 
 
The country has recognized the vital role of science, technology and innovation (STI) as key drivers to implement the SDGs.   The government, through the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), developed an STI ecosystem based on Technology Self-Sufficiency, which has the elements of know-how in human resource development, S&T infrastructure, policies for technology transfer, and programs and projects that respond to national problems. This resulted, among others, to the following: a) a four-fold increase in S&T  scholarships; b) establishment of innovation centers for food processing in the countryside, central facilities for metals and engineering, semiconductor and electronics, aerospace and manufacturing industries as well as technology business incubators and innovation hubs that link the academe and industries;  c) creation of policies on data sharing, technology transfer protocols for research and development institutions, and favorable royalty and spin-off policies for researchers; and d) use of light and detection ranging, remote sensing, numerical modeling, high-performance computing and ICT to generate flood, landslide and storm surge hazard maps that are available online that resulted to the reduction or eradication of  casualties of typhoons that have hit the country in recent years.  The government deemed it important to enhance regional and international cooperation in improving the access to STI and financial resources, and increased investments, among others, to help developing countries achieve the SDG goals.     
 
 
 
 
4.3.2 	Planning and Costing tool: e-PSDP/Advance Data Planning Tool (ADAPT) for the PSDP  
The Electronic-Philippine Statistical Development Program (e-PSDP), the Philippine version of ADAPT is a web-based application that aims to facilitate coordination between data producers and planners and manage the data demands for the monitoring of the SDGs.  The e-PSDP, which will be operationalized in the PSS, will define the correspondence/matching between the following: a) indicators in the revalidated results matrix of the PDP 2011-2016; b) the SDG indicators; and c) the statistical activity/program in the PSDP Update 2011-2017.  It will also provide information as to what statistical activities generate which SDG indicators, including the corresponding cost based on disaggregating variables such as sex, age group and geographic level.  In general, the application is both a planning and costing tool that facilitates data collection and advocacy to mobilize financing, for statistical activities that will generate the PDP and SDG indicators. 
4.3.3 	Threshold 21 (T21) model for planning 
The Philippine government, through NEDA, is involved in capacity-building for the development of  an integrated long-term model for sustainable development  using the Threshold 21 (T21) model. The model was developed by the Millennium Institute in Washington D.C., and custom-fitted into the country’s context.  It allows the simulation of long-term development scenarios thus helping decisionmakers/planners identify policies/strategies to realize their desired outcome and goal.  The current version contains some SDG-related indicators but can be further customized once the national-level indicators have been finalized. 
 
5. NEXT STEPS  
 
SDG Implementation Roadmap.  The Philippines will formulate an SDG Implementation Roadmap that will serve as an overall framework that guides government and other key stakeholders on the actions, resources, responsibilities and partnerships needed for the implementation of the SDGs. This Implementation Roadmap will include a financial plan, a date collection and methodology work plan, and a communications and advocacy plan. The Roadmap will consolidate inputs from lead government agencies that will prepare work plans for the different sectors/areas relevant to the SDGs. The Roadmap will also include inputs from the private sector that will devise  their own work plans to supplement thegovernment’s contributions in attaining  the SDG targets.  
Institutional Arrangements.  In recognition of the broader and cross-sectoral scope of the SDGs, the government, in consultation with stakeholders, is working on institutional arrangements that will accommodate the overall coordination and monitoring of the SDGs. It is envisaged that a dedicated high-level committee chaired by the NEDA will be created to oversee the coordinated implementation of SDG-related policies and programs and to monitor progress vis-à-vis targets until 2030. Horizontal and vertical linkages of the proposed committee with concerned planning and budget coordinating bodies and subnational councils, among others, will be clarified for policy and program coherence.  
Development of the SDG indicators.  The SDG indicators have yet to be further refined according to relevance to national priorities, clarity, and availability of disaggregated data.  More stakeholders will be encouraged to participate in the process to ensure ownership and accountability. In the next  6 months, the government, represented by the Philippine Statistical Authority, has lined up the following activities: a) further consultations with inter-agency and technical committees and data source agencies;  b) release of the initial list of national SDG indicators for national monitoring; c) coordination with data source agencies and identification of SDG Focal Points; d) formulation of metadata; e) consultations with the inter-agency committees and Technical Committees on metadata; and f) finalization of the list of the national SDG indicators and metadata.  The PSA will then prepare a workplan for the regular collection of data and the development of methodologies for producing data on priority indicators identified under Tiers 2 and 3 The initial list of national SDG indicators will serve as inputs to the forthcoming planning exercise that will produce the Successor Philippine Medium-Term Development Plan.   
Incorporation of the SDGs in national  development frameworks . Under a new administration, the government will step up its efforts and synchronize activities related to:  a) matching/alignment of the SDGs with the country’s Long-Term Vision; ensuring buy-in of the Vision by the new leaders and other stakeholders;   b) fine tuning of the SDG indicators for incorporation in the Successor MediumTerm Plan and Sectoral  Plans; and c) development of guidelines and other preparations for the formulation of the Successor Medium-Term Development Plan.  Institutional mechanisms will be put in place to clarify the roles of local stakeholders in incorporating the SDGs in local development plans. Local players will be capacitated to fulfill their roles in localizing the SDGs.      
Advocacy/Creating ownership of the SDGs.  Engaging national and subnational stakeholders in the new agenda will require vigorous communications and advocacy efforts, especially now that a new Administration has assumed post.   As the government starts to roll out the SDGs into national and local development planning, it shall also develop a strategic Communication Plan to raise awareness, create a knowledge repository, ensure coherent messaging and advocacy, connect communication platforms, and mobilize broad support.   Some  strategies that may be considered  in the SDG campaign include: a) the identification of new Champions for the SDGs,  and b) harnessing the good practices of the active CSOs, e.g., using the SDG framework for child rights advocacy, including SDG-related proposals in the formulation of the Legislative Agenda for the next Congress.  A coherent and integrated communications and advocacy plan for the SDGs will be linked to the recently launched communication plan for the country’s Long-Term Vision, which is currently being put together by the NEDA.      
Means of Implementation. To operationalize the roadmap, the government needs to strengthen the capacities of local leaders and communities (e.g., on local governance) who will directly work towards the attainment of the SDGs.  Further, it  will also need to raise the capacities of statistical agencies and concerned institutions with respect to data collection, analysis and reporting, in order to improve monitoring and tracking of the SDGs.  The means of financing various activities as identified in the roadmap will have to be determined.  
A financial plan will be prepared to consolidate the financial requirements that will support the implementation of the SDGs.  Funds will come from domestic sources (public and private), ODA, and other international financing sources. ODA will play a more strategic and catalytic role in mobilizing other sources of development finance.  The government will access adequate long-term financing for disaster risk reduction and management to build resilience. The financial plan will be linked to the country’s budget priorities framework and Public Investment Program. Other sources/modes  of financing will be mobilized such as: public-private partnerships, enhancing taxation, subsidy reforms, OFW remittances, e.g., starting-up businesses for additional revenue;  south-south cooperation; and south-north cooperation. Studies and analyses will be conducted to improve investment decisions.   
 
On the effectiveness of development cooperation, the role of the GPEDC stakeholders at the national level will be considered in supporting the institutional mechanism for the coordination and monitoring of SDG implementation, specifically Goal 17, “Partnerships for the Goals”.  Opportunities to dialogue about the GPEDC and SDGs will be explored, such as the Philippine Development Forum, ODA Programming Discussions, and ODA Portfolio, among others.  
 
6. CONCLUSION  
Building on the lessons from the MDG experience, the Philippine government stays committed to addressing unfinished business from the MDGs while moving on to face the bigger challenge that is the SDGs.   
There is a good enabling environment for creating ownership of the SDGs and for integrating the SDGs in the country’s national development frameworks.  The first year for the implementation of the SDGs, which coincides with welcoming a new administration in the country gives  an opportune time for sensitizing and influencing the new national and local officials on national priorities and the SDGs, and a synchronized integration of the SDGs in the Successor Philippine Development Plan, 2017-2022 and its accompanying Subnational Development Plans and Sectoral Plans. The  continuing  work of the government  on the country’s Long-Term Vision also provides an opportunity for its alignment with the SDGs.           
The country has demonstrated good practice in mapping out SDG indicators for national monitoring.  The review, identification and prioritization of SDG indicators have undergone a participatory and iterative process attributable to the active leadership of the national planning and statistics agencies as well as the broad-based involvement of stakeholders. The products of these efforts are timely inputs to the forthcoming  preparation of the Successor Medium-Term Development Plan.  However, there are issues and concerns which need to be tackled such as unavailability of data, lack of disaggregated data, lack of common definitions of some terms used in the targets and indicators, overlaps between indicators across SDG goals, and lack of measurement methods for some indicators.  The government has to exert more effort in improving data collection methodologies of more than half of the total number of  identified SDG indicators. Most of these indicators fall under Goal 12 (“Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns”), Goal 14 (“Conserve and Sustainable Use the Oceans, Seas and Marine Resources for Sustainable Development), Goal 6 (“Water and Sanitation”) and Goal 10 (“Reduce Inequality”). 
The government also needs to expand and strengthen existing institutional mechanisms which were used in the MDG implementation to suit the requirements for coordinating and monitoring a much broader agenda for sustainable development. A dedicated high-level inter-agency committee chaired by the NEDA will be created to oversee the coordinated implementation of SDG-related policies and programs and to monitor progress vis-à-vis targets until 2030.  Horizontal and vertical linkages of the committee with concerned bodies, e.g., planning, budget coordination, investment programming, subnational councils, among others, will be clarified for policy and program coherence and maximization of resources. 
As for Means of Implementation (MOI), the government has yet to draw up an SDG Implementation Roadmap that will serve as an overall framework to guide government and other key stakeholders on the needed actions and resources. The financing requirements for implementation will be consolidated into a financial plan that will accompany the Roadmap, and will be linked to the yearly budget framework and Public Investment Program. The GPEDC  national stakeholders’s  role in supporting the institutional mechanism for the coordination and monitoring of SDG implementation, specifically Goal 17, will be considered.  A communication plan for the SDGs will also be developed and linked to the Ambisyon Natin 2040 Communications and Advocacy Plan currently being put together by the NEDA, which will generate public awareness on the nation’s Long-Term Vision.  
 
 