
Introduction 
This National Voluntary Review aims at providing a genuine picture about Qataris development efforts to build a modern state with sustainable, integrated economic, social and environmental development that leverage the available human and material resources to ensure a better future for the all Qatar citizens and residents. The NVR also explains Qataris role in national development and development and relief aids to vulnerable communities and civil society organizations in many countries around the world and in promoting interaction and dialogue among civilizations with a view to build global security and peace through effective international involvement aimed at a world free of poverty and through focusing on dialogue and interaction in the forums and events hosted by Qatar to build a world full of peace, love and brotherhood among all nations so that no one is left behind. This translates the QNV 2030, which was the result of extensive consultations among different groups in Qatar. QNV 2030 was mainly based on the Constitution and reflected the aspirations of the Qatari people as well as the guidance of its leadership.1 
This NVR is about the methodology applied to incorporate the 2030 Agenda into different NDS-2 sectors and the efforts made in this regard. The NVR also explains the NDS-2 implementation mechanism, which includes the 2030 Agenda goals and targets while considering the government identified national priorities that are achievable through specific performance indicators in the coming six years. The NVR matches between the national priorities and SDGs. In the midterm and by the end of 2022 Qatar will review the already achieved goals and targets in order to incorporate the still unfulfilled ones into the NDS-3 2023-2028. The NVR also presents the institutions and entities concerned with the implementation of NDS-2 which incorporates the 2030 Agenda goals and targets.  
It shows that Qatar has emphasized the integration among objectives which are indivisible and should be achieved concurrently, in cooperation with the private sector, civil society and research and academic centers through extensive R&D and innovation and national and global partnerships. The NVR shows the great efforts made by the State to build science and technology infrastructure and invest in human capital through managing a number of national and international universities, allocating a R&D fund and through committing around 2.8 the annual government spending for these purposes.  
Meanwhile, the State of Qatar realized the importance of developing and modernizing the statistical system to generate the necessary statistics and indicators to measure the NDS-1 progress, prepare for the NDS-2 and monitor its progress in the future including the 2030 Agenda goals and targets. Qatar started concrete actions to transform its statistical system in cooperation with the United Nations Statistics Division and regional and Arab organizations to change the structure of statistical outputs in line with the obligations agreed on with the United Nations Statistical Commission. This NVR focuses on a number of selected objectives where Qatar has made real progress.  
                                                          
 General Secretariat for Development Planning QNV 2030, July 20081  
Executive summary 
This report reviews the progress made in 10 SDGs as well as the implementation challenges. 
With regard to SDG1 (End poverty in all its forms everywhere), the State of Qatar adopted NDS-1 to address poverty issues using a prevention/protection approach within a comprehensive development framework that links protection and prevention against poverty with creating an enabling environment for the integration of vulnerable groups and increased community participation in implementing sustainable development initiatives and programs.  
With regard to SDG2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture), Qatar has worked to achieve food security, improve nutrition and enhance sustainable agriculture and it ranked first among the GCC countries and 20 among 113 countries internationally in the Food Security Index issued by the Alpen Capital annual report on food industry in GCC countries. 
In the area of SDG3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages), Qatar has achieved preventive care, early detection of diseases, reduced mortality rates, enhanced governance of healthcare system, improved emergency and urgent care services. The government now provides medicines at 10-20% of actual cost.  
With regard to SDG4 (Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all), Qatar has developed the National Qualifications Framework, higher education QA system and the National Curriculum Framework for government schools. It has continued opening branches of international universities in Qatar and established the Training and Educational Development Center.  
As for SDG5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls), the number of women in public and private sector leadership positions has increased by 30% higher than 2008. 30% of managers in civil society organizations in Qatar are also women. Legislation reviews have been conducted, through legal committees or special events, to remove the obstacles impeding women. 
As for SDG6 (Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all), all Qatar residents have access to safe drinking water and sanitation and hygiene services.  
On SDG7, (Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all), Qatar has worked to increase the thermal efficiency in energy production through monitoring the operational competency of all independent producers, adopting efficient economic operation, unifying the gas prices in production stations. Extensive awareness campaign have been conducted about energy consumption rationalization and the share of renewal energies in total countryis needs will be increased. 
On SDG8 (Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all), Qatar has ranked 8 among 63 countries in 2017 on the economic performance index according to the annual competitiveness report issued by the Institute of Administrative Development. Qatar also achieved 73.1 on the Heritageis Index of Economic Freedom 2017. 
With regard to SDG9 (Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation), five spatial development plans were developed for the five municipalities, in addition to master plans for urban centers (17 plans are under implementation) for the studied municipalities; the construction of two new ports has been completed (Hamad Port and Hamad International Airport); the Ruwais Port has been expanded and some road have been built; Qatar water policy has been developed; and the first phase of the Doha Metro was completed in 2016 
As for SDG17 (Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development), Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development developed and implemented the Silatech Initiative to foster the ambitions of Arab and international youth in decent work; the \0xECEducation Above All organization which offers education opportunities, especially for the children of low-income families or who face humanitarian crises. The State of Qatar also established QF which is an umbrella organization for seven agencies specialized in fostering social development. The Doha Institute for Graduate Studies established a college and program for economic development to build professionals able to lead and enhance development institutions and programs in Qatar. The development assistance provided voluntarily by Qatar (government and non-government) increased from QAR 1.6 billion in 2008 to around QAR 7.7 billion in 2014. 
Qatar started concrete steps to transform its statistical system in cooperation with the United Nations Statistics Division and Arab and regional organizations. 
The most important lessons to be highlighted in Qatar experience in incorporating SDGs into the NDS-1 are: 
1. The integration of development-oriented goals and targets in social, economic and environment sectors, and the preparation of relevant monitoring and follow-up indicators. 
2. Involving the private sector, civil society organisations in the 2030 Agenda. 
3. Accelerate the meetings among the 2030 Agenda task teams. 
4. Clear ownership of goal implementation. 
5. Incorporating 2030 Agenda into the NDS-2 components. 
 
Sustainable development in the State of Qatar:  
Beginnings, Aspirations and Challenges 
Qatar focused on sustainable development since independence in 1971. This focus has covered the three dimensions of sustainable development: social, economic and environmental. The government has over the time established many developmentoriented institutions and authorities including the Supreme Planning Council, General Secretariat for Development Planning and Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. Since the launch of QNV 2030 in 2008 with its four pillars (human development, social development, economic development and environmental development), this vision aimed to change the face of life in Qatar.  
1. Potential challenges facing the 2030 Agenda implementation  
Despite Qataris economic, social and environmental progress, sustainable development in the country is still facing a number of challenges:  
- Effective management to lead the 2030 Agenda implementation and harmonization with the NDS.  
- Adequate human resources needed for such a big task. 
- Availability of statistics to produce the 230 international indicators and use them on timely basis to activate the M&E system. 
- Efficient communication strategy covering the staff of all sectors. 
- Stakeholder involvement in SDA/NDS implementation. - Enabling legal environment. 
 
2. Establish a conductive environment and incorporate SDGs into the NDS 
Although the NDS was launched in 2011, well before the SDA endorsement in 2015, the MDPS, in collaboration with different stakeholders, mobilized the national efforts to incorporate the SDGs into the NDS. It is very important to share Qataris experience in developing the NDS-2. The related task teams were created representing the ministries, government agencies, private sector, civil society organisations and others to prepare for the development of sector strategies. The SDGs were incorporated in these strategies as major inputs for planning the NDS-2 sectors. See Table 1 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Incorporating 2030 Agenda into the NDS-2 

NDS-2 sectors 
SDGs 
- 
Social protection and family cohesion and women's empowerment 
1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
- 
- 
Social protection and family cohesion 
and women's empowerment  Economic infrastructure 
2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture  
- 
- 
Comprehensive healthcare system  
Cultural 	enrichment 	and 	sports excellence 
3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages  
- 
Quality education and training  
4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all  
- 
Social protection and family cohesion 

- 
- 
and women's empowerment 
Quality education and training  
Qualified and committed labor force  
5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women 
and girls  
- 
- 
Natural resources  
Economic infrastructure  
6. Goal 	6. 	Ensure 	availability 	and 	sustainable 
management of water and sanitation for all  
- 
- 
Natural resources  Infrastructure  
7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
- 
- 
Qualified and committed labor force Economic infrastructure  
8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
- 
Economic infrastructure  
9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation  
- 
Global partnerships for development  
10. Reduce inequality within and among countries  
- 
- 
sustainable  
Security and public safety  
11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable  
- 
- 
- 
Economic infrastructure 
Natural resources  
Global partnerships for development  
12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production 
patterns  
- 
Sustainable environment  
13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts  
- 
Sustainable environment  
14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development  
- 
Sustainable environment  
15.  Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss  
- 
- 
Security and public safety  
Institutional 	Development 	and 
Modernization  
16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels  
- 
- 
Global partnerships for development  Cultural enrichment and sports excellence  
17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development  
 
 
 
3. NDS monitoring and evaluation mechanism  
In line with international best practices, a central monitoring function will be developed as a performance measurement dashboard to be regularly updated and shared with officials and decision makers. Focus will be on the top 5-8 priorities under NDS-2 umbrella, which will be ratified by the council of ministers. These programs will have a limited number of related KPIs (15-20 max.) These programs tend to be interrelated and overlapping and involve many implementation agencies. Thus, focus will be on major NDS-2 priorities which are beyond the mandates of individual ministries (a leading agency will be named for each priority). The selection process will be supported and enhanced through defining the main procedures required by the government to achieve the KPIs These KPIs will be monitored on monthly basis, where possible, and on quarterly basis at all rates. 
4. Institutional mechanisms and national sectors involvement in the 
development process 
Given the MDPS role in the development and management of national development strategies, the NDS-2 has been developed using an inclusive strategic planning approach to all national stakeholders. A supervisory committee representing all ministries, an advisory committee representing NGOs and the private sector, and eight national task teams have been created to develop the sector strategies.  
In addition to these teams, another team was created to design and develop the NDS performance management system through regular monitoring and tracking with the national stakeholders. MDPS has incorporated the 2030 Agenda (17 SDGs + 169 targets) into the work of sector projects/task teams. The KPI dashboard contains the most important KPIs related to sustainable development. 
Among the most significant challenges for the NDS-1 implementation were the overlapped project ownerships and ownership changes during the implementation period. Thus, the government promoted sector participation by all stakeholders in project planning and design and ownership was determined against sound and consensual principles. These projects will be incorporated in the annual action plans and according to them, resources will be allocated and implementation will be monitored with the owners.  
5. NDS implementation and performance management  
The NDS performance management is based on a key principle highlighted in the guidance of His Highness the Amir: the continuous development and modernization of public sector institutions to reach an efficient, transparent and accountable public sector. His Highness underlined the need to identify the challenges that impeded the implementation of some NDS-1 programs and projects and to learn lessons in order to avoid them in future development strategies. Based on these guidelines and addressing the above challenges, the NDS performance management system was designed to provide the necessary tools to monitor and track the progress in implementing the projects developed to achieve the strategic objectives using clear, measurable and comparable performance measurement standards. The system will also provide performance measurement systems to regularly measure the performance of inputs (resources), efficiency of implementation (procedures) and the extent of achieving the desired impact (result measurement) (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1: NDS-2 project implementation monitoring mechanism  

 
6. Qatar efforts in the statistics area  
 
In the statistical field, Qatar responded to the United Nations Statistics Division call and joined the global project on the Transformative Agenda for Official Statistics, which aims to significantly transform and modernize the national statistical system and enable it to collect, process, analyze and disseminate an unprecedented amount of traditional and non-traditional statistical indicators classified under various categories, in order to produce the indicators required by the 2030 Agenda and approved by the United Nations Statistical Commission to monitor progress in 2030 Agenda implementation. 
 
 MDPS also undertook to implement the official statistics transformation project (announced on 30 April 2017) in collaboration with the United Nations Statistics Division and regional and Arab organizations. This agenda contains a roadmap providing the 2030 Agenda indicators to be used to monitor implementation and develop national and implementation reports. It is based on: 
\0xEF Coordination and partnership among different components of the national statistical system  
\0xEF Communication and advocacy  
\0xEF Building an integrated data collection, processing and publication system  
\0xEF Innovation in using technology and new data sources  
\0xEF Capacity building and resource mobilization  
 
Figure 2: Drivers of Qataris statistical system transformation 
 
Emerging requirements 
 
Costs of statistics production 
 
 
New matrices 
 
Data revolution 
Employees recognition 
 
Quality vs. resources 

Globalization  
 
Digitization 
Monitoring 	the 
SDGs 
implementation 
 
Reducing budgets 
 
Sustainable development 
 
New data sources 
Timeliness 
 
Reduce 	response burdens 
 
Geographic spatial interrelations 
 
Competition among data providers 

Qatar efforts to achieve the SDGs 
 
SDG1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere  
Qatar adopted sustainable development in its QNV 2030 which was ratified in 2008 as a roadmap for the medium-term national development strategies based on social, human, economic and environmental development. QNV 2030 aimed at developing a development framework as coherent as possible with the MDGs. Qatar will continue to harmonize the NDS-2 priorities with the 2030 Agenda. QNV 2030 aspires to transform Qatar by 2030 into an advanced country capable of achieving sustainable development and ensuring decent living for its generations. At the end of 2016, Qatar completed the implementation of NDS-1 2011-2016 and finalized the NDS-2 2017-2022. 
MDPS conducted a comprehensive mid-term review of all NDS-1 sector strategies in 2013-2014, in cooperation with the World Bank and with extensive participation by experts from the implementing agencies and stakeholders to evaluate the progress, identify the implementation barriers and challenges and recommend actions to address them. Below are the most important aspects of the social development strategies, which incorporate SDG1. 
The World Bank and United Nations define the extreme poverty line as the equivalent to spending one dollar a day and two dollars a day, respectively. This does not actually apply to Qatar. This does not actually apply to Qatar. 
With regard to the relative poverty line, the study "Measuring the Standard of Living in Qatar" was prepared based on the results of the Household Expenditure and Income Survey 2012/2013. The relative poverty line for Qataris is estimated at QAR 3,514 per month. Thus, a member of a Qatari family with equivalent consumption below QAR 3,514 per month would have a low standard of living. The limit for the limited income using equivalent income is QAR 5,375. 
There is no Qatari citizen with an income below $ 1.25 per day (equivalent to purchasing power parity), and no Qatari consumes less than $ 2 per day (see page 31)1 
The NDS-1 aimed at addressing the poverty issues using a proactive and protective perspective within a comprehensive development framework that links protection and prevention of poverty, creates an enabling environment to integrate vulnerable groups and expand community participation in the implementation of sustainable development initiatives and programs. The NDS-1 undertook to build a social protection system that ensures decent life for the citizens and appreciates their community contributions through this system, which aimed at realizing three cross-sector outcomes: 
1. Establish an integrated social protection system. 
2. Establish an enabling ecosystem to integrate the vulnerable groups into the society and labour force. 
3. Expand participation by building smart partnerships.  
Achievements 
The NDS-1 mid-term review report and the updated data show the following achievements with regard to the first sector outcome:  
1. Real household income more than doubled, and the number of Qataris participating in the Productive Families Program increased from 220 households in 2008 to 587 in 2012.  
2. Gaps in the Qatari householdsi income have narrowed over time. The Gini coefficient was 0.273 in 2012-2013 down from 0.293 in 2006-2007. Relative income poverty remained largely unchanged over time. The updated data show that public spending on social benefits as a percentage of GDP rose from 0.05% in 2008 to 0.14% in 2015. 
3. Data from the Ministry of Administrative Development, Labor and Social Affairs indicate that social security benefits increased by 200% in 2014 compared to 2013 and the number of beneficiaries doubled between 2007 and 2015. 
 
With regard to the second sector outcome, the MTR report shows that Qatar has made significant strides promoting the rights of vulnerable groups and integrating them into the society and in the labor force, especially in employment and education areas2. Key achievements include:  
1. The number of households in the Productive Families Program outpaced the NDS target by 50% (from 200 households in 2008 to 587 in 2012) at a record of about 200%4.  
2. Progress was made in supporting disabled persons with the means that enable them to exercise their rights, particularly in the education and employment areas. However, the levels of education and employment of these persons remain below the public. Better results might be achieved if the current law entitling these persons to at least 2% of the total jobs was enforced.3  
As for the third sectoral outcome (expanding participation through smart partnerships), key steps have been covered towards developing a partnership framework including a CSR survey and a number of conferences on social protection and the identification of the CSR indicators. The NDS-1 period (2011-2016) witnessed increased CSOs roles in various social work areas, thanks to the outstanding efforts of such CSOs like QF, the Qatar Foundation for Social Work and many charities, which support social protection in Qatar. Given the increasing challenges facing traditional values on family cohesion as a result of the rapid economic and social changes in Qatar and the weakening of the symbiotic role of the Qatari family, it is necessary to continue the policy of expanding participation among government, CSOs and the private sector to foster social protection.  
Challenges 
Key challenges identified in this sector, and which were addressed by the social protection strategy, include: 
- Poor organization and synergy in implementing the social protection strategy and the lack of regular review of social protection legislation. 
- Low number of training and qualification centers for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 
- Lack of a systemic database using social protection indicators.  
- Lack of a job supply/demand matching mechanism for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 
 	 



SDG2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and 
promote sustainable agriculture 
Qatar does not have any reason to suffer from hunger. However, the second part of SDG2 on food security issues is of great interest to the State because it has an open economy and a desert nature with low agricultural production and is already feeding so many expatriate workers. Qatar imports about 90% of its food needs, which means that food security is of paramount importance. Qatar may face very complex challenges in ensuring access to foreign imports due to the geopolitical conflicts in food production areas. 
Qatar has always recognized the importance of food security and that is why Qatar National Food Security Program was established in 2011. The strategy focuses on achieving food security through local production, national production of food outside the country, imports and storage within the country. Each of these sources raises a number of risks that must be addressed to achieve the program objectives. Qatar enhanced the local agricultural and livestock production system through Qatari investments in some countries. About 12.7% of the countryis food security needs were met in 2014. The NDS-2 called for promoting food self-sufficiency with varying levels of animal and fish production. 
Achievements  
1. Prime Minister's Decision No. 13 of 2013 on the creation and formation of a technical committee promoting private sector participation in food security projects. The committee develops mechanisms to encourage the private sector to participate in development, especially in food security projects, and identifies areas of government support fostering the private sector developmental role.  
2. Qatar National Food Security Plan was established in 2013 to develop a long-term strategy that would enable the State of Qatar to considerably increase its local food production in the coming decades and enhance the security of its imports of other food items. Meanwhile, Qatar National Food Security Program promotes agriculture through technology, water resources, private sector involvement and capacity building.  
3. The establishment of the QAR 3-billion Hassad Company in 2008. Hassad invests about QAR 500 million in livestock and cereals (wheat and barley) in Australia. The company also has plans to invest in Canada, Turkey and Sudan. It has projects in Pakistan (rice), India and Oman with a view to satisfy Qataris need for certain food imports. Hassad focuses on five products that meet local market demand: cereals, sugar, rice, meat and chicken and fodder.  
4. The farms of Global Project Development Company have worked through AGRICCO Program to replace traditional crops with modern hydroponics, which use limited areas of land and save 80% of water consumption. 
5. The State of Qatar ranked first among the GCC countries and 20th among 113 nations worldwide on the Food Security Index issued by the Alpen Capital annual report on food industry in GCC countries. The report shows that Qatar is still determined to achieve self-sufficiency at 40% by 2030 as stipulated in Qatar National Food Security Programme launched in 2008. Challenges: 
Qatar agricultural, livestock and fisheries production system is facing a number of challenges, including:  
1. High population growth. Qatar population doubled in eight years (from about 1.4 million in 2008 to about 2.6 million in 2016), at an average annual growth rate of 7.7%. This was coupled with rising disposable income, increased number of tourists, expanding urbanization and higher consumer preferences. 
2. Dry and hot climate with high temperature, increasing salinity and scarcity of groundwater, arid lands and lack of fresh water. 
3. Limited areas of arable land (only 650 square kilometers or 65,000 hectares equaling 6% of the total Qatar territory). This is combined with low agricultural production and the lack of weather-friendly crops, which reduces contribution to food security. In addition, the marketing structure does not satisfy the expansion of local agricultural production. Scarcity of feed components in the country. 
4. Limited self-sufficiency in animal production (12%) and fisheries (45%) in 2016, due to the low contribution of local cattle in food security and scarcity of fishing areas and hyper exploitation of fisheries, as well as the scarcity of commercial fish farms that would increase local production. Limited availability of some necessary equipment and services for fishing vessels in some fishing ports. Lack of fish processing activities that might contribute to the diversification and expansion of fish products. 
 	 



SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages  
To achieve the health goals set out in Qatar's Permanent Constitution and National 
Vision, Qatar has designed two strategies to develop the health sector within the 1st National Development Strategy 2011-2016 and the 2nd NDS 2017-2022 that go in line with the said goals. The goals include building an integrated healthcare system that delivers highest-standard services through public and private healthcare institutions guided by a national health policy. This system will cover all preventive and therapeutic healthcare aspects, take care of both physical and psychological health while taking into consideration the different needs of men, women and children, and build national staff that are able to provide the best health services. Qatar's commitment to providing the funding necessary for maintaining citizens' health does not contradict establishing partnerships to undertake healthcare costs.  
Qatar generously spends on the healthcare of all its residents and provides three-level healthcare for all at low costs compared to any other healthcare system as well as medications at about 10-20% of their costs. As predicted, with the huge increase of Qatar's population over five years by over 1.7 million people, the government spending on health continued to rise totally and individually. The spending on healthcare in 2016 was about QAR 22.7 billion, which represents 10.8% of total government spending in that year and 41.3% higher than in 2012/2013. The government annual per capita spending on healthcare, measured by the PPP against the USD, rose by 89% from US$ 2719 in 2010 to US$ 5138 in 20164. 
Achievements of National Health Strategy 2011-2016 
The National Health Strategy (NHS) has made major achievements developing Qatar's health sector, especially in establishing an integrated healthcare system and developing preventive and therapeutic care, as follows: 
1. Promoting the healthcare system governance and building a more balanced system through increasing the opportunities of access to primary healthcare and to community centers. Moreover, all private-sector healthcare workers were certified by the Qatar Council for Healthcare Practitioners (QCHP), the integration between public and private health institutions was promoted and progress was made in building an active workforce and further training health workers; 
2. Regarding preventive healthcare, means of early detection of diseases developed, death rates in people over 60 years old due to diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and trauma declined, healthy practices were encouraged and transparency in patients' rights and responsibilities improved; 
3. As for therapeutic healthcare, emergency and urgent care services were developed, and six new primary healthcare centers were opened as well as the first socio-psychological healthcare service center in November 2014; and 
4. Popularizing "We are Healthy Kids "and "Health at Workplace "programmes, opening five smoking-cessation clinics early in 2015, raising awareness of the risks of cousin marriages and establishing more specialized hospitals, the last of which was the Communicable Disease Center. By the end of 2016, 80% of the strategic projects and their outputs was achieved. 
Challenges facing the health sector between 2011-2016 
The 1st NHS faced several challenges that can be summarize as follows: 
1. Transition from focusing on recovery to focusing on the primary and community healthcare model which provides a connected and integrated series of health services; 
2. The spread of non-communicable diseases, including chronic diseases, and those related to unhealthy lifestyle and behavior; 
3. The need for the healthcare system to keep up with the quickly increasing population, which raises the demand for health services beyond the capacity of the system; 
4. The lack of high-quality healthcare workforce; and  
5. The lack of IT abilities and the gap in health statistics and data. 
National Health Strategy 2017-2022 
The 2nd NHS 2017-2022 identified a key result related to sustainability and improvement of healthcare, which is "to improve the health of Qataris population and meet the needs of the existing and future generations through an integrated healthcare system that aims at better health, better care, and better value for all. The 2nd NHS was based on the achievements of the 1st NHS and on the lessons learned from it. It set new priorities based on three key pillars: better health, better care and better value. The "better health" pillar aims to improve population's health through cooperating with local communities and individuals to determine their needs and implement programmes necessary for promoting a healthy lifestyle. "Better care" aims to provide integrated and coordinated healthcare services to citizens at the right time and place. "Better value" considers spending on health a profitable investment through improving health services and providing patients with a better value. 
The 1st NHS 2011-2016 continuously faced health challenges, like failure to adopt a healthy lifestyle by citizens and residents, leading to negative consequences (overweight and huge increase of diabetes rates), the challenge of building national healthcare capacities as well as building and maintaining a highly-skilled workforce, the increasing rates of traffic and workplace injuries and the occurrence of new communicable diseases transmitted by expatriate workers that pose a threat to Qatar's health situation. Therefore, the 2nd NHS 2017-2022 maintained the seven goals of the 1st NHS while prioritizing seven population groups in the health sector: healthy kids and teenagers, women's health for healthy pregnancy, workers' health and safety, psychological and mental health, improving the health of patients with chronic diseases, improving the health and well-being of people with special needs and disease-free aging. The 2nd NHS defined quantitative indicators to measure the improvement of each group as a result of health programmes, projects and interventions during the strategy implementation period. It is worth mentioning that 2030 Agenda goals adopted the same approach of focusing on improving the public health of certain population groups. 
 
 	 



SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 
Qatar cares for providing learning opportunities to all children in the country, which has been embodied in a set of procedures and measures. Articles 25 and 49 of Qatar's Constitution states that "education is one of the basic pillars of social progress. The State shall ensure, foster, and endeavor to spread it" and "All citizens have the right to education; and the State shall endeavor to make general education compulsory and free of charge in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the State."  
Furthermore, Qatar approved compulsory education through Law No. 25 of 2001 and Decree-Law No. 37 of 2002 on the Establishment of the Supreme Council of Education, which provides for achieving quality in education to meet Qatar's needs through the provision of a variety of alternative educational systems that promote innovation and scientific excellence. In 2005, Qatar ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, whose Articles 28, 29 and 30 provide for education, leisure and cultural activities. Moreover, the National Plan for Education for All 2003 was developed according to the six Education-for-All goals that were adopted in the World Education Forum in Dakar in April 2000. The plan goals and the Millennium Development Goals on education as well as Sustainable Development Goals are closely connected. 
Achievements 
Qatar National Vision (QNV) 2030 emphasized the transition to a diverse and competitive knowledge-based economy as an empowerment element for social progress and a driver of individual and economic transformation. The Education and Training Sector Strategy (2011-2016) and (2017-2022), inspired from QNV 2030, aspires at establishing a high-quality education system that combines quality, accessibility, competence, efficiency, diversity and multiple options. Major achievements of the Education and Training Sector Strategy 2011-2016 include:  
1. Setting a national qualification framework; 
2. Developing systems to ensure quality higher education, including the approval of establishing the Qualification and Accreditation Office; 
3. Developing a comprehensive national framework for public school curricula. This framework allows developing more harmonized school curricula and further observes individual differences in learning processes. It also incorporates skills of the 21st century into all school curricula; 
4. Opening more branches of global universities in Qatar through Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development and establishing the Community College to diversify higher education; 
5. Establishing the Training and Educational Development Center to extend and improve the quality of professional development opportunities available for teachers and school principals; 
6. Opening the first state-funded Early Childhood Center "Bidayaat"; 
7. Establishing the Early Childhood Department and the Department of Special Education and Talent Sponsoring; 
8. Increased numbers of Qataris admitted to higher education institutions (recording figures higher than regional standard levels); and 
9. Providing services to students with disabilities, such as opening Roua Center in April 2015 for student education assessments and opening the first kindergarten for kids in need for additional educational support in September 2015. 
These achievements resulted in a net enrolment ratio of 69.9% (girls) and 70.5% (boys) in the pre-elementary stage in the school year 2014-2015, which demonstrates that there are no huge gender differences at this education level, with boys being slightly superior. 
In elementary to secondary stages, the total net enrolment ratio was 89.4%, with 93.2% for boys and 91.7% for girls, in the same school year. 
Qatari students recorded a total higher education enrolment ratio of 72%, where girls were more than twice as boys (99% to 40%), during the same academic year5. 
The government spending on education in the year 2014-2015 landed at QAR 22.2 billion, which is 10.5% of total government spending in the same year. 
Challenges 
Despite the development results achieved by the National Development Strategy (NDS) 2011-2016 towards building knowledge that is highly important for the objectives of human development, which is a major pillar of QNV 2030, Qatar is still facing challenges, most prominently: 
a. The lack of motivation by students to learn and pursue their studies, ultimately leading to lower productivity in workforce; 
b. The inability of human capital development to keep up with labor market requirements and national development priorities. Options of technical and professional training have failed to attract and maintain Qataris; 
c. The weak preparation and qualification of several higher education graduates to meet the needs of the private sector which should accommodate more Qataris to facilitate the country's transition to a knowledge-based economy; and 
d. The need to raise the ratio of science, mathematics, engineering and technology graduates that was 42% of university graduates in Qatar in the academic year 2014-2015.  
27 
 



SDG 5: Achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls   
To achieve this goal, Qatar NDS 2011-2016 included an integrated approach for advancing and developing the social structure through adopting and implementing sectoral strategies that included integrated social policies and programmes for family cohesion, women's empowerment and social protection. The NDS provided the civil society and the private sector with the opportunity to actively participate with the government in implementing the social development strategy. It also emphasized Qatar's international obligations under international conventions emanating from ratifying the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1995, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2008 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 2009. 
The 1st NDS 2011-2016 addressed gender equality issues through the strategic goal of women's empowerment and worked on two sectoral outcomes: 
1. Improving support for working families, particularly for women; and 
2. Increasing the number of women in leadership and decision-making positions while reducing the stereotyping of women's roles and responsibilities. 
Achievements 
The NDS aimed to increase women's participation quota in the workforce and positions of leadership and decision making in Qatar's society. This goal cannot be realized without supporting working and job-seeking women, so that they can efficiently practice their jobs while guaranteeing the physical and psychological well-being of their children and other family dependents. As for increasing women's participation in workforce, the following has been achieved: 
1. Taking measures to provide a supportive environment in order to strike a balance between women's job and life responsibilities. This project consists of three main activities: establishing workplace nurseries and kindergartens and more highquality public and private nurseries and kindergartens while reviewing relevant laws, adopting family-friendly job procedures like time flexibility, part-time jobs and special leaves (including reviewing privileges of maternity leave) and raising awareness of the responsibility shared among family members and spouses through counseling centers; 
2. The number of registered nurseries rose from only two in 2009 to 146 in 2016;  
3. Issuing Law No. 1 of 2014 on Regulating the Activities of Nursery Schools. This law includes a qualitative feature which is authorizing nurseries to maintain permanent female staff that consist of a general supervisor, an assistant supervisor, a nutrition specialist, an educator/nurse and a visiting physician; 
4. A major procedure that supported women's empowerment on the national level was making essential amendments to the Human Resources Management Law of 2009 to promote the supportive environment in order to strike a work-family 
29 
 
balance for women. A number of institutions support civil society organizations and associations on women's issues, most prominently Qatar Social Work Foundation. 
Regarding the progress made in the second outcome, namely more women in leadership and political decision-making positions and reduction of stereotyping women's roles and responsibilities, the following has been achieved6: 
1. The percentage of women assuming leadership positions in the government sector increased from 17% in 2011 to 21% in 2016;  
2. The percentage of Qatari women in leadership positions at public institutions/SOEs rose from 12% in 2011 to 24.4% in 2016. In the mixed sector, the ratio went up from 7.8% to 17% and in the private sector from 8.2% to 15% during the same period; and 
3. Women account for 30% of manager positions at Qatar's civil society organizations.  
As for making changes to the prevalent stereotypes about women, three key activities were defined: 
1. Reviewing and modernizing existing laws to eliminate obstacles that face women; 
2. Broadcasting awareness-raising and educational media programmes via official channels to promote positive images of women as professional colleagues as well as educational programmes for young girls; and 
3. Encouraging civil society organizations and associations to support women's affairs. Broad legislative reviews were carried out through events and legal committees to remove the obstacles that face women. 
Challenges 
- Despite this increasing trend, women's participation in leadership and decisionmaking is still generally weak since women only account for 6% of Qatar's total workforce in 2016;  
- There are still many challenges that hinder the goal of women's empowerment and gender equality like, most prominently, the difficulty of changing the cultural concepts instilled in Qatar's conservative society;  
- Despite Qatar's commitment to international conventions and standards of the most developed practices towards bridging the gap between both genders, this gap still exists in some fields; and 
- In addition to social challenges, the strategy of sustainable social development faced operational obstacles, such as the difficult coordination among the departments and authorities responsible for implementing the abovementioned projects, the lack of human resources trained in project management and the lack of vital data to evaluate and follow-up project implementation. 
30 
 



SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all  
Regarding the environmental development pillar, QNV 2030 referred to "the need to maintain and protect environment, including air, land, water and biodiversity." 
Achievements            
Qatar has realized several achievements in this field: 
1. Qatar's residents have access to safe drinking water at subsidized prices;  
2. Qatar's residents have access to sanitation and hygiene services; 
3. Qatar NDS 2011-2016 aimed at hugely increasing water use efficiency in all sectors and ensuring sustainable fresh water supplies to address water scarcity in Qatar; 
4. A total of 204 million m3 of sewage water was treated in 2016, about 51% of which was used to irrigate agricultural crops and landscapes; 
5. To promote water consumption efficiency and sustainability, Qatar General Electricity and Water Corporation (Kahramaa) reduced the total and real waste of non-revenue desalinated water (NRW) to 10% in 2016 down from 30% in 2011. Conservation Law No. 26 of 2008 was amended through Conservation Law No. 20 of 2015 to stop water wastage and reduce the groundwater level. Moreover, unconventional water sources are being used in saline agriculture, and treated sewage networks were extended to about 800 km; 
6. Establishing more treatment plants and completing a study for setting up an industrial wastewater treatment plant; and  
7. Reducing the number of tanker consumers to 0.17% and supporting the installation of modern water-conservation technologies for households and other uses. 
Regarding environment and climate issues, Qatar has paid great attention to climate change. Doha hosted the 18th Climate Change Conference, which resulted in several decisions like, most prominently, amending the Kyoto Protocol to determine a second commitment period between 2013-2020 and working on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in developed countries by at least 18%. 
Challenges 
The challenges facing availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation can be summarized as follows: 
- Need to activate integrated water resources management to develop and implement policies, strategies and laws for water sector management; 
- Water security and supplies are endangered on the long term (water desalination) due to natural disasters, pollution, political conflicts and excessive groundwater consumption, which has led to water salinity and declined quality; 
31 
 
- Increased irrational water consumption (in 2015, the per capita rate of drinking water consumption was 550 liter a day) as a result of the increased population and consumption rates; 
- The high costs of water supply installations to meet the needs of the increasing population, tourism and changing lifestyle, which is currently burdening the treasury (the tariff does not reflect the real cost); 
- The harmful environmental impacts of groundwater depletion and desalination that lead to higher CO2 emissions and higher groundwater level in Qatar and threaten the well-being of the coming generations; 
- Continuously growing high water consumption crops (like feed) while there is no active tariff to exploit groundwater, which prevents its sustainability; 
- Inefficient use of renewable energy in water production, which prevents exporting the current energy used in power generation and water production; 
- The increasing environmental impact of using the current water resources: The environmental impacts emanating from desalination wastewater discharge, air pollution as a result of water production, groundwater depletion and deterioration and the environmental impacts resulting from sewage treatment plants; and 
- These is no investment in renewable energy, especially solar energy, due to the high costs of solar energy investment, high temperature and humidity, ultraviolet radiations, atmospheric salinity and dust accumulation, negatively affecting the performance and durability of solar cells. 
32 
 



SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all  
Renewable energy is clean and environment-friendly, does not affect temperature levels, is always available and has multiple uses. Therefore, many countries, including Qatar, started using this energy and developing its necessary technologies through focusing investments and expenditure on its generation and development projects. This will contribute to promoting people's well-being and reducing CO2 emissions. Achievements  
Qatar has realized the following achievements in the energy field: 
1. Promoting the efficiency of the energy sector through taking procedures to reduce production costs and wastage, price energy products and services, like electricity, water and fuel, in line with economic cost standards through verifying the operational efficiency of all independent producers, implementing efficiency-based economic operation by Kahramaa as of January 1, 2016 and standardizing gas tariffs for production plants; 
2. Speeding up the adoption of power-saving technologies through prohibiting importing power-consuming incandescent light bulbs through Tarsheed awareness campaigns, spreading the use of power-saving LED lights instead of other power-consuming types, implementing energy efficiency labels for air conditioners and completing the development of a green-building system (code) in Qatar that is to adopted and implemented in projects of the public and private sectors; 
3. Providing affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all Qatar's residents. Qatar has adopted a principle of optimal economic pricing of energy products, such as water, electricity and fuel, to motivate optimal use and prevent excessive consumption and wastage, which ultimately ensures energy sustainability and availability; 
4. Renewable natural resources are a major source for providing the needs of local economies for alternative and environmentally clean energy sources with fewer costs and more return, which reduces the depletion of exhausted natural resources and ensures their sustainability. Qatar has adopted several renewableenergy initiatives, such as Qatar Foundation's adoption of green buildings that use solar energy. The foundation has also inaugurated a project to generate electricity from solar energy at the Education City with a capacity of 1.68 megawatts. It also established the Energy Monitoring Center; 
5. Qatar Solar Technologies (QSTec) generates solar energy through annually producing 8 thousand tons of high-quality polysilicon to meet the increasing global demand for solar energy sources; and 
6. Qatar Electricity and Water Company (Kahramaa) has signed an agreement with the Emirati Masdar Company and the Qatari Nebras Powers for establishing a joint business relation in the field of developing sustainable and renewable energy projects. The Ministry of Energy and Industry is developing and 
34 
 
implementing a renewable-energy strategy including its policy and legal framework. The ministry has also formed a special committee on renewable energy to coordinate all renewable energy initiatives.  
Challenges 
In the transition to renewable energy beside non-renewable energy, Qatar faces several challenges, most prominently the need to: 
- Provide the financial allocations necessary for solar energy projects to meet the increasing demand for energy in Qatar; 
- Master the technologies necessary for renewable energy generation and provide suitable solutions; 
- Promote the cooperation and lesson sharing between developed countries, companies, Mediterranean countries on the one side and Qatar on the other regarding ways of meeting their needs for renewable energy;    
- Draft appropriate laws and regulations to motivate investors and solar-energydependent sectors in Qatar, such as providing grants or financial or governmental support, to encourage investment in clean energy technology; and - Promote synergy between relevant public entities and the private sector. 
 	 



SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
1. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth 
QNV 2030 points to the challenges of how to balance five options, including managed growth and uncontrolled expansion. It also notes the three pillars of economic development; namely, sound economic management, responsible exploitation of oil and gas, and appropriate economic diversification.  
Achievements 
The decline in oil prices over the past two years have affected growth rates in constant prices, with the rate of economic growth in constant prices of 2013 reaching nearly 3.6% in 2015 but then falling to 2.2% in 2016. Nevertheless, Qatar has made the following achievements: 
1. Qatar ranked eighth out of 63 states in the Economic Performance Index in 2017 in the International Institute for Management Development World Competitiveness Yearbook on competitiveness. It also got 73.1 in the Heritage Foundation Economic Freedom Index in 2017.  
2. The official launch of the activities of Enterprise Qatar which was subsequently merged with Qatar Development Bank (QDB), where the State increased the QDBis capital to QAR 10 billion in order to provide more services and products to the private sector 
3. The new Government Procurement Act was enacted in 2015 and it took effect in June 2016. 
4. The establishment of an incubator for knowledge-based projects in Qatar Science and Technology Park (QSTP) 
5. The adoption of the strategy of the Supreme Council of Information and Communication Technology and the implementation of a number of strategies and of their detailed sub-plans with a view to increasing the readiness of the information and communication technology (ICT) sector  
6. The implementation of the Qatar Financial Center Authorityis (QFCA) strategy and the expansion of the activities of the Qatar Financial Business Academy. The QFCA successfully attracted a large number of companies operating in financing (307 registered and licensed companies as of June 2016). 
7. The Economic Zones Company (EZC) n affiliated with the Ministry of Economy and Commerce (MEC) n has been established to oversee economic zones in Qatar. In 2015, the first economic zone, with an area of four square kilometers, was launched in Abu Fintas, and then a second one with an area of 34 square kilometers in Umm al-Houl. The third one is planned to be launched in Kariaana in 2018. 
Private sector and economic diversification 
Economic diversification is important because it helps expand the choices of the national economy, strengthen its productive base, diversify its sources of income (diversification of the investment portfolio in state-owned foreign assets and derived revenues), enable the private sector to participate effectively in economic activity (and promote domestic and foreign investment), sustain and preserve available economic resources, and create an enabling environment that supports various facets of economic activity in all its institutional, legislative, legal, and regulatory dimensions. The Economic Diversification and Private Sector Development Strategy has two pillars: (1) productivity and competitiveness; and (2) private sector-based growth. 
The expansion of the non-oil and gas economy has focused on the enabling sectors as well as the service and non-traded goods sectors where their real output grew at an average annual rate of 10% and 10.3% respectively over 2011-2016 as shown in Figure 
3:  
Figure 3: Components of the real GDP of the non-oil and gas sector 

Source: MDPS. 
Note: The enabling sectors include utilities, transport and warehousing, ICT and finance. Traded goods and services (excluding mining) include   agriculture and fishing, manufacturing, professional services and wholesale and retail trade. Non-traded goods and services include construction, housing services, catering, and administrative and other services. 
 
Challenges facing economic diversification and private sector development in Qatar 
- There are a range of policy shortcomings that limit the ability of the private sector to have access to the local market and to compete and grow efficiently and effectively therein (e.g. a group of companies monopolize the import and distribution of certain categories of brands, which restricts local competition conditions, in addition to the cumbersome regulatory procedures, slow and ineffective litigation system, and private sector orientation towards less productive but more profitable areas).  
- Market failures prevent the development of the private sector and the enhancement of its role in the Qatari economy (a failure to coordinate among and harmonize companies that complement each otheris production. Deficiencies in domestic market harmonization between the activities of government-owned enterprises and those led by the government) 
- Delay or even absence of enabling sector activities to meet all the needs of Qataris economic sectors (despite significant public spending on the ICT and utilities sector, for example, accessing their products is still limited and very costly, constraining the growth of other sectors of the local economy)9  
- Insufficient information and data on investment opportunities in the country that enable investors to prepare a precise roadmap for their projects and investment 
- Non-completion of the amendment to the Foreign Direct Investment Promotion Law, which impedes businessmenis engagement in investment and establishment of joint ventures 
- The private sector mainly relies on the Stateis public expenditure and projects to drive its activities and projects.  
- The difficulty of recruiting the appropriate staff for the private sectoris activities and projects, whether in terms of specializations or qualification, due to inappropriate education and vocational training outputs  
- Some consumers are attached to foreign brands and it is difficult to convince them of the quality of national products.  
2. Full and productive employment and decent work for all 
Achievements 
1. Qatar has achieved good male and female labour market participation rates (69% and 37% respectively for Qataris in 2016). Although the male participation rate is less than that in the Middle East and North Africa (75%),  the female participation rate is much higher than that in the region (22%).70  
2. Most Qataris work in the public sector (both government departments and government companies). Also, the proportion of Qataris in the private sector has increased from 7% to 12%8 of the total workforce in the country. 
3. The first National Development Strategy (NDS-1) sought to increase the benefit package for Qataris in the private sector to make it more attractive, such as expanding the pension coverage to include some private sector enterprises. Emphasis has also been placed on the expansion of high-quality training programmes for Qataris.  
Challenges 
Despite the achievements made under the NDS-1 (2011-2016), the Labour Market Strategy 2017-2022 identifies some challenges facing the sector and seeks to overcome them through necessary policies and initiatives. The demographic rebalancing of Qataris and non-Qataris remains a challenge that can only be addressed through concerted efforts to ensure the highest quality and productivity of the workers needed to implement the 2022 FIFA World Cup projects. In 2015, 19.6% of foreign workers were engaged in unskilled jobs, 51.4% in semi-skilled jobs, and about 29% in jobs requiring high or very high skills. The influx of foreign workers is expected to continue until the completion of the infrastructure projects of the 2022 FIFA World Cup.  
The challenges of providing full employment are: (1) rebalancing the labour market structure; (2) increasing work efficiency in different sectors and developing the capacities of Qataris, especially the Qatari women with high levels of education; (3) attracting and maintaining skilled and highly qualified labour and developing labour legislation; and (4) improving the labour market information system.  

SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation  
1. Infrastructure 
At first, it should be noted that economic infrastructure refers to transport sectors (roads, ports, airports and railways), energy and treated wastewater, ICT, construction materials and logistics, and construction sector (civil engineering). This sector contributed around 2.6% to the GDP in 2015, which is a modest contribution. The sector employed nearly 17% of the countryis total labour market, which is a high rate (the total value added was approximately QAR 50 billion, with a total number of approximately 325,000 workers in 2015). 
Achievements 
Qatar has made the following achievements in these economic sectors:  
1. Development and adoption of five draft spatial development plans for the five municipalities, and plans for urban centers (17 plans under implementation) for the studied municipalities, and some progress has been made in the preparation of the comprehensive transport plan. Comprehensive plans have been developed for infrastructure sub-sectors and they are in the pipeline, although they need to be further coordinated. In addition, Phase I of the establishment of Hamad Port was completed in 2016 and it is now operational. Also, the first stage of the Ruwais Port was completed in January 2015, as well as the completion of some road projects. 
2. Drawing up a study on Qataris water policy in 2016 as part of the preparation of Qatar Water Strategy. A project to link GCC states through railways is also being studied. 
3. Completion of the first phase of the Doha Subway in 2016, and work is underway to complete all lines in preparation for the 2022 FIFA World Cup 
4. Qatar ranked 18th out of 138 states in the Infrastructure Index in 2016-2017 in accordance with the World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report of 2016. Moreover, Qataris ranking in the WB Logistics Performance Index improved from 55th in 2010 to 30th out of 160 countries in 2016. 
5. The number of Internet users per 100 people increased from 44.3 in 2008 to 92.9 in 2015 (WB indicators) due to improved level of education, developed Internet services and the use of broadband Internet. Also, the personal computer penetration rate per 100 people increased from 32.2 in 2008 to 77.8 in 2013 in view of the high standard of living; higher penetration of Internet service in public services, education, trade and businesses; and moving towards a knowledge economy. 
Challenges 
? The transport sector needs to prioritize projects, accurately identify the volume of needed investment and expectations of demand thereon, and effectively implement relevant projects to ensure sustainable transport, coupled with the promulgation of appropriate legislation, the provision of relevant data and information and the building of technical capacities of human resources. 
? The ICT sector faces security issues, such as security breaches of websites, social media platforms and cyber security in the financial sector; and the slow pace of keeping up with new services and rapid global development, such as voice communication via Internet protocols, electronic clouds and others. 
? Poor coordination among government entities involved in the energy and water sector  
? A scarcity of natural raw materials produced by Qatar and usable for general constructions such as roads, bridges, airports, and installations related to mines, ports, docks, shipyards and all other constructions other than buildings. Therefore, the NDS 2017-2022 encourages recycling to provide other sources of structural materials while preserving the environment, accompanied by the development of relevant legislation. 
2. Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization 
Achievements 
1. Qatar pursues an open economic environment. 
2. Qatar, in cooperation with the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, has worked to provide investment opportunities in the fields of pharmaceuticals, food industry, green building materials, recycling, petrochemicals, aluminum, and refrigeration sector. 
3. Qatar focuses on the development of small and medium-sized industries, provides them with incentives and financing, and provides infrastructure through the EZC and QDB. 
4. The MEC has adopted the one-stop shop system to facilitate Qatari, GCC and foreign investment procedures in the country. 
5. The MEC reviews the Foreign Direct Investment Law and works on a new law. 
6. Qatar provides more manufacturing incentives and comparative advantages, such as raw materials, export opportunities and plans to invest sophisticated industrial zones. 
7. The three main industrial zones (the Small and Medium-Sized Industrial Zone, Mesaieed Industrial Area and RAS Laffan Industrial City) provide all facilities, services, soft loans and exemptions for industrial and service projects at incentive prices. 
Foster innovation to serve sustainable development  
Qatar has been among the first nations to recognize the importance of research and development (R&D) and innovation in development, allocating 2.8% of its government spending for R&D. Qatar National Research Strategy (QNRS) n developed in April 2012 n provides a framework for the objectives of national R&D, and helps drive the performance plans and measures by directing investment decisions in the R&D programmes that address national priorities and progress towards QNV 2030 so that Qatar will become a leading center, as follows:9 
QNRS Vision  
Qatar will be a leading center for research and development excellence and innovation. 
The national research program will be based on inclusiveness and intellectual merit to:  
\0xEF Develop the capabilities of Qataris people and institutions; 
\0xEF Build and maintain a competitive and diversified economy; 
\0xEF Improve the health and social well-being of Qataris population; ? Support Qataris distinctive culture and the security of its people; and ? Preserve and improve the natural and built environment. 
The QNRS has five major pillars:  
\0xEF R&D; 
\0xEF Energy and environment; 
\0xEF IT and computing; 
\0xEF Health; and 
\0xEF Social science, arts and humanities. 
Thus, the results and impact of achieving the goals will depend on the transfer of research and innovation from basic education to applied research, then to development and commercialization, and finally to assimilation and application.  
QNRS forums  
The QNRS provides a framework for research objectives to be achieved by the QF R&D Sector. It also helps guide performance plans and measures through guiding the investment decisions in the R&D programmes that address critical national priorities, and making progress towards QNV 2030 so that Qatar will become a leading center for research and development excellence and innovation. In this context, the QF R&D Sector organizes annual forums that bring together stakeholders to discuss and move the QNRS forward. After the launch of the QNRS in 2012, a process of consultation with stakeholders was launched through the said forums to transform the QNRS into a more specific set of opportunities and priorities. For example: the 2014 Research Strategy Forum. 
Qatar Science and Technology Park 
The QSTP is part of the QF R&D Sector and is the basic incubator for technology development projects, where it seeks to create a favorable environment to develop commercially viable technologies and to support research, innovation and entrepreneurship. The QSTP focuses on four main pillars in accordance with the QNRS: energy, environment, health science and ICT.  
Qatar National Research Fund 
The QF established Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) in 2006 as part of its ongoing commitment to establishing a knowledge-based economy in Qatar. The QF attaches paramount importance to research given its vital role in achieving growth both within Qatar and regionally, and because it is a means to diversify the countryis economy, promote educational opportunities and develop the spheres that influence society like health and environment. The QNRF aims to promote selected innovative research on a competitive basis in the fields of engineering and technology, physical and life science, medicine, humanities, social science and arts. In addition to funding, the QNRF seeks to build bridges of dialogue and partnerships.  

SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development  
Qataris International Cooperation and Partnership Program (ICPP) aims at strengthening the regional and global role economically, politically and culturally under the United Nations and regional and international organizations; promoting cultural exchanges with Arab countries and peoples in particular, and with other states in general; supporting inter-civilizational dialogue; promoting coexistence of different religions and cultures; and helping make international peace and security through political initiatives and development and humanitarian aid. In this regard, the QNV 2030 development assistance objectives are in line with Articles VI and VII of Qataris Permanent Constitution that stipulates that \0xECthe State shall respect international instruments and covenants and work to implement all international conventions, charters and covenants it is a part to10 and \0xECthe foreign policy of the State shall be based on the principle of the consolidation of international peace and security through encouraging the amicable resolution of international disputes, supporting the right of peoples to self-determination and non-interference in the internal affairs of states, and cooperating with peace-loving nations.11 QNV 2030 also emphasizes the need to strengthen the economic, political and cultural role of Qatar.  
Qatar considers assisting the least developing countries (LDCs) to achieve the SDGs a major objective of several initiatives. Reducing poverty, creating job opportunities in infrastructure projects, and providing education and health are of the main areas of focus of the ICPP. Accordingly, the QF has launched the Silatech initiative to support the aspirations of Arab and global youth of having access to decent work, in addition to the Education above All Foundation that provides educational opportunities, especially for children living in low-income families or facing humanitarian crises. The said initiative includes a wide range of national, regional and international partners in promoting and guaranteeing the right of all children to education. Qatar has also established the Qatar Foundation for Social Action (QFSA) that brings together seven Qatari agencies specializing in the promotion of social development.  
In this context, the Doha Institute of Graduate Studies has developed the Economic Development College and Programme to graduate people capable of leading and strengthening international development institutions and programmes in Qatar. Qatar is one of the high-income developing countries of the South and is not a developed industrial country that has to provide official development assistance (ODA) of 0.7% of the gross national income (GNI). Qatar however is actively and voluntarily involved in achieving SDG 17 through providing ODA to developing countries, especially the LDCs, to help them achieve the above-mentioned Goal and previously the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The developed countries of the North have to fully fulfill their ODA commitments, including the 0.7% ODA/GNI target for developed countries and the 0.15-0.20% ODA/GNI target for the LDCs. ODA providers are encouraged to consider the possibility of a 0.20% ODA/GNI target for the LDCs. The total voluntary ODA provided by Qatar increased from nearly QAR 1.6 billion in 2008 to about QAR 7.7 billion (76% by the government and 24% by non-governmental organizations and institutions) in 2014, i.e. an increase of 381% (Figure 4).  
Figure 4: Total assistance provided by Qatar (QAR million) 2008-2014  
Millions 
		 
 
Data indicate that most of Qataris government assistance in 2014 (54%) was given to African countries then to Asian countries (44%) and international organizations (1.2%). The share offered to European and American states was 0.7% (Figure 5). ODA provided by Qatar in 2015 amounted to 0.78% of its GDP, an increase of 87% compared to 2008. This increase exceeds that of Qataris counterparts in the DAC countries of 0.3% of their GDP.12 
Figure 5: Relative distribution of government assistance by continent in 2014 


Partnership in development and civic society role  
The Arab region is undergoing great challenges, and some of its countries are often exposed to serious crises such as insecurity, armed conflict, terrorism and migration. The Arab situation today, as noted above, makes partnership among all social components of governments, civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector, universities and research centers a key implementation factor of the SDGs with a view to maintaining the development process at the national and local levels and effecting a real change in living conditions. The civil society is empowered to play this role given its proximity and interaction with societal challenges. 
The QFSA has therefore taken an active role in forging a supportive and effective framework to achieve the SDGs in partnership with a number of international and regional bodies. It helped organize and host the \0xECArab Conference on the Role of the Civil Society in the 2030 Agenda during April 20-21, 2016. The Conference brought together participants from all Arab states, selected networks of CSOs operating at the national level, government entities concerned with civil society in the Arab region, experts and specialists from the Arab region and the world, and GCC CSOs. Representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, the United Nations Population Fund, the League of Arab States, the GCC, the WB, and the Islamic Development Bank participated in the Conference. Moreover, a number of experts, specialized scholars and representatives of Arab governmental institutions contributed to the Conference. 
The objective of the Conference was to prepare a roadmap at the national level to achieve the SDGs, in which the civil society would play an effective role as an active partner in development, contributing to planning, implementation, monitoring and followup. At the end of the Conference, the participants adopted the Doha Declaration on the Arab Conference on the Role of the Civil Society in the 2030 Agenda. 
Conclusion and Way Forward 
This report explains how the State of Qatar has adopted sustainable development as a strategic choice, embodied in Qatar National Vision 2030 and has committed to achieving the 2030 Agenda goals. The majority of the 17 SDGs and 169 targets were incorporated into the NDS-2 (2017-2022). The NDS-1 (2011-2016) addressed many of these 17 SDGs and made further progress in the social protection system that provided adequate income for citizens, advanced health and education services for all residents, systems for pensions, women empowerment and elderly care and other types of social assistance. It also provided economic infrastructure (advanced transport and communications network, advanced e-government, water supply and sanitation networks and energy). The report also shows that Qatar has an advanced infrastructure for research, development and innovation. 
In terms of human development, Qatar continued to invest in healthcare and education in order to enable citizens to participate in economic, social and political life and to contribute to environment preservation. On the economic front, Qatar undertook to optimize the use of hydrocarbon resources. 
The report also outlines Qatar's development priorities as specified in the NDS-2, which is a continuation of the NDS-1. The report highlights the successes and challenges faced by some NDS-1 sectors. 
The State of Qatar aspires to provide an advanced economic, social and environmental ecosystem to fulfill its commitment to implementing the 2030, which was incorporated into the NDS-2 and produce the statistical indicators adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission, always using a M&E system that helps the timely achievement of SDGs. As noted in Goal 17, the government of Qatar will continue to build partnerships between the public and private sectors, CSOs, research centers, universities and others in order to meet the national and international priorities. The Government will also continue to provide development and relief assistance to vulnerable countries, communities and refugees who are partners of our international community. 
