
Executive Summary
This review has been prepared to shed light on the efforts being made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia towards the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It will be presented at the 2018 United Nations High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable Development. The review represents the Kingdomis first attempt to conduct a systematic and comprehensive review of the status of the SDGs and actions taken by relevant stakeholders to fulfill the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
The review was developed to accomplish the following objectives:
 Provide a broad assessment of the current status of the SDGs, existing institutional arrangements for their operationalization and the enabling policy environment
 Establish a baseline for tracking progress on the goals implementation
 Identify priorities for further action in the implementation process
 Identify opportunities, challenges and lessons learned
 Outline the next steps in the process
 	The emphasis of the review is on the goals that have been selected for a more in-depth discussion in the 2018 HLPF:
 Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
 Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
 Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
 Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
 Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
 Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development
The preparation of this review was done following a participatory approach, engaging multiple stakeholders from public institutions, the private sector and charitable societies and associations. The data collection and analysis was carried out by a technical working group under the leadership of the Ministry of Economy and Planning. Overall, the review reaffirms Saudi Arabiais commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the achievement of The SDGs, both at the national and international levels. This commitment is not only a reflection of the Kingdomis remarkable successes in its development path, which have led in the span of only a few decades to significant improvements in key aspects of human development such as life expectancy, infant mortality, literacy, infrastructure, per capita income, etc., but also a corollary of its determination to further accelerate the pace of social and economic transformation by building pragmatically on existing achievements, policies and institutions. Saudi Arabia has recently embarked on an ambitious transformational journey outlined in an overarching strategic plan called \0xECVision 2030. Unveiled by HRH Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman in April 2016, the plan was conceived to tackle the major challenges the country faces today, such as the need to diversify the economy and meet the aspirations of a young and growing population.
Vision 2030 charts out the path Saudi Arabia will take to build a prosperous future in all development areas. The Vision rests on three thematic pillars\0xF3a vibrant society, a thriving economy and an ambitious nation\0xF3and outlines a set of goals and targets for the Kingdom to achieve in the areas of economic development, social cohesion and environmental protection. To ensure the realization of the Vision, a set of executive programs have been developed and are being launched in due course. Each program includes detailed objectives and action plans, as well as specific targets and indicators to track progress over a pre-identified timeframe.
The Vision is also supported by an integrated governance system, which consists of a number of institutional structures that bring together a range of actors from the public, private sectors and charitable societies and associations. The Vision will serve as the point of reference for all major decisions taken in the Kingdom. 
Vision 2030 framework and other state programs and policies provide solid foundations for the implementation of the sustainable development agenda. An assessment of linkages between the Vision 2030 goals and the 17 The SDGs conducted as part of the analytical work for this review found that a significant degree of alignment exists between the two frameworks. Their timelines also match, running up to year 2030. Adapting the SDGs to the realities of Saudi Arabia is work in progress and further alignment and integration is expected to be achieved as SDG targets and indicators become incorporated into the governmentis detailed action plans and programs that are being developed and refined under the Vision 2030 framework. A major contribution of The SDGs to this existing framework is the explicit recognition of the interlinkages of economic, social and environmental dimensions of development inherent in the concept of sustainability.
Major challenges identified in the review are the availability of data and identifying measures to enhance the capacity of statistical bodies to collect and disseminate SDG-related statistics; achieving more effective coordination among government and non-government institutions to ensure synergies rather than duplication of efforts; building on existing institutional frameworks rather than creating new structures and promoting the SDGs at the sub-national level. Saudi Arabia is committed to pursuing the implementation of the global development agenda through close collaboration between all relevant stakeholders. SDG-related activities will proceed hand-in-hand with the implementation of Vision 2030, which has already gathered significant momentum. Key priority areas include improving the quality and coverage of SDG indicators and analysis of data, continuing the process of alignment of state programs and strategies with global development goals, targets and indicators and developing strategies for strengthening collaboration among different actors and key players. Other key priorities include strengthening the role of The SDGs at the sub-national level, enhancing the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) infrastructure for tracking progress towards the achievement of The SDGs at the national and sub-national levels and promoting international partnerships around the SDGs through development assistance, especially at the regional level.
16	17
The Voluntary National Review concludes with a number of lessons that have been drawn in the context of the first phase of alignment of The SDGs with Vision 2030. Key among these lessons is the need to take into account national realities and priorities. In fact, drawing on the national context in The SDGs prioritization is an effective enabler for preparation and implementation, as well as for long-term sustainability of results. Another lesson is the importance of a clear long-term Vision and policy coherence, such that would ensure building on existing national frameworks, plans and initiatives that are geared up to implement The SDGs. Equally important is the requirement for early collaboration of new policies and initiatives through mechanisms that are bound to ensure alignment with The SDGs. Economic diversification is a significant factor. As a priority aspect of sustainability, economic diversification is conceived as a vehicle to support integration and achievement of a range of The SDGs in an effective and functional way. In addition, Performance Measurement in the Public Sector is extremely significant in view of the Kingdomis commitment to strengthen the capability of public sector institutions to measure performance and track progress.  
Introduction
Sustainable development has been an increasingly important dimension in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia since the inception of the countryis development process, with major highlights of this dimension already evident in Saudi Arabia's long-term strategic directions. Practical implementation of this endeavor proceeded throughout the Kingdom's successive five-year development plans that were initiated in 1970, with a primary focus on development of capabilities of citizens, attainment of their ambitions, satisfying their needs and improving their standard of living, since citizens are the ultimate target of sustainable development. In addition, development plans have been keen to extend development to all social and economic sectors across all provinces. In the context of implementing its development strategy, Saudi Arabia draws upon Islamic principles and values as well as on economic freedom, so as to integrate the three basic dimensions of development: economic, social and environmental. 
Successive development plans have contributed to the Kingdom's achievement of considerable social and economic gains that are both balanced and sustainable, as evidenced by the country's continued economic growth at high rates, along with a conducive climate for a growing private sector's role and improved competitiveness of the Saudi economy. In addition, the country possesses an advanced socio-economic infrastructure, coupled with continued improvement of health, educational and environmental services provided to citizens.

Regulatory dimension
Economic dimension
Social dimension 
 Focuses on raising the efficiency of government services through 
development of administrative rules and regulations, restructuring of 
 government bodies and creation of new bodies with an aim to improve performance and boost productivity.
 The emphasis is to sustain the economic base, diversify 
revenue sources and achieve a balanced development among 
various economic sectors, along 
with rationalized exploitation and increased productivity of physical and human resources.
 Social dimension focuses on safeguarding Islamic values, 
development of human resources 
and improvement of social welfare of citizens through scaling up of health, educational and cultural aspects.
A key target of development plans has been to achieve growth and economic stability due to the marked positive effect this has on GDP per capita, thereby raising the living standard of Saudi citizens, a target that is underscored by the Kingdom's Vision 2030. Data indicate that real GDP increased by about 93% during the period 1980-2017. This marked economic growth, besides other factors, helped Saudi Arabia to become a member of The Group of Twenty (G20). In addition, income per capita went up by 30% since 1980, rising up to about SAR 76,261 (USD 20,300) by the end of 2016.1
Saudi Arabiais average per capita income went up by 30% since 1980, rising up to about SAR 76.26 thousand (USD 20.3 thousand) by the end of 2016
1 Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority-Annual Report
18

Looking Ahead, with an Ambitious Vision
Vision 2030 of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was launched and approved by the Council of Ministers in April 2016. The underpinning quest of Vision 2030 is to address current regional and international challenges, maintain development gains, diversify and stimulate economic growth and end its reliance on oil as the mainstay source of income. Vision 2030 is an ambitious methodology and a roadmap for the Kingdom to gain a prominent international standing in all economic, social and cultural spheres. It also outlines the Kingdom's course for continued and accelerated sustainable development efforts leading up to a higher standard of living and improved quality of life for citizens. Towards this end, Vision 2030 envisages three pillars, namely a vibrant society, a thriving economy and an ambitious nation.
principle of moderation, in line with Islamic guidelines.
 
Fulfilling lives 
A society that cherishes its national identity and takes pride in its rich cultural heritage and history, 
within a stimulating and attractive 
environment that provides for all the 
needs of citizens and expatriates.
Strong foundations
 A society that is based on a strong family system, along with all 
enablers and constituents of health and social care.
The Kingdom's interest in the public sector is driven by its keenness 
to build an ambitious nation, with an effective government and a responsible citizenry.
An effective government
Enhancement of the principle of transparency and benchmarking 
of public performance, in order to 
upgrade human resources, with full utilization of resources.
A responsible citizenry An effective government allows the opportunity for citizens, the private 
sector and non-profit organizations to take the responsibility required 
to cope with the difficulties and to harness opportunities.
entrepreneurs, through alignment of education with labor market needs.
Investing for the long term
Creation of opportunities for various economic sectors and generation of adequate and rewarding job 
opportunities, through development of investment instruments.
Open for business
The Kingdom seeks to raise quality of development and economic 
services provided to all, through privatization of 
government services.
Leveraging the country's unique position
Saudi Arabia seeks to improve the business climate in order to attract international investments and expertise.
 A vibrant A thriving society economy
  This is the main pillar and the This pillar falls within the cornerstone for building a thriving Kingdom's interest to build a 
economy. The Kingdom's emphasis thriving economy with rewarding on this aspect is to build a vibrant opportunities, investing for the 
society, with strong roots, fulfilling long-term, open for business and lives and strong foundations.leveraging the country's unique 
position.
Deep roots 
 A society where members live Rewarding opportunities
in accordance with the Islamic  will be generated for all, including large and small companies and 
19
Saudi Vision 2030
Saudi Vision 2030 endorses several constructive programs, initiatives and projects that are bound to enhance efforts towards achievement of sustainable development.

	Housing 	Lifestyle Improvement 	Fiscal Balance 
	Program	Program 	Program	Saudi Character 
Enrichment Program

	National Industrial 	National Companies 	Financial Sector 	Public Investment 
	Development and 	Promotion Program	Development 	Fund Program
	Logistics Program	Program

	Enriching the 	National 	Strategic 	Privatization 
	Hajj and Umrah 	Transformation 	Partnerships 	Program
	Experience	Program	Program 

Governance of Saudi Vision 2030
A full-fledged governance system has been developed to ensure institutionalization and increased efficiency of work and to streamline efforts of stakeholders so as to enable them to effectively monitor progress towards the realization of Vision 2030 objectives. The Minister of Economy and Planning (MEP) is entrusted by His Majesty the King with the mandate to follow up on Sustainable Development Goals' dossier. Under the mandate, MEP plays a supporting role to stakeholders and government agencies in strategic planning and implementation. In addition, MEP furnishes stakeholders with the necessary information, data, statistics and studies. MEP also works on alignment of sectoral and regional plans between relevant agencies.
Work is in progress  to develop several 
new programs that are bound to contribute to the realization of the Saudi Vision 2030.
20
VNR Methodology and Preparation Process
	During its participation at United Nations High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF) in 2017, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia declared its desire to present the Kingdom's first Voluntary National Review at HLPF 2018, within theme of the forum "Transformation towards sustainable and resilient societies". The Kingdom's intended participation gained the approval of His Majesty the King, so as to illustrate the Kingdom's efforts towards the realization of Sustainable Development 
Goals, with the relevant economic, social and environmental dimensions.
This report has been prepared through a participatory approach, with MEP as the lead agency, institutions along with participation of public, private and non-profit agencies and associations. 

 Work Team
In the context of its efforts to compile this review, MEP conducted workshops and held intensive bilateral meetings with a number of government agencies. These included the Ministry of Energy, Industry and Mineral Resources, Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Environment, Water and Agriculture, Ministry of 
Health, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Education. Other institutions included the Public Investment Fund (PIF), General Authority for Statistics (GASTAT), 
Saudi Commission for Tourism and National Heritage (SCTH), Arriyadh Development Authority (ADA), Royal Commission for Jubail and Yanbu 
(RCJB), Royal Commission for Al-Ula (RCU), Saudi Fund for Development (SFD), Saudi Energy Efficiency Center (SEEC), King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief) and the Family Council.
These workshops and meetings were also attended by several private sector and charitable societies and associations, most notably Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC), ACWA Power Corporation, Prince Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Foundation \0xECMiSK, King Khalid Foundation (KKF) and Bunyan Women's Charitable Association.
 Internal team
Includes members of MEP sectors and deputyships
 National team	 Deputyship team
Members include representatives 	Includes staff of the Assistant of government agencies, the private 	Deputyship for Sustainable sector and charitable societies and 	Development Affairs associations

This review tracks the progress made towards achievement of the SDGs, with emphasis on the following goals:
	6	11	15

 Clean water and sanitation
Sustainable cities  and communities
Life on land
7
12
17

 Affordable and clean energy
Responsible consumption and production
Partnerships for the goals
21

Plan of Saudi Arabiais participation in the
UN High-Level Political Forum 2018 
	 Present the work plan to H.E the  	 2nd workshop on VNR preparation Prepare communication plan   
Minister Bilateral meetingswith the public
	 Communication with stakeholders High-level meeting for VNR    Coordinate publications  	 
	 Prepare for the 1st workshop	 presentation	and pamphlets, in association  
	 Conduct the 1st meeting with the   Conduct the 3rd meeting with the  	 with the Strategic  	 	 
 	internal team
 Dec.
2017
 	internal team
 Feb.
2018
Communication Department
 Apr.
2018
 Jan. Mar. 2018 2018
 1st workshop on VNR preparation Present VNR to H.E the
 Prepare 1st VNR draft versionMinister
 Bilateral meetings Final review of VNR
  Conduct the 2nd meeting with   	the internal team
 Send names of the Kingdomis  	 delegation to the Ministry of Foreign   Affairs
 Prepare an electronic file on the  	 Kingdomis participation
 Prepare a statement by the Minister   of Economy and Planning
	 Submit VNR to His Majesty the King	 Participation in HLPF 2018
 May.	 Jul.
2018	2018
 Jun.
2018
 Aug.
2018
 Provide participants with  	  	the file which contains Forumis  	Agenda, Saudi Arabiais VNR,    	besides logistics information
 Assign participants to sessions
 Prepare of the final    	report on participation in  
 	HLPF

An on-going Course of Work
 Preparation for side event activities
 Logistic support and coordination
 Communication with the Permanent Mission
The team has gained considerable benefit from bilateral meetings held with stakeholders. It was through these meetings that the team was able to collect the information required to prepare, enrich and produce this VNR.

22	23
Policy and Enabling Environment
Creating ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals
SDGs. The Ministry of Environment, Water and Agriculture (MEWA), for example, issued the Water Strategy and the Environment Strategy, which are aligned with The SDGs, with sufficient integration of social, economic and environmental dimensions. As the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia consistently accords due attention to education as a key driver to advance development, a Royal Order was issued to include the SDGs into education curricula. Work is in progress towards this end, led by the Ministry of Education, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Furthermore, work is underway to develop more strategies and plans, which are designed to promote national frameworksi coverage of the SDGs.
innovation and infrastructure

24

25
Since the very inception of the SDGs, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia took an active part in related consultations and has pledged its commitment to meet the goals once they were endorsed in September 2015. Since then, Saudi Arabia has always reaffirmed its commitment during its participation in various regional and international conferences and forums. The Kingdom's commitment was set into action through the Royal Order that mandated the Minister of Economy and Planning (MEP) to follow up on this important dossier. A key task of the Ministry of Economy and Planning in this regard is to create alignment of the national context with the SDGs. This is addressed through the pivotal role assumed by MEP in providing support to government agencies with respect to strategic planning and implementation, as well as in providing data, statistics and studies to stakeholders, along with harmonization of sectoral and regional plans between the relevant authorities. In addition, MEP promotes the role of the private sector and charitable societies and associations towards realization of the SDGs, through development of methodologies and proposals designed to improve productivity and efficiency of the public, private and third sectors. As the lead agency for the strategic objective "Enhance businesses' focus on the sustainability of the national economy" under the National Transformation Program (NTP 2.0), MEP assumes a leading role in promoting the private sector's role in sustainability.
Incorporation of the SDGs in national frameworks
MEP conducted a review to assess the alignment of Vision 2030 with the SDGs. In order to get a multidimensional picture, a number of national strategies and programs were added and assessed for consistency with the SDGs. Within this context, sub-strategic objectives of Vision 2030 along with national strategies and programs that are aligned with the SDGs targets have been identified to reflect an accurate picture of actual alignment that can be implemented by executing agencies. The UNDP-designed Rapid Integrated Assessment (RIA) Tool was used in conducting this process.
The chart on page 25 shows alignment of all current national plans with the SDGs in order to take advantage of follow-up mechanisms at the national level, Performance indicators of relevant government agencies have been aligned with the SDGs level, with an aim to establish proxy indicators to measure progress made towards attainment of the goals and targets at various levels, namely Vision 2030 and related realization programs as well as indicators of various agencies.
Saudi Arabia embarked on a process to align its national strategies in various sectors with the 

National Transformation Program (NTP 2.0)
MEP efforts to promote private sector's role in sustainability

Strategic Objective Enhance businesses' focus on the sustainability of the national economy.
Encourage businesses to participate sustainably in economic activities and to boost their resilience to shocks through establishment of strong and long-term linkages to economic and environmental systems, not to focus solely on shortterm profitability.


Ambition of the objective
This objective calls for the private sector to adopt the concept of sustainability. Companies and institutions of the sector should develop work mechanisms and approaches that would ensure sustainability of the national economy.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recognizes the importance of private sector development and seeks to increase its GDP contribution up to 65% by 2030. In view of the likely short-term impacts of economic reforms intended, the government has sought to enable and support the private sector so that it can contribute to stimulating economic growth. Accordingly, the Private Sector Stimulus Package was adopted to ensure continued private sector growth and acceleration during economic reforms in line with the objectives of Saudi Vision 2030 by allocating SAR 200 billion (USD 53.33 billion) over the course of four years. The Private Sector Stimulus Package started with two initiatives in early 2017 followed by 17 initiatives of SAR 72 billion (USD 19.2 billion) launched in late 2017 and implemented since the start of 2018. The plan seeks to achieve four key objectives, namely:
 	Stimulate economic growth and maximize the impact on GDP
 	Increase private sector confidence and remove obstacles
 	Provide support for economic transformation  	Increase consumer demand
With respect to breakdown of the total amounts approved, an amount of SAR 21 billion (USD 5.6 billion) has been earmarked for the housing projectsi acceleration initiative, SAR 17 billion (USD 4.53 billion) for the private sectoris finance initiative and SAR 17 billion (USD 4.53 billion) for the initiative to improve efficiency and technology. In addition, an amount of SAR 12 billion (USD 3.2 billion) has been allocated to the initiative to incentivize small and medium enterprises, along with an amount of SAR 5 billion (USD 1.33 billion) for the export promotion initiative through the establishment of an export bank. These initiatives complement the decisions taken to drive private sector growth including the capital increase of the Saudi Industrial Development Fund by SAR 25 billion (USD 6.67 billion) as well as injecting SAR 15 billion (USD 4 billion) into the National Housing Corporation. Work is also underway to develop and analyze a further package of initiatives that will be launched during this year with a focus on promoting private sector transformation.1

Key Challenges
Promoting the SDGs at the Sub-National Level: Promotion of the SDGs at the sub-national level implies adapting the SDGs, targets and indicators to local circumstances and integrating them into the planning and implementation of public policy at the sub-national level. The SDG framework has the potential to help local governments improve their planning and link their performance more firmly to evidence and results, through accelerating capacity building for local government structures.
Coordination of Multiple Actors and Sectors: Given the comprehensiveness of The SDGs, multiple stakeholders from the public, private and non-profit sectors play a vital role in turning the SDGs into practical tools for explaining sustainable development, managing implementation, ensuring accountability and reporting on progress. Therefore, it is important that all these actors are truly on board in a comprehensive approach and ensuring that sustainable development is not just a matter for specialized sustainable development designated focal points, but rather a whole-ofgovernment affair. This underscores the need for strong coordination among government and nongovernment institutions to ensure synergies rather than duplication of efforts. Achieving effective coordination between all these actors is not easy. Efforts and resources are therefore needed to strengthen existing mechanisms of coordination and adapting them to the requirements of the SDGs.
Data Availability and Statistical Capacity: The adaptation and monitoring of the SDGs requires data and statistics that are accurate, timely, sufficiently disaggregated, relevant, accessible and easy to use. Although data availability and quality have steadily improved over the years, the analysis of the alignment of Vision 2030 with the SDGs revealed that in certain areas data are unavailable. Filling these gaps and ensuring that key measures are included in the official indicators will require improved methodologies and data collection systems. One of the key priorities identified in this review is the need to invest in strengthening data collection systems and the capacity of statistical bodies. This will also require better coordination between data producers and users and innovative ways of producing and applying data and statistics.
1 Namaa - Local Content Unit
Building on Existing Institutional Frameworks: With work underway to strengthen the implementation of the sustainable development agenda, it is important to avoid creating overlapping mechanisms through the establishment of new institutions where existing ones can play that role. This can be challenging because building upon existing institutional frameworks requires a better understanding of the SDGs by government officials and developing their capacity to deal with them. The establishment of the Vision 2030 infrastructure provides a great opportunity for further embedding the SDGs into the existing governance system, especially the planning and financing frameworks.

Lessons Learned
In the first couple of years of adapting the SDGs to the local context and incorporating them into the Vision 2030 planning framework, Saudi Arabia has identified a number of important lessons which might benefit other countries. The following are four key lessons, highlighted for this review.
Lesson 1
Taking into Account National Realities and Circumstances: For all their global nature, the adaptation and implementation of The SDGs needs to take into account national realities, including country aspirations and expectations, as well as existing strengths and capacities. Saudi Arabia has grounded its SDG activities in the local context and circumstances. The adaptation of the SDGs is driven by local priorities identified in Vision 2030 and other sectoral strategies and plans. This context-driven approach applies also to implementation arrangements, data collection and analysis systems and reporting methods.
Lesson 2
Importance of a Clear Long-Term Vision and Policy Coherence: Saudi Arabiais experience shows that effective adaptation and implementation of the SDGs requires a clear national long-term Vision and policy coherence. One of the strengths of the process in Saudi Arabia has been the existence of a well-developed and coherent national development framework in the form of Vision 2030 which has the full backing of the countryis leadership and public acceptance. For its SDG activities, Saudi Arabia did not have to start from scratch, but had to ensure continuity between existing development programs and frameworks and initiatives focused on the achievement of the SDGs. Furthermore, the early implementation of the 2030 Agenda has greatly benefitted from strong political will and support at the highest level, a facilitating policy environment, streamlined institutional mechanisms and building on the successful experience gained during the implementations of the Vision 2030. In the Saudi experience, there were essential prerequisites for an effective adaptation of the SDGs.
Lesson 3
Economic Diversification as a Priority Aspect of Sustainability: At the practical level, the SDGs map into different national priorities, depending on country needs and circumstances. Given the Kingdomis reliance on natural resources for its socio-economic development, economic diversification has been identified as a key aspect of Saudi Arabiais sustainable development path. In the Saudi context, economic diversification is not only the cornerstone of Vision 2030 and a key goal pursued by the leadership, but is also conceived as a vehicle for the achievement of a range of the SDGs.
Lesson 4
Performance Measurement in the Public Sector: Evidence-based policy making is key to the achievement of the SDGs. Saudi Arabia is fully committed to strengthening the capacity of its public institutions to measuring results and tracking progress in the achievement of development goals. One example of this commitment is the establishment of the National Center for Performance Measurement (Adaa), a government body responsible for measuring the performance of public organizations towards the achievement of Vision 2030 objectives. Adaa carries out its mandate by developing performance measurement tools and training programs to help public organizations achieve higher efficiency, thus fostering a culture of performance excellence in the public sector. 

28	29


Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques
King Salman bin Abdulaziz

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia makes great efforts to support needy people, an endeavor that features prominently among the priorities of Vision 2030. Towards this end, Saudi Arabia continues to develop and upgrade the social services system to become more efficient, further equitable and more accessible. For example, the Kingdom works on maximizing the use of food, fuel, electricity and water subsidies through targeting of subsidies to qualified recipients. The Kingdom pays special attention to citizens in need of constant care. Seeking to create a full chain for enablement of those in need, cooperation is pursued with the non-profit sector, along with partnerships with the private sector to offer training and qualification opportunities to enable citizens to enter the labor market.
The Kingdom's social protection system is based on supporting the social security system, encouraging institutions and individuals to contribute to charitable work, along with providing general education and healthcare to all citizens, as well as promotion of literacy.
The social protection system is made up of three components, with each one branching out into a number of programs and initiatives:

This includes cooperative health insurance, retirement pension system and unemployment insurance (Musaned Scheme).

Social Safety Nets 
These include government subsidy (food, fuel, electricity and water subsidies), 
citizen account programs, housing support programs, educational programs, shelter care programs and welfare programs for persons with special needs.
Labor Market Support 
Programs
 
 These include wage protection programs, employment support programs and job seekersi employment support programs. 

Saudi Arabia has recently launched several initiatives and programs to support the poorest nations. Key among programs recently launched is the Citizen Account, a program that seeks to alleviate the burden of Saudi citizens and provide financial support to low and middle income Saudi households in the Kingdom. Saudi Arabia also provides support to charitable societies, offers support to housing projects and increases allocations for orphans with special needs. In addition, Saudi Arabia provides assistance to the poorest nations and to developing countries. It also provides support to international organizations involved in the fight against poverty. Using various channels, Saudi Arabia provides assistance in a multitude of forms.
Saudi Arabia also provides support to the poorest nations and to developing countries. It also provides support to international organizations involved in the fight against poverty. Using various channels, Saudi Arabia has provided development assistance in a multitude of forms. Over the past three decades, Saudi Arabia provided over USD 84 billion (SAR 315 billion) in concessionary aid and favorable development assistance. Internationally, Saudi Arabia ranks second in terms of the volume of labor cash transfers. This is pretty important, as such remittances constitute a significant source of foreign currency for developing countries. Furthermore, Saudi Arabia supports institutions and organizations which run special programs that are recognized by the international community. Among these are United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Industrial Development Fund (UNIDF), Arab Gulf Programme for Development (AGFUND), Arab Fund for 
Technical Aid to African Countries (AFTAAC), United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and 
34	35
World Food Programme (WFP).1
 National Strategy for Social
 Development in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Social development in Saudi Arabia
In cooperation with other government bodies, the Ministry of Labor and Social Development has developed the National Strategy for Social Development in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The strategy has been prepared in line with an integrated methodology that draws on the best international practices applied in strategic planning. The strategy is designed to put in place radical and comprehensive solutions, including both protective and curative measures, to address poverty through innovative means. The strategy focuses on several themes, including training of manpower in various categories through programs leading up to employment, insulation against poverty through education and setting up of mechanisms to break the cycle of poverty. Additionally, themes include enabling of female social security recipients, who are able to work, to gain access to qualification measures leading up to employment. These programs complement training programs run by the Human Resources Development Fund (HRDF) which are designed for women most in need. In addition, the government allocates considerable amounts to social safety nets. The following graph sheds light on relevant efforts of the Kingdom in 2015:1-2
Allocation for health and social development in 2017 state budget

 (USD 25.33 billion)
Total expenditure for social insurance pensions in 2015

 (USD 4.53 billion)
Social security allocations in 2017 state budget

 (USD 4 billion)
Total annual assistance 	450
provided to charitable 
societies 	million SAR 
billion SAR 95
17
billion SAR 
15
billion SAR 

(USD 120 million)
Total annual assistance to 100 cooperative societies	million SAR 

 (USD 26.67 million)
	1 Ministry of Labor and Social Development Yearbook 2017- Special needs persons
2 Final  Account of the Ministry of Labor and Social Development - 2017
36

Persons with special needs
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia accords special attention to persons with special needs. Vision 2030 sets a strategic objective that calls for enabling people with disabilities to gain access to suitable job opportunities as well as education to ensure their independence and integration as effective members of society. The government provides cash assistance to the families of disabled persons to help them cope with the costs associated with providing care to the disabled family member. In 2017, the government issued a decision which exempted persons with special needs from visa fees related to recruitment of nurses, drivers and laborers, in order to help them manage their dayto-day activities. A total of 136,500 persons received this exemption, including 73,500 males and 63,000 females. A recently issued Royal Order provides for development of a national strategy for the rights of persons with disabilities, with an aim to improve their quality of life. Furthermore, the Council of Ministers approved a move to set up an umbrella commission for persons with disabilities. The commission will function as a reference body for disabled persons and will monitor programs and services provided to them. It will also audit the regulations and policies and will submit related advice. The commission will further supervise activities of relevant agencies in the government and private sectors as well as charitable institutions.1
King Khalid Foundation (KKF) 
KKF has been the first non-profit organization that took the lead in undertaking related research and studies (a study on subsistence level, as well as a study on female poverty). In this regard, KKF conducted a survey of 10,000 households covering all provinces of the Kingdom, with an aim to develop a methodology to measure poverty line in the Kingdom. Research efforts by KKF had a significant impact on leading the discussions on this issue and on forwarding of proposals for solutions and how best to tackle the issue. KKF is a member of the national social protection strategy team through which policies and programs are developed to address poverty and to enable vulnerable segments of society.1

Community Jameel 
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab takes part in the global fight against poverty and in providing aid to poor people. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab aims to serve 100 million persons around the world over the coming years, through international partnerships with countries, international institutions and world development organizations. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab also provides support to studies and research work to combat poverty and offers training programs to specialists in this field.2

The Social Charity Fund (SCF)
SCF is a charitable institution which operates as an independent corporate entity. SCF has a mission to improve living conditions of needy citizens in Saudi Arabia. SCF plays a leading role in promoting the non-profit sector and in addressing challenges facing development work, through enablement, innovation and impact assessment. SCF contributes to improving living standards of targeted segments through quality solutions and innovations. The fund's activities are provided to targeted beneficiaries in all provinces of the Kingdom through a network of several partnerships to achieve the required objectives. Key among the achievements made by SCF during 2016 are:3
 Scholarship programs: An amount of USD 139.81 million (SAR 524.3 million) was allocation for the program. 
 Training and employment programs: An amount of USD 30.51 million (SAR 114.4 million) was allocation for the program. 
 My Future programs: An amount of USD 5.83 million (SAR 18.1 million) was allocation for the program. 
1 King Khalid Foundation (KKF) Report: Determining poverty line and subsistence level
2 Abdul Latif Jameel anti - poverty lab
3 Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority: 53rd Annual Report (2017)
37


Relevance of SDG 1 to Vision 2030

Figures and Statistics1
99%
100%
Proportion of the population living in households with access to sanitation services in 2016
Proportion of the population living in households with access to basic services in 2016
0.0043%
Direct disaster economic loss in relation to GDP in 2016
1 Report on SDG indicators 2017, GASTAT
38
36%
Government expenditure on basic services (education, health and social protection as a share of total government expenditure in 2017) 99%
 Proportion of the population living  in households with access to safe water service in 2016
Citizen Account Program
Citizen Account is a program that seeks to alleviate the burden of Saudi citizens and to provide financial support to low and middle income Saudi households, to ensure a better life for citizens. The program was initiated to compensate citizens who may be at risk as a result of the economic policies being implemented by the government. The rationale for the Citizen Account is that subsidy in its earlier form was provided to all consumers, including non-Saudis and high-income Saudi citizens. Allowing universal access to subsidies meant that the needs of both low and high income people were treated alike, leading in turn to overconsumption of subsidized products. Rechanneling of subsidies to eligible beneficiaries is bound to promote rational consumption. The program aims to re-channel subsidies to eligible segments, in such a way as to promote rational consumption and to ensure that subsidies are offered in an equitable manner to eligible groups. Under the Citizen Account program, subsidies will be offered in cash payments to be deposited directly into eligible recipients' accounts. It is worth mentioning that cash transfer is an effective and internationally recognized instrument to encourage people to save. The program seeks to achieve several objectives that are bound to raise the efficiency of government subsidies to citizens, encourage rational consumption of basic services by households and reduce the negative impacts of economic reforms. 

Program objectives
Encourage households to conserve on consumption of basic goods, such as gasoline, electricity, energy products and water

Figures:
Raise efficiency of government subsidies provided to citizens
Alleviate impacts of economic reforms on citizens in limited income, low income and middleincome brackets

	family heads	family heads
39

\0xECWe live in an era that poses many challenges. This calls for an objective and comprehensive consideration to develop mechanisms of the economy. Such development should be based on proper scientific study and principles."
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques
King Salman bin Abdulaziz
41

In the face of the Kingdomis ecology of scarce water resources, decision-makers have placed their greatest focus in prioritization of food and drinking water supply to the population. In-terms of strategic direction, this focus features high on Vision 2030 through the strategic objective "Ensure development & food security". Over the past four decades, several initiatives were launched to make water available to citizens for, drinking, agriculture and other uses, to provide safe food sources from within and outside the country.

National program to reduce food loss and waste and to prevent inadequate use of natural resources
Seeking to develop food security sources and to ensure availability of food at affordable prices, several programs and initiatives have been launched. Among these is the national program to reduce food loss and waste and to prevent inadequate use of natural resources, which draws on international experience and best practices worldwide. The program is designed to maximize benefit and raise efficiency of food consumption, in such a way as to achieve savings of food reserves and conservation of natural resources. The program takes into account both the economic viability of consumption and the use of natural resources. Furthermore, domestic initiatives were launched and farming practices were developed to improve crop yield of vegetables, fruits, dates and field crops. 
In the context of the Kingdomis endeavors to improve the environment in agricultural areas and to carry out preventive epidemics control, a program for prevention and control of Red Palm Weevil insect was launched in order to control the disease and to reduce its incidence from 10% to 1%, in view of the importance of date palm and its suitability to the Kingdomis environment. On the other hand, agricultural terraces have been rehabilitated, along with application of rain water harvest techniques in Taif, Baha, Asir and Jazan. Agricultural and water objectives of these activities will ultimately lead to abundance of output, as well as creation of a conducive environment for growth of agricultural activity and provision of food.
In addition, the Kingdom pays special attention to the marketing and distribution of agricultural products of local farmers. In this regard, a study was conducted to set up marketing services' centers for small farmers and producers, with the aim to create an efficient system for the marketing of vegetables and fruits, through sustainable supply chains and forwarding systems. These centers will take into account the value added aspect and will support the food processing industry. Besides conventional support channels, assistance is also provided to the electronic trade of dates, leading to an increase of the Kingdom's export of dates to about SAR 820 million (USD 218.67 million). A mechanism for the coordination of efforts was put in place between Ministry of Environment, Water and Agriculture, Saudi Agricultural and Livestock Investment Company, Grain Silos and the Flour Mills Organization and other stakeholders. The aim of this mechanism is to make optimal use of available resources for out-of-Kingdom agricultural investment, besides management of the strategic stockpile to secure food supply and ensure the achievement of overall food security for the Kingdom.1
 Revitalizing the Role of Global
Partnerships

Aware of the country's ecological and geographical nature, and seeking to find the most suitable sources of food supply, the kingdom resorted to external agricultural investment through strategic partnerships with other countries, in such a way that brings benefits to all parties and to local communities. In this respect, the Kingdom approved a strategy and an implementation plan for Saudi agricultural investment outside the Kingdom. This is carried out through investment or contractual agriculture in developing countries. As well as King Abdulla initiative for external agricultural investment. Besides its attention to domestic food security, the Kingdom is an active donor of development aid and direct support to other nations.
 982.5
million SAR
2015-2018
*USD 262 million 
King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre provided assistance in excess of USD 262 million to secure food in various parts of the world during the period 2015-2018. This testifies to the considerable attention given by the Kingdom to food security, both within and outside the Kingdom.1

Figures and Statistics
2017 2	4.1%
Prevalence of undernourishment
	16%	20%
	10.6%	11.1%
 Prevalence of stunting 	The agriculture orientation among children under 5 	index for government years of age	expenditures
	9.1%	3.3%
(2014) Proportion of agricultural 	Proportion of plant and 	Prevalence of malnutrition 	 Prevalence of malnutrition area under productive and 	animal genetic resources 	(overweight) among children 	 (emaciation) among children
	sustainable agriculture	for food and agriculture	under 5 years of age	under 5 years of age
As part of the Kingdomis efforts to ensure sustainability and protection of agricultural environment and food production, attention was given to provide advanced technologies along with government support to the agricultural and livestock sector. In this regard, the Kingdom set up a center for environmental information, meteorology and early warning of climate and pollution. Another information center was established to provide Kingdom-wide environmental and meteorological data and indicators and to monitor natural and environmental disasters. In addition, a national livestock excellence center has been set up. The Kingdom also set up a center for selection of the best local breeds, genetic improvement of livestock and development of herd management. On the other hand, a program has been designed for effective strategic stockpiling of food reserves. The system involves an early warning system, as well as information on agricultural markets. Additional features of the system include development of adequate mechanisms and management framework for the food security strategy. As such, the system provides feedback to decision makers on the food production chain. These government-supported centers contribute effectively to the development of agricultural and animal production techniques and practices and as such contribute to the sustainability of food availability over different economic cycles.

42	43


With the largest share of state budget allocations, health constitutes the largest and most important sector that receives the Kingdomis utmost focus for development and upscaling. As a result, the Kingdomis health sector has witnessed remarkable progress and has gained significant 

momentum over the past decades. Through Vision 2030, Saudi Arabia seeks to make a qualitative leap in terms of the standards and quality of medical and healthcare services, in line with Islamic Sharia principles and professional health ethics. The core objective is to promote preventive healthcare and to provide integrated healthcare. 

Vision 2030 strategic objectives
Analysis of Vision 2030 strategic objectives shows relevance of SDG 3 with the Visionis strategic objectives and related initiatives, as follows:
The Ministry of Health conducted a survey of health sector manpower in line with the SDG indicator of intensity and distribution of health professionals. The survey revealed that Saudi Arabiais score has improved considerably since 2016. For each 10,000 medical staff, Saudi Arabia has 28.3 medical physicians, including dentists, along with 57 nursing staff, including midwives, 7.9 pharmacists and 33.8 allied medical staff. 
 
In 2018, budget allocations for the health services and social development sectors amounted to about USD 39.2 billion (SAR 147 billion), including about USD 8.8 billion (SAR 33 billion) for Vision 2030 Realization Programs. The budget includes allocations for the completion of construction and furnishing of hospitals and primary healthcare centers in all provinces of the Kingdom. Currently, 36 new hospitals are being built and upgraded in various provinces with a total bed capacity of 8,950 beds, in addition to two medical cities with a total bed 
	  Ease access to healthcare services 	capacity of 2,350 beds. In the course of the current year, one new hospital was commissioned 
	  Improve value of healthcare services 	into service with a bed capacity of 100 beds. Furthermore, about 25 new hospitals will be 
	  Strengthen prevention against health threats 	received from contractors during the period 2016-2018, accounting for 58% of the total 
	  Promote sports activities in society	number of hospitals planned for the five- year period 2016-2020. The two medical cities 
	  Improve quality of services provided in Saudi cities	currently under construction and upgrading will not be completed before the end of fiscal 
	  Substantially reduce air, noise, water and soil pollution	year 2018.
  Enhance the nation's immunity towards drug abuse
	  Promote traffic safety	Overall, Saudi Arabiais health sector has made significant progress. A recent World Health 
	  Safeguard the environment from natural threats	Organization study put Saudi Arabia in the forefront of countries in terms of health system 
	  Enhance family involvement in preparing for their children's future	quality. According to WHO data, Saudi Arabia ranks 26th in the list of health systems of 190 
	  Empower citizens through the welfare system	countries worldwide in 2017. In this regard, Saudi Arabia took precedence over some advanced 
In conformity with Vision 2030, Saudi Arabia has developed a patient-based National Healthcare Model.

countries, like Canada (ranks 30th), Australia (ranks 32nd) and New Zealand (ranks 41st). The Kingdom tops all GCC countries in this regard, compared to UAE (ranks 27th), Qatar (ranks 44th) and Kuwait (ranks 45th). 
	National Healthcare Model	
	World Health Organization	Among 190 health 
	Health Care System	care systems in 
the world
CanadaUnited Arab 
Emirates 3027
Among 190 health 
care systems in Among 190 health the worldcare systems in 
the world
46	47
Saudi Arabia strives to strengthen and upgrade its health sector, taking into account the SDGs. 
In this regard, the Kingdom provides a new national healthcare path for pregnant women (safe delivery path), which involves three stages, namely antenatal, pregnancy and postpartum healthcare under the supervision of health professionals. This stems from the attention accorded by the Kingdom to reduce maternal mortality rate to less than 70 deaths per 100,000 live births by 2030.
The Kingdom has also been keen to reduce the incidence of genetic diseases through premarriage and antenatal medical examinations. In addition to healthcare provided during pregnancy, along with healthcare to newborn babies, the Kingdom follows up on the health of children below 5 years of age through periodic medical examinations and vaccinations, with an aim to reduce death rate to less than 25 deaths per 1,000 live births.
Saudi Arabia continues to upgrade national research centers through furnishing of state-ofthe-art laboratory technologies for examination, detection and control of communicable as well as epidemic and non-epidemic diseases. Several specialized centers have been set up for certain communicable diseases. Vision 2030 gives due attention to the promotion of preventive care under the Visionis theme of \0xECvibrant society. The theme includes several educational and other initiatives and programs. In this regard, several initiatives have been prepared with respect to cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, respiratory disease and obesity. Under these initiatives, campaigns were launched to promote awareness as to the health risks and the bad health habits associated with these diseases, along with the proper healthy practices to prevent and eliminate related health risks. Awareness campaigns were also launched to promote a culture of sports through which these diseases can be avoided and healthy habits and practices can be developed. Within this context, several athletic events were organized (such as marathons, hiking, cycling). The first female marathon took place in Al Hasa at the end of 2017. Launched under the campaign title \0xECAl Hasa on the run the event saw an unprecedented participation of 1,500 ladies who ran for 3 kilometers, having been grouped into athletes, young women, children and senior age participants. Community events, including hiking, were also organized in Riyadh, Jeddah and Jubail at the end of 2017 in recognition of the role of sports in promoting community health and to promote sports among community members in order to develop a vibrant and health-minded society. During these events, presentations are conducted as to the health and physical benefits associated with hiking. Approximately 5,000 participants took part in these events which involved over 2 km covered by participants. Promotional prizes were given to participants of all ages. Saudi Arabia endeavors to rectify bad nutrition habits through the promotion of ideal ways of healthy nutrition. In this regard, teams from competent authorities make visits to schools and universities, along with participation in community events and shopping mall promotions. On the other hand, authorities make it mandatory for restaurants as well as food suppliers and manufacturers to display nutritional information on food labeling in order for consumers to identify ingredients and nutritional value. Saudi Arabia also increased excise taxes on some harmful food products. The Kingdom provides medical examination of chronic diseases through public health protection programs, in addition to ongoing healthcare services. Saudi Arabia makes strenuous efforts to fight and control drugs, by conducting continuous examinations of youth in upper school grades through school and university health centers. Programs are also conducted to raise awareness as to the risks of drug abuse and associated psychological and social impacts, besides the health dangers. The Kingdom has several ideal rehabilitation centers to treat, rehabilitate and educate drug addicts, along with follow up activity after completion of rehabilitation. In cooperation with several agencies, Saudi Arabia offers educational programs on traffic safety. A key educational program \0xECAl Afia offers community awareness of traffic safety.1
Furthermore, Saudi Arabia makes considerable efforts to combat and control drugs. Ideal rehabilitation centers have been set up in the Kingdom to rehabilitate, educate, monitor and reintegrate drug addicts into society after treatment. For example, the national drug prevention program (Nebras) is designed to curb the spread of drugs and to promote positive values among society members as to abstention from drug abuse. It also benefits from joint agreements with other entities, such as the Ministry of Education, for drug-awareness.2
48	49


Saudi Arabia accords a high priority to education, as stipulated by the Basics Law of Governance. Article 30 of the Law states The state shall provide general education and shall be committed to fighting of illiteracy. As a result, the Kingdomis education system has grown steadily, with the number of schools in 2017 reaching 38,368, attended by 6,230,108 students and served by 537,147 teachers. Additionally, Saudi Arabia has 28 public universities and 30 private universities and colleges, with a combined student population of 1,489,013. A total 174,333 students receive education abroad on a scholarship basis.

2017
Since the official launch of the 17 SDGs and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Saudi Arabia has been keen to build national frameworks to achieve the goals. SDG 4 features prominently in the Ministry of Education strategy and in related initiatives and projects.

38,368 
6,230,108
537,147
Number of schools
Number of students
Number of teachers

	28	30	174,333
Number of public Number of private Number of universities universities and scholarship 
	colleges	students
Education accounts for the largest share of the 2018 state budget allocation. A total of USD 51 billion (SAR 192 billion) has been earmarked for general education, higher education and training sector. In fact, the education sector receives direct support and follow-up from the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King Salman bin Abdulaziz and the Crown Prince, HRH Prince Mohammad bin Salman. Both play a leading role in accelerating the Kingdomis development process which will place Saudi Arabia at the forefront of technologically advanced nations.
Ministry of Education
Education indicators 20171
94%
Net registration rate, Secondary education 98%
 Enrolment rate, Primary education 
24.26%
  Enrolment rate, vocational education 11
Student / teacher ratio
97%
Survival rate in primary education
98%
Net registration rate, Primary 
 education 69%
Total enrolment rate, higher 
   education 17.9%
Percentage share of private and foreign education
1.02%
Gender parity index in education enrolment 97%
Net registration rate, Intermediary 
education 192
(SAR billion) 
Education budget, 2018
(USD 51.2 billion) 23%
Percentage rented buildings
The following is an overview of key efforts by the Ministry of Education to implement SDG 4:
 A National Committee has been set up to track the implementation of SDG 4. The committee leads efforts, develops plans and implements initiatives. It also supports competent agencies in implementing other educationnrelated sustainable development goals.
 Build a Modern System of Governance and Policy including standardized regulations for General Education and Universities.
 Build a Strategy for Education and Training in the Kingdom: Strategy Vision is \0xECa learner that achieves his highest potential and participates in national and community development through a high quality and globally competitive education system.
 Launch of a Number of Initiatives under Vision 2030 and strive to realize the SDG 4.
52	53
1 
Education in Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia pays considerable attention to basic services which respond to the needs of the population, with education in the forefront of these needs. Therefore, the Ministry of Education seeks to provide education opportunities for all within an adequate education environment, in the light of the Kingdomis education policy. The Ministry also seeks to raise the quality of output and to increase the efficiency of scientific research. As a result of the Kingdomis efforts, the number of students enrolled in general education has increased by more than fourfold, compared to 1980, with the countryis student population totaling to 5.4 million students by the end of 2016. Notably, the growth of enrolment has been higher for female students, whose numbers have increased by an average annual rate of about 5.3% over the same period. A clear trend of parity can be seen in general education enrolment for both sexes. This corresponds with the gender ratio in total population. Saudi Vision 2030, announced in April 2016, seeks to achieve economic diversification and sustainable development, through a wide range of economic reform and initiatives stemming from the Vision Realization Programs.
The Vision 2030 education component addresses three key areas: development of curricula, advancement of higher education and building of skills that are necessary for the labor market. Vision 2030 advances objectives, such as "At least five Saudi universities should be among the top 200 universities in the World University Rankings" and "Assist students to acquire results higher than international rates in world education indicators and "Pursue work for development of job descriptions for each and every education field". 
\0xECEducation in Saudi Arabia is the cornerstone through which we can achieve our nationis aspirations towards progress and advancement in sciences and knowledge.
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques 
King Salman bin Abdulaziz
 Education curriculum development 
 Advancement of higher education progress  Building skills for labor market
percentage	Boys to girlsi ratio in general 
education student population1
0
1 Ministry of Education
Independent schools
In line with Saudi Vision 2030 and seeking to boost the role of the private sector and to promote publicprivate partnership, an initiative for independent schools was adopted. The first part of this initiative will involve transfer of 25 public schools for operation by the private sector. The move is expected to contribute to better quality of the education sectoris input and output. In addition, the initiative will help develop and upgrade educational facilities, improve and upgrade school transport, increase the scope of vocational disciplines in order to meet labor market needs and innovate new instructional techniques.

Objectives of independent schools 
Create and enable a batch of private sector operators
Education quality
Efficiency and effectiveness
	Private sector participation	Improve education quality Develop a student-based 
  Improve safety and security 	 Achieve curricular and 	educational model of school buildings	educational enrichment, offer  Cost effectiveness and 
	 Attractive opportunities for 	private tuition and promote 	efficient use of financial 
business and profitability level
extra-curricular activities
 Improve level of teacher development and performance management
resources

54	55
	 Summer campaigns for promotion of awareness and eradication of 	between academic institutionsi output and labor market needs.
Stream 1	illiteracy: This program is implemented every year during the school's  Cooperation project between the Ministry of Education and the Saudi Adult education 	summer recess in remote areas in some provinces and governorates. It Arabian General Investment Authority (SAGIA) for the employment and and eradication 	includes educational, social, health general guidance and agricultural aspects.	training of graduates of scholarships
                                                                                                                                  Safeer portal project for graduates of the Custodian of the Two Holy of illiteracy	 Lifelong education initiative (Estidama) This initiative seeks to eradicate 	Mosques Program for International Scholarships, which allows the private illiteracy, promote lifelong education values and enable individuals to 	sector to search data and information on program graduates and contact benefit from varied education and training opportunities and to gain access to sources of knowledge. The initiative targets adults with low educational 	them for potential job opportunities.
	qualifications in the age group 15-29.	 Saudi Injaz initiative: This initiative seeks to help students develop their 
interpersonal and professional skills for the labor market. This is pursued 
	Stream 2	 Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz Center for Support Services to Special 	through a number of specialized vocational and educational programs. A 
	Special needs 	Education This is an integrated center that combines educational and rehabilitation disciplines. The center provides survey, diagnostic and 	total of 500,000 students have been trained under this initiative.
	education	assessment services in schools and kindergartens, through a multi-		The Ministry of Education is committed to achieving the targets of SDG 
disciplinary team. It also provides tailored treatment plans for children with the aim of integrating them into the school or home environment as interactive and independent persons, with continued adequate support provided to children in new environments. 
 Inculcation of values  and characteristics of
excellence
4, including target 7 Promote a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of cultureis contribution to sustainable development. Seeking to achieve this target, the Ministry has launched a number of initiatives, including:
  Education vouchers: This is a free grant given to educational institutions licensed by the Ministry of Education and relevant agencies to provide 
	placement to targeted students under specific conditions and criteria.	Stream 1	 Promotion of positive attitudes in schools: This project seeks to promote 
	strategy for the education of people with disabilities. Development of special education, through development of a national Citizenship	positive attitudes through a motivating environment and attractive guiding programs which aim at improving the studentsi psychological, social and 
 Creation of a national center for special education, in cooperation with the educational equilibrium.
	private sector. The center will provide integrated high quality education and 	 Aramcois environmental education initiative: Under this initiative, a school 
training to students with disabilities, along with their teachers and families. School transportation for special education students of with motor 	team called \0xECFriendis of the environment club is formed by students. The disability.	team participates in sharing responsibility to achieve informed interaction 
with the environment both within and outside schools.

Equal opportunities
The Ministry of Education seeks to achieve the requirements associated with SDG 4 \0xECEnsure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. This objective has been at the core of strategies, initiatives and programs launched by the Ministry in various areas. Key among these are:
 A comprehensive  education system that  matches labor market
requirements
In further developing the education system, the Ministry of Education takes into account the need to link the system, both at the general and higher education levels, to local and global labor market needs and seeks to improve educational and training programs, as well as the knowledge and skills required by employers,. This is in line with the requirements of SDG 4, as well as other SDGs.
 An initiative to develop a practical framework that ensures the match 
Stream 3	digital classes that were launched for Southern border schools to ensure  Virtual school project in the Southern border: This project involves virtual 	 Volunteering in education: This program aims at developing an educated generation who take the lead in volunteerism with active involvement 
	Education in 	the continuation of education for students facing challenging conditions in 	in advancing the society and serving the nation. The program also aims 
the Kingdomis 	the Southern border area.	at promoting respect of volunteerism, developing a sense of social southern border	seeks to provide knowledge enrichment to 20,000 students in the Southern  Knowledge enrichment project in the Southern border: This initiative 	responsibility and active interaction among students. border areas, through three programs that are provided by Aramcois 
	King Abdulaziz Global Cultural Center in cooperation with the Ministry of 	Stream 2	 Intellectual awareness center: This center pursues a scientific 
Education. The latter is represented in the project by the Educational and Technical Support Center of the Southern Border Education Directorates. Intellectual	methodology that seeks to strengthen principles of patriotism and  Project for the Twinning of Southern Border Schools: This project aims at 	 security and	development of an institutional base to deal with alien ideas. My country protects my rights: This initiative consists of an interactive 

                                   providing direct education to students whose schools are located within the 	 renunciation of	education portal. Developed through a cooperation between the Ministry red unsafe boundary. The project involves twinning of red boundary schools with other schools in the safe green boundary.	violence	of Education, the Human Rights Commission and Tatweer company, the initiative seeks to promote a human rights culture within general education 	schools.
	 Virtual school project	5,724	5	718	17,543 National project for protection from peer violence and bullying.
 in the southern	Synchronized 	Joint education 	Registered 	students Child support hotline program: Campaigns were launched to promote border	lessons	districts	schools	awareness of children as to the hotline objectives and controls of use.
	5,527	44,000	2,909	3,608Stream 3 Future researcher: This initiative aims to develop research skills of 
	 Excellence	general education students. It is supported by universities and research 
	E Homework	beneficiaries	E-Examinations	teacherscharacteristics	centers. National scientific creativity Olympiad: This is an annual scientific 
competition in which students compete in a specific science field.
  Participation in the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program.
Ministry of Education
56	57

Programs and initiatives
An efficient and effective system
                The Ministry of Education is keen to ensure the systemis efficiency and effectiveness and has placed this objective at the center of its attention. In its quest to achieve the SDG 4, the Ministry 	has launched a number of initiatives, including:
                                 Establishment of a center for user communication and care: Users of An Efficient and 	Ministry of Education services are enabled to communicate with the effective system	Ministry through modern electronic means.
 Voluntary health insurance for Ministry of Education employees.
 Teachersi services center, which provides various services to teachers and their families
 Independent school initiative: Under this initiative, the management of some public schools is outsourced to small-scale non-public entities. These entities are required under the contract to raise education quality in accordance with KPIs and quality benchmarks.
 Education performance benchmarking for primary school students (Hassen): This program involves a number of measures for analysis and development of the educational process.
 Neighborhood clubs: This initiative involves the creation of specialized community clubs within public schools to develop skills and hobbies.
 Ertiqa initiative, which will measure participation of Saudi parents in the education of their children, along with enablement of society in general to support partnership towards attainment of a knowledge-based society.
 Operation of school canteens by productive families: The project aims to support productive families and to provide healthy meals to students.
 Project for development of education statistics and creation of databases on graduates and scientific research.
The Ministry of Education has won several regional and international awards. MOEis Faris electronic system won the World Summit for Information Society Award. In addition, the Tawasul Center won the Insight Organizationis award for the best communication center in the Middle East
The Ministry of Education looks forward to making further achievements in sustainable development, in line with the Kingdomis ambitious Vision 2030. The Ministry is pursuing further cooperation with Arab, Islamic and other countries with the aim of streamlining efforts and to put into practice the global citizenry concept, in accordance with the SDGs.
Ministry of Education
 Building blocks of education curriculum standards

general objectives
Ensure consistency between disciplinary frameworks and education curricula standards
3
6
well as enforcement requirements
Structure of education curricula standards
Objectives of the National Framework of Education Curricula Provide an intellectual perspective 1 4 Provide guiding principles for for development of education education curricula standards curricula that meet society needs and aspirations, based on the latest educational trends
Provide a vision for educational 	25 Specify roles and mandates of curricula standards and related directly relevant stakeholders as 

Structure of education curricula standards
Curricular priority
Curricular priority expresses national orientations and major themes of priority to society, which must necessarily be present in learning fields over the coming years. These priorities guide the process of developing, implementation and assessment of education standards, through systemic integration into all education fields across all levels and grades. This will be pursued through well oriented quality education expertise that includes both knowledge and values, which together act in synergy and integrate with the knowledge structure of individual learning fields.

58	59

productive half.

Women in Saudi Vision 2030
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has promoted women's standing in development through capacity development and harnessing of womenis capabilities in order to leverage their local and international roles. Vision 2030 dedicates the necessary efforts for enablement of women in community and economic development, as well as in raising women's stature as an effective player at all levels. Vision 2030 sets a separate strategic objective to increase women's participation in the labor market. The Vision further ensures women's rights in the fields of health, education, protection, employment and in being provided with a decent living standard. This is much in alignment with SDGs objectives and targets.
Saudi Arabia has taken several measures that aim to enable women to hold leading positions in the government. Earlier on, women became members of the Shura Council (Consultative Council) with a Royal Order issued in 20132 to reserve 20% of the Council's seats for female members. Women were also elected to municipal board councils and several women were appointed to top-level positions in the government and private sectors. Saudi Arabia is inching closer to achieve its goal of gender parity of wages. One noteworthy progress has been the rise in women's participation in the labor market from 12% in 2009 to 18% in 2017. Vision 2030 aims to raise this share to 25% by 2020.3

Womenis participation in development in Saudi Arabia
Public sector
Private sector
Politics
Education
Economy and trade
National transformation
Women hold several leading positions, such as vice minister, chairperson of Councils and deputy minister
Women hold CEO positions of leading banks and in several companies
Women account for 20% of Shura Council members

Active participation in municipal elections, having run for over 19 seats (2016)
A first ever appointment of a woman as Dean of Student Affairs, Taif University
Allowing women to pursue business without consent of guardian 
Women account for 20% of private sectoris investments in 2017
127,000 new commercial registrations issued for women in 2017
Over 450,000 jobs will be created for women

The launch of the National Observatory of Women's Participation in Development is another manifestation of the Kingdom's efforts to foster conditions that are conducive to women's participation in forging ahead with the development process. The observatory is a think tank that seeks to monitor Saudi women's participation in development at local and international levels, along several themes encompassing economic, educational, regulatory, health and social fields. As such, the observatory serves as a reference resource for decision-makers and charitable societies and associations and institutions, through compiling of benchmark, indicators relevant to women's role in development. In addition, several initiatives were launched with both direct and indirect intent to enable women in all fields. Key among these are:
Launching of an electronic portal that allows job seeking women to register and obtain information on eligibility criteria in all provinces.
Development of production schemes for social security recipients that are fit for work, with the aim of raising the volume of sales from USD 96 million (SAR 360 million) to USD 666 million (SAR 2.5 billion).
Launching of a program to support the transport of working women (Wusool).
Development of mechanisms that enable female members of vulnerable groups to make use of qualification programs that provide employment from home at the end of training. 
Launching a training program aimed at providing professional support to needy women and orphans by equipping them with the necessary skills to enter the labor market. 
Providing affordable childcare services to working women.
Launching of a program to support the hosting of children of working women (Qurrah).
Support of women 
Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz Fund for Women's Development
Provides support for women to promote their role in community 
AlNahda Women Charitable Society
Provides financial support to women to protect them from 
Charitable societies and associations and non-profit organizations offer considerable moral and material support to Saudi women in all areas. These institutions and organizations seek to promote women's participation in the labor market and conduct events and activities that create opportunities for partnerships, information sharing and increased public awareness. Most notable among these institutions and organizations are:
building and advancement.poverty. It also offers training 
opportunities to develop skills 
National family security programrequired for employment and runs 
campaigns to raise awareness 
The program seeks to promote as to the importance of women family security, safety and unity, participation in municipal elections. through protection and support AlNahda provides portals for programs, awareness promotion women to share experience in and forging of professional various fields. partnerships with specialists, 
on family as a basis for unity of society.
Deem Al-Manahil Fund 
(Princess Madawi' fund for women development)
The fund serves as a business incubator to encourage Saudi women through offering of technical, management and financial support in entrepreneurial activities.
business plans. Over 25 successful projects in women entrepreneurs have been carried out by SDB in various business fields.
Mawada society
Aims to reduce divorce rates and the impacts associated with divorce, through offering of courses on planning for marriage, as well as providing legal services to divorced women.
government and private institutions Social Development Bank and international organizations, to Social Development Bank  create a safe family environment in (SDB) provides financial support to Saudi Arabia. The program focuses women for project management and Women account for 49.6% of the total Saudi population, but have an extremely low economic participation rate of just 19%, compared to 64.6% for men. This wide disparity underscores the need to make further efforts in order to harness the full potential and capabilities of women to achieve inclusive and sustainable development in the Kingdom. Towards this end, the Kingdom aims to raise women participation to 25% by 2020. This will be achieved through a number of plans and programs that are being assessed in terms of likely impact by the National Observatory of Women's Participation in Development, in association with stakeholders.4Family Council

The Royal approval of the organizational set-up of the Family Council testifies to the great importance that the 
Kingdom attaches to serve women and families in particular and the SDGs in general. Chaired by the Minister of 
Labor and Social Affairs, the Family Council is made up of 16 members, half of them are women. Members of the Council hold a minimum of grade 15 civil service position, or the equivalent thereof. Members are appointed under a decision of the Council of Ministers, based on nomination of candidates by the Council chair. The Council is vested with an autonomous financial and administrative status and has a wide spectrum mandate, such that will allow the Council both financial independence and quick decision-making. The Council aims to promote and advance family stature and role of family in society advancement, along with maintaining a strong and cohesive family that attends to the welfare of its children, with due adherence to religious and moral values as well as high ideals. The Council has a set of family relevant strategic objectives that seek to promote the family's role in society and ensure that family rights are observed. The Council branches out into three committees all of which are relevant to the SDGs. These are: children's committee, women's committee and seniorsi committee. Key among the Family Councilis mandate are:2

Wafa institution for women's rights 
Wafa was founded to promote awareness of society as to women's rights, through conducting of specialized studies and research work and through the creation of a legal advice center.
The Kingdom launched several other initiatives that are directly relevant to SDG 5. Among these are achieving gender equality in civil service; enablement of female leaders; and improved women representation in decisionmaking positions. A trend of gender parity is emerging in general education enrolment. This corresponds with percentage distribution of the population by gender. In general and based on gender equality principle, the Kingdom's Basic Law of Governance prohibits discrimination against women and bans all forms of discrimination. 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has acceded to a number of international agreements and conventions, including the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. As part of the Kingdomis efforts in this regard, a decree was issued to put into operation the law on protection from all forms of abuse. The Royal Decree provides for furnishing of immediate assistance and to make every possible effort to provide shelter as well as social, psychological and health care to victims of abuse. It also prescribes that culprits should be brought to justice and that convicted persons must be punished. The decree further calls for promotion of awareness as to the concept and legal consequences of abuse and addresses negative forms of conduct that could trigger incidence of abuse. In addition, the Royal Decree calls for development of scientific and enforcement mechanisms to deal with cases of abuse.1
Prepare a draft family strategy and follow up on implementation and periodic assessment of the strategy.
Offer feedback on national reports on family (children, women, senior people) and propose relevant solutions.
Encourage participation by charitable societies and associations and the private sector in paying attention to family issues and how to address such issues.
Promote awareness of society as to family issues and how they can be addressed.
Promote awareness of Islamic rights and duties of family members.
Work to get government and charitable societies and associations that are engaged in family relevant tasks to undertake their roles and to achieve their goals, with stress on coordination between these agencies in order to form a shared vision.
Submit proposals with respect to legislations relating to family.
Identify problems and risks faced by the family and work towards development of relevant solutions.
Offer opinions on national reports, studies, queries and recommendations issued by regional and international bodies and organizations on family relevant activities and programs; propose relevant viewpoints and recommendations.
Develop a database on family issues
Cooperate with regional and international bodies and organizations concerned with family issues and take part, through specialized committees, in conferences and symposiums that are held to discuss family issues.
Submit an annual report on family issues to the president of the Council of Ministers, covering the Council's achievements and the obstacles it faces. 
Cooperate with local and international research centers to conduct research and studies on family issues.
"In order to preserve the unique environmental character of the region, environmental sustainability laws and mechanisms will be developed. Natural resources will be conserved in accordance with the best practices and standards in place globally.
Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
Mohammad bin Salman
67

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has seen remarkable progress in its environment, water and agriculture sectors, due to continued government support. In this respect, the Ministry of Environment, Water and Agriculture (MEWA) has made great strides, as can be seen in the progress made in these sectors. Particular examples of this progress include achievement of water and food security, increased efficiency of different services, environmental conservation and innovative solutions adopted to strengthen sustainability of these sectors, thus moving on to give form to Vision 2030.
MEWA has put in place an integrated water supply plan as commensurate with the growing demand and to meet the needs of the Kingdom's population. The plan involves several water infrastructure projects, such as water wells, dams, treatment plants, water transport pipelines, house connections and wastewater networks.
MEWA has always endeavored to make use of rain water as a source for drinking water, replenishment of groundwater reservoirs and for agricultural purposes. Towards this end, (508) dams were built, with a total storage capacity of (2.2) billion m3, along with (40) dams currently under construction. Accordingly, the combined storage capacity of existing and planned dams amounts to a total of (2.5) billion m3 including (58) dams reserved for drinking water supply. Currently, MEWA is in the process of implementing an initiative to promote surface water resources through the construction of 1,000 dams. In the context of this initiative, a project was tendered out for a study to construct 60 dams in various parts of the Kingdom, with (24) of these dams reserved for drinking water supply. This initiative comes within context of the National Transformation Plan and Vision 2030. Design storage capacity of all these dams is expected to reach a total of 4.5 billion cubic meters.1
MEWA seeks to adopt an approach whereby emphasis is placed on water demand management, rather than merely satisfaction of demand. Under this approach, which keeps pace with relevant global trends, a good water management involves the initiation of measures to reduce water demand. Key among these measures is raising the efficiency of water supply to consumers, along with awareness promotion and conservation. This approach calls for sending clear messages to consuming sectors, such as agriculture, to conserve on the use of irrigation water, as well as abstention from policies that are bound to lead to increased water consumption.

Vision 2030 strategic objectives

In 2015, water demand 

The Abdul Latif Jameel World Water and Food Security Lab (J-WAFS) and Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) are important platforms for promotion of scientific research and launch of new technologies, policies and programs that are geared to develop solutions for a plethora of current challenges faced by todayis food and water systems worldwide. J-WAFS J-PAL was founded in 2014 in partnership with Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Saudi Arabia is a leading world producer of desalinated water, with a share of 16.5% of total worldwide production. The Saline Water Conversion Corporation (SWCC) owns the worldis 3 largest water desalination plants, including Ras Al Khair desalination and power plant which produces 1.1 million m3 of water per day.

National Water Strategy 2030
MEWA developed a reference framework for the water sector which includes a comprehensive water strategy that seeks to integrate water sector directions, policy, legislations and practices at the national level into the main objective of addressing the key challenges and restructuring of the sector. Action in this regard covers several elements, including involvement of stakeholders, assessment of the sectoris current situation through a set of factors, such as water demand, water resources, sector operations and enabling factors. The framework of action determines supply-demand gaps and sets out sector economics under different scenarios.
Figures
 and Statistics
61%
Share of desalinated water in total 
distributed water 
2015
39%
   Share of water produced from wells 
and dams in total 
distributed water 
2015
1335
million m3
   Volume of desalinated water 
actually produced in 
2016
29
Water desalination plants in the 
Kingdom
During 2015, the quantity of distributed water totaled 3,025 million m3, with an increase of 5% over 2014 level. The water, mainly produced from sea water desalination and groundwater wells and dams, was distributed to various provinces of the Kingdom, based on relevant needs, through the public water system.
0

Average per capita Share in total water Volume of Water water consumption consumption consumption (million 
	(liters/day)	m3)

Out of its firm belief in scientific research and technology development, the Saline Water Conversion Corp (SWCC) has established a specialized research institute to conduct research studies in the field of water desalination. The institute is located next to one of the biggest desalination and power generation plants in the Jubail province, on the eastern coast of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Research & Development Center was established as part of the 
Saudi American Cooperation Agreement. It was inaugurated in 1987, SWCC established its Research Institute at Al-Jubail, KSA, as part of the Saudi American Cooperation Agreement. It was inaugurated in 1987 under the name of Research & Development Center. The institute made big strides in the field of research and development, contributing to improvements in desalination technology, water treatment techniques, increasing efficiency in operations and maintenance and reducing production cost in the operating stations.
\0xECThe Kingdom has invested a great deal to maintain its production levels in order to promote the stability of global energy markets, 
in turn promoting global economic growth and stability.
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques
King Salman bin Abdulaziz
73


Saudi Arabia: From oil to renewable energy

The energy sector has played a crucial role in achieving Saudi Arabia's SDGs and has contributed significantly to increasing GDP volume. For example, the oil sector posted a GDP share of 43% in 2017. Enormous investments in the development of infrastructure of the electricity sector, 
 Proportion of population  with access to electricity  services in different regions
of the Kingdom is 99%
have contributed effectively to improvement of the standard of living and in the delivery of electricity to all regions of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, including villages and hamlets, with a 99% delivery rate to the residential sector. In a bid to ensure continued development of the energy sector, the Kingdom seeks to strengthen energy security through cooperation, studies, local and international partnerships, regional connectivity, along with capacity building, knowledge, development of national skills and promotion of innovation. Other essential factors to ensure continuity include a forward look for open, efficient, well-functioning, competitive and stable energy markets and to build an energy future characterized by moderate prices, reliability, sustainability and the use of all energy sources and technologies. It should be indicated that the Kingdom has recently launched several largescale projects to develop an environmentally-friendly renewable energy sector, with an aim to exploit the Kingdomis competitive advantages, ensure energy security in the future and make energy available at affordable and adequate prices for producers and consumers alike.1
Renewable energy and energy efficiency
The Kingdom has paid great attention to the development of renewable energy, particularly solar, wind and nuclear power. It has launched several programs, projects and initiatives in this regard, as follows:

74
Programs, projects and initiatives are linked to Vision 2030, as follows:
Grow contribution of renewables to national energy mix
Under the National Transformation Program, the Kingdom has set a target to produce 3.45 GW of renewable energy by 2020, thus raising its share to 4% of total energy produced. In the same vein, Vision 2030 targets the production of 9.5 GW of renewable energy by 2030 equivalent to 10% of the total energy produced in the Kingdom.
Increasing the competitiveness of the energy sector
The National Renewable Energy Program was created to encourage local and international companies to take part in the Kingdomis renewable energy projects. All projects under the Program enjoy 100% financial autonomy. In addition, energy produced will be based on an \0xECindependent power producer model and will be carried out under the framework of purchase agreements of 25 years for solar projects and 20 years for wind projects.

Figures & Statistics5
 Wind power projects include: Saudi Aramcois Turaif 2.7 MW project and Huraymla 2.7 MW wind power project
 Fuel use efficiency at SEC Saudi Electricity Company and private sector power plants averaged 38.8% up to 2017. Work is underway to raise this level to over 40%.
 Currently, Saudi Arabia has the following solar power projects: Concentrated solar power 1 MW project in Tabuk
Solar panels of 2 MW at King 
Abdullah University of Science & 
Technology (KAUST)
Solar panels of 5 MW at King 
Abdullah Petroleum Studies and 
Research Center (KAPSARC)
1 Ministry of Energy, Industry and Mineral Resources
 Sakaka Project
Capacity: 300 MW
Will supply power to about 40,000 houses by 2019
Al-Midra Tower parking project in Dhahran generates up to 10.5 MW of power using solar energy. 
 Houses using solar power 
In 2017, 1.3% of total houses in the Kingdom used solar power. Hail province stood first with 2.84% of houses powered by solar energy.
75
Saudi Energy Efficiency Center
 Centeris objective
As the agency entrusted with the task of conserving and raising energy efficiency in the Kingdom, the Saudi Energy Efficiency Center (SEEC) is responsible for coordinating the efforts of government and non- government agencies in this regard. Active for over six years now, SEEC has developed a national program to conserve and raise energy efficiency. The program, entitled the Saudi Energy Efficiency Program, is designed to increase efficiency in three main sectors that together account for over 90% of national energy consumption: buildings, industry and land transportation. The program is an integrated endeavor based on the consensus of all public and private stakeholders and pursues a mechanism of full cooperation and coordination among the agencies involved. It is principled on respect of jurisdiction of individual agencies and focused on addressing the challenges they face in accelerating the implementation of energy efficiency programs. SEEC pursues these objectives by providing enablers and raising the effectiveness of the operations of agencies, as well as by promoting international best practices.6
Local energy consumption
 Three main sectors that together account for over 90% of local energy consumption

76
Saudi Energy Efficiency Program is based on an integrated system of operation with three main pillars
Human 
 Development resources and development or implementation capacity development 
Saudi Energy Efficiency Center - Operation system
Principles: These include program management mechanism, work methodology pursued and how to involve all stakeholders in development and implementation of activities, along with governance of roles.
Development and implementation: This includes mechanisms for development of specifications, standards and enablers that are necessary to put into action the activities associated with different programs which are bound to contribute to strengthening of the energy market, through creation of investment opportunities that promote competition for quality.
Human development / capacity development: This includes awareness promotion for different program activities, along with qualification of human resources for the energy efficiency market.

SEEC Work methodology
 Bottom-up approach
 Promote the principle of responsibility and ownership
77
Saudi Energy Efficiency Center
Industrial sector
  Develop a rigorous mechanism for monitoring the implementation of specifications and standards of locally manufactured and imported equipment to ensure compliance with energy efficiency requirements
  An initiative to increase the efficiency of energy consumption in iron, cement and petrochemical industries, in both existing and new plants 
Set target levels of energy efficiency for existing plants by 2019
80%
Develop new Saudi energy 
efficiency standards share of steel, cement and 
     petrochemical industries in Encourage new plants to achieve total energy consumption of the energy efficiency based on industrial sector international standards

Land Transport sector
 Initiative on establishing requirements for selling new passengers cars in the local market
Transportation is the third largest energy consuming sector in the Kingdom, with 21% of total domestic consumption of primary energy. Land transportation accounts for about 90% of the sectoris energy consumption.
 Initiative on establishing standard specifications for energy efficiency of tires
  Apply the energy economy card on light vehicles and approve the fuel economy standard for light vehicles
2012
2020
Million vehicles
 15
Saudi Energy Efficiency Center
Buildings sector
 Saudi building code (energy efficiency)
 Modern buildings
Buildings use 29% of total domestic consumption of primary energy and about 75% of total electricity produced. Air-conditioning units account for about 65% of this consumption. As thermal insulation can help reduce energy consumption of air-conditioning units by as much as 30%, a high priority has been given to improving the energy efficiency of air conditioners and enforcing thermal insulation of buildings.
 Proposed scheme for energy intensity certification of existing and new buildings
  Initiative for the renovation of government buildings and incentivizing the private sector to invest in energy efficiency
 Develop and update standard specifications for small and large capacity air conditioners  Initiative for highly efficient air conditioners

Figures & statistics
2012
	2018	0
for water heaters
Minimum energy efficiency ratio of small capacity air conditioners has been augmented to international specificationsi level. As a result, a 37% saving was made in energy consumption of air conditioners covered, compared to the situation prior to updating of specifications in 2012.
Saudi Energy Efficiency Center

78	79



Labor Market in Saudi Arabia
Demographic data indicate that the Kingdom had to meet labor market needs through recruitment of foreign labor in order to keep pace with economic growth. Between 1980-2017, the country's population saw a three-fold increase, to 32.6 million, with non-Saudi population making up the largest increase, having grown by eight-fold compared to a three-fold increase for Saudi population. The disparity in growth of total Saudi and non-Saudi population is in conformity with the variation of economic growth momentum. It should be noted that educational institutions require a longer time span for capacity building of national resources in order to contribute to advancement of the development process and to keep abreast with the accelerating pace of economic growth. However, education output and labor force developments over the past few years point to a strong trend to bridge the gap and to make more reliance on Saudi manpower, particularly in the private sector.
Theme 2 of Vision 2030 envisages a thriving economy, whereby strategic objectives and initiatives undertaken by government agencies will seek to achieve a thriving economy with rewarding opportunities, effective investment, along with attractive competitiveness and a well-exploited position.
Towards attainment of these objectives, a package of programs was developed to translate the Vision into action and to forge ahead with the realization of the objectives. Targets were also developed for individual programs. The targets involve several levels, including national macro economy, such as GDP, employment in the private sector, contribution to local content, balance of payments, government revenues and non-government investment.
Vision 2030 Targets
Reduce unemploymentRaise private sector from 11.6% to 7% GDP share to 65%
  Raise proportion of non-oil Increase value of Public exports to a minimum of 50% Investment Fund assets to over of non-oil GDPUSD 1.8 trillion (SAR 7 trillion)
Saudi Vision 2030 takes a central role in shifting gear of the oil-dependent Saudi economy, moving it into a diversified economy that is inclusive of all sectors. The Kingdom makes strenuous efforts to proceed with plans and strategies that will ensure increased employment, along with readiness of the labor force to enter the labor market with higher efficiency and better capabilities. In addition, the plans and programs are geared to raise GDP through focus on several sectors, including:

82
Relevant Vision 2030 Strategic Objectives
SDG 8 is in harmony with several Vision 2030 strategic objectives that have considerable impact on economic progress, GDP growth and generation of job opportunities.
    Localize technologies and  knowledge through the Public
Investment Fund Improve equity of access to education
 Develop our brightest minds in priority fields
 Ensure alignment of educational outputs with labor market needs
  Expand vocational training to provide for labor market needs
Improve readiness of youth to enter the labor market
 Increase women participation in the labor market Enable integration of people with
disabilities in the labor market
 Nurture and support the innovation & entrepreneurship culture Grow SME contribution to the economy
Grow productive families contribution to the  Improve living conditions economyfor expats
      Improve work  Enable the development conditions for expatsof the tourism sector

Partnerships
In partnership with other sectors, government agencies have adopted a large number of initiatives that are bound to promote growth of the economy and production and generate job opportunities for various levels of capabilities and skills. Key among these agencies are:
	 Public Investment Fund (PIF)	 Technical and Vocational 
	 Ministry of Labor and Social 	Education and Training Corporation 
	Development (MLSD)	(TVTC)
	 Ministry of Commerce and Investment 	 Saudi Commission for Tourism 
	(MCI)	and National Heritage (SCTH)
83
Figures & Statistics
Saudi Commission for Tourism and National Heritage (SCTH)1
SAR billion (USD 45.33 billion) of total investment in tourism sector
SAR billion (USD 31.47 billion) tourism sector contribution to GDP by 2020
Cooperation agreements with Kingdom-wide initiatives to develop cities, partnerspay due attention to heritage and support 
the financing of tourism
Million jobs in tourism sector by 2020
The Kingdomis tourism sector gives attention to stimulation of micro economic activities in the area of traditional crafts with an aim to promote economic dynamism. In this regard, SCTH launched the national program for development of handicrafts and manual trades (BARE). The program led to the following achievements:
 3883
 1007
		25
  National registry of craftsmen 	75
    Production of 75 short documentaries on Saudi crafts, 
along with BARE contributions
		7
Operation of 
creativity centers for crafts 
Training of 1007 craftsmen and craftswomen 	42
Participation in providing finance to 42 craftsmen and craftswomen through program partners
		51
 Partnership with 51 malls as vending and marketing outlets
Participation in 25 local and international exhibitions 	820
 Support participation of about 820 craftsmen and craftswomen in events conducted in provinces
		50
Approval of 50 models for presents of Saudi crafts
		8647	170	 12
	Launch of over 8647 tweets 	170 prize winners in crafts	Promotion workshops in 
and messages through social provinces
media 147
Participation in 147 exhibitions for consumer products
1 Saudi Commission for Tourism and National Heritage

Ministry of Commerce and Investment (MCI)1
Seeking to facilitate and streamline the economic development process, MCI upgrades and develops its activities in order to provide its services in an electronic way, as this will save users' time and effort, leading to positive impacts on their economic activities and businesses. In this regard, MCI managed to reduce the time needed for issue of a new commercial registration to just 180 seconds. In the process of launching a new electronic service, MCI takes into account that the service should be flexible enough to make room for future upgrading once new requirements emerge in the future. The service should also be linkable to other government organizations to allow for integration in service provision. On the other hand, MCI carries out regular reviews of economic activity regulations and policies and seeks to develop these policies and regulations to bring them into conformity with Vision 2030 as well as sustainable development goals. MCI ultimate objective is to develop and increase private sector's GDP contribution through removal of obstacles of private sector's progress and 
advancement. 	180
Seconds to issue 
Ministry of Labor and Social 	 a new commercial 
Development (MLSD)2	 registration
MLSD pursues four pillars to realize its strategic objectives:
 Attractive labor 	 A growing and 	 Enabled and 	 Sustainable job market	influential non-profit 	cohesive society	opportunities
sector
These pillars aim to realize and furnish adequate job opportunities for all, with no exceptions and to create a safe and attractive work environment. They also seek to improve work conditions for expatriate labor, attract world-class talents to work through services and social protection programs and to promote the role of non-profit organizations.

Key Targets 2020
National Tranformation Program 2.0	Baseline	Target
01 Share of Saudi women in total manpower	17%	25%
02 Increase employment of disabled persons who are able to work	7.7%	15%
03 Increase compliance with wage protection system	50%	80%
04 Raise the Kingdomis ranking in the \0xECBest Countries to Live in for Expats	65	50
05 Raise the Kingdomis ranking in the Global Talent Competitiveness Index	39	37
06 Increase sale volume of productive families that receive support from 	SAR 360 million	SAR 2.5 billion the Social Development Bank
07 GDP share of non-profit sector 	0.2%	 0.6%
08 Increase proportion of beneficiaries who opt out from financial support	1%	12%
09 Increase the number of volunteers	23,000	300,000
10 Per capita economic value of volunteering	0.6 SAR	15 SAR
	Baseline 2016 	USD 96 million	USD 666.67 
million
1 Ministry of Commerce and Investment
2 Ministry of Labor and Social Development

84	85

	In addition, MLSD launched a national volunteering portal to promote 	1
	awareness of the importance of voluntary work. It is the objective of MLSD to 	Promotion of Partnerships
increase the number of volunteers to 300,000 by 2020. The following graph shows the number of volunteers by field and economic value in 2017.	
In partnership with other sectors, government agencies have adopted a large number of initiatives that are designed to promote economic growth, boost production and generate job opportunities to people of various skill and capability levels. Key among these agencies are:
Public Investment Fund (PIF)
PIF is the government's investment arm. PIF looks forward to becoming the largest sovereign fund worldwide through building of diversified leading investment portfolios at local and international levels. The focus of PIF operations is on providing support to development endeavors and economic diversification, through effective local and international long-term investment, with an aim to maximize sustainable revenues. 
PIF owns 6 investment portfolios:
 Investment portfolio in Saudi companies
 Investment portfolio targeted to growing and development of promising sectors
 Investment portfolio in Saudi real estate and infrastructure development projects
 Portfolio of large scale Saudi projects
 Portfolio of strategic international investments
 Portfolio of varied international investments
Through PIF, Saudi Arabia seeks to make a stable increase of GDP, diversify sources of income, preserve large Saudi companies, create new investment opportunities, scale up innovation and technology, create job opportunities for young men and women, raise productivity, enter into and develop large scale government projects, promote and grow tourism and support SMEs.
In addition, the Kingdom seeks to achieve the following objectives, through PIF:
Maximize the Public Investment Fund's assets
Launch new sectors
PIF program looks forward to launching and developing new sectors, through the incorporation of new companies and development of large scale projects, such as infrastructure and real estate development. The program seeks to raise PIF's share in these new sectors to 20% of total PIF assets and to increase the sectorsi GDP share to USD 8 billion (SAR 30 billion) by 2020.
Build strategic economic partnerships
PIF Program aims to develop PIFis assets in international markets as well as grow its role both regionally and globally. Through the Program, PIFis international assets are expected to reach 25% of its assets under management by 2020. Moreover, the program is expected to contribute to attracting USD 5.33 billion (SAR 20 billion) in foreign direct investments, through partnerships.
Localize edge technology & knowledge
PIF program seeks to support the localization of technology and know-how through new sectors, as well as strategic partnerships. In addition, the program seeks to stimulate research and development efforts across national companies. In this context, the program aims to create 11,000 high- skilled jobs locally by 2020 and to invest USD 56 billion (SAR 210 billion).
PIFis assets have increased to USD 224 billion (SAR 840 billion) in the third quarter 2017, from USD 152 billion (SAR 570 billion) in 2015. The Program aims to increase PIFis assets to USD 400 billion (SAR 1.5 trillion) by 2020.
Chaired by His Royal Highness Prince Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, Crown Prince and Deputy Prime Minister, PIF Board of Directors dedicates its efforts and activities to promote PIF standing, as part of the broader effort to drive national economic transformation and achieve positive and sustainable change in Saudi Arabia. Specifically, PIF is actively contributing towards domestic economic development, while expanding its international assets by investing in global sectors and markets, establishing strategic partnerships and launching large-scale programs and initiatives. PIF will aim to maximize sustainable returns in line with the ambitious goals and objectives, so that PIF will grow into one of the largest and most impactful sovereign wealth funds in the world.
1 The Public Investment Fund
86	87


Performance indicators of PIF program

Performance Index


Target (2020)


Performance Index

Target (2020)

	Contribution to gross domestic 	Non-governmental investments
	product (GDP)	SAR 170 billion USD 45.33 billion - Baseline of 2016 SAR 110 billion (USD 29.33 billion)	 Direct and indirect cumulative	SAR 630 billion - USD 168 billion
In real terms; direct contribution
 local investments through the
	6.3% of total GDP - Baseline of 4.4% (2016)	PIF Program
Balance of payments
	 Jobs Average over the period between	SAR 47 billion - USD 12.53 billion
20,000 direct jobs
9,000 indirect jobs
256,000 construction jobs
created2018 and 2020
Impact of PIF investments on
	household consumption rate	+1.4 pp
Share of local content Impact of PIF investment on the
SAR 50 billion  USD 13.33 billion - Baseline of 2017 SAR 32 billion (USD 8.53 billion)
2.3% of total local content - Baseline of 1.7% (2017)
	Direct contribution of assets and investmentsInflation rate	+0.7 pp

Technical and Vocational Education and Training Corporation 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training Corporation(TVTC) qualifies young Saudi men and women for the labor market through its nation-wide colleges with an aim to provide training and qualification opportunities through diploma and college level programs in several technical fields. These include management, electronics, electrical, civil, architectural, computer and mechanical disciplines. The aim is to meet labor market needs and replacement of jobs currently occupied by expatriate workers. In addition, TVTC offers cooperative training programs to young male and female graduates following satisfaction of qualification requirements, through private sector partners. The following charts show TVTC targets and actual achievements for 2016, by sex and discipline.
Technical Colleges, branches and International 
Technical Colleges (Male)
Secondary Technical Institutes
Number of annual admissions 
Number of annual admissions 
Annual targetAnnual target
Total achievedTotal achieved
Annual targetAnnual target
	116,643	Total achieved18,157	Total achieved
Annual targetAnnual target
Total achievedTotal achieved
Technical Colleges and International Technical Colleges (Females)
On-the-job training and the national system of joint training & vocational military training
Number of annual admissions 
Number of annual trainees 
	Annual target3,050	Annual target
Total achieved3,866Total achieved
Total annual graduates 
Annual targetAnnual target
	21,549	Total achievedTotal achieved
Annual target
Total achieved
Ministry of Labor and Social Development Annual Report- 2017
88
Higher technical institutes of strategic partnerships 
Number of annual trainees 
10,000Annual target 9,943Total achieved
Total annual graduates 
Annual target
Total achieved
Training courses (Business center)
Number of annual trainees 

E-Training program
Number of annual trainees 
80,000Annual target
Total achieved
Ministry of Labor and Social Development Annual Report- 2017
Girlsi Welfare and Women Prisons
Number of annual trainees 
1,200	Annual target
Total achieved
Annual target
Total achieved
Industrial vocational training program in prisons
Number of annual trainees 

Private sector training program
Number of annual trainees 
Annual target
183,691Total achieved
Total annual graduates 
Annual target
	180,799	Total achieved
89

Labor market and employment
According to labor statistics, private sector manpower totaled 9,686,974 workers by the end of 2017. Non-Saudi workers accounted for 7,907,514 workers, or 81.63% of total manpower, including 97.42% male and 2.58% female workers. Saudi workforce totaled 1,779,460 workers, or 18.37% of total private sector manpower, including 68.26% male and 31.74% female workers.
Saudization rate went up by 
1.29% in the fourth quarter 2017, with the number of Saudi workers growing up by 92,677 workers, compared to the third quarter of the same year
2017 
Non-Saudi
7,907,514 Saudi
1,779,460
Private sector workforce
18.37%
Private sector workforce
9,686,974
Third quarter 2017
9,873,150
1,686,783
8,186,367
17.08%
1.29% 
Saudization rate
Private sector wo
92,677 
  Saudis Workforce rkforce
 Fourth quarter 2017
9,686,974
1,779,460
7,907,514
18.37%





Saudi Non-Saudi


Saudization rate


	-278,853	-186,176
 Drop in non-Saudi Drop in workforce workforce	size

Ministry of Labor and Social Development Annual Report- 2017
 The following figures illustrate labor market changes in 2017 and Saudization rate over the past few years
	Saudis8,424,370	8,345,001	8,186,367
                                                                                         7,907,514 Non-Saudis 
Average Saudization

Manpower developments and progress of womenis participation in the private sector
Manpower distribution in the private sector, by main economic activity, sex and nationality, has undergone significant changes, in particular among Saudi nationals. Between 2005 and 2015, the total number of workers in the private sector increased by two folds, while the sectoris total number of Saudi workers increased by about three folds. This means that Saudi manpower became more attractive during that period. Another noteworthy development is that the number of male workers in the private sector, including Saudi and non-Saudi manpower, saw a two-fold increase, while the female workforce in the sector increased 16 times, compared to a six-fold increase in the number of nonSaudi female workers. As such, Saudi women accounted for the largest share in the increase of Saudi manpower participation in the private sector.

Digital transformation and economic growth
Saudi Arabia has experienced a quantum leap in the digital transformation of government services, by facilitating access to services and raising GDP and employment over the long term. Government agencies are engaged in upgrading their services to keep pace with the national digital transformation under Vision 2030, which dedicates a strategic objective to the development of the digital economy. Forging partnerships with the private sector, government agencies are in the process of developing an advanced digital economy. This refers to an economy that mainly operates through digital technology, driven by innovations. The objective here covers aspects relevant to the development of digital technologies in the manufacturing and services sectors, along with the social impacts involved. The objective also focuses on digital technology innovations and contribution of the digital economy in GDP and employment.
Government agencies have developed a number of programs and initiatives that contribute to the development of digital content and the digital economy. A key player is the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT), with the following initiatives: Digital transformation unit: This program seeks to build a digital society, a digital economy and a digital nation, in such a way as to ensure transformation into a digital society that is based on launching digital portals to enrich interaction and effective involvement of society. This should ultimately contribute to improved experience by citizens, residents, tourists and investors. It will also lead to a digital economy and help upgrade industries, improve competitiveness and bring positive impacts on the economy through the generation of knowledge-based jobs, provision of better services to users and creating a digital nation that promotes creativity by attracting local and international investments and partnerships in all aspects of technology and innovation. Another MCIT initiative is the e-government program which seeks to raise public sector productivity and efficiency and enable better and streamlined services to individuals and businesses. The program will also help increase investment returns and provide information in an accurate and timely manner.

90	91



Saudi Arabia is keen on developing and upgrading its infrastructure and transportation system, with over USD 14.4 billion (SAR 54 billion) allocated for this purpose in the 2018 state budget. Significant attention is also given to physical and digital infrastructure, along with support for promising industries, regional and international connectivity and support of innovation, research and technology. Some strategic objectives of Vision 2030 are broadly consistent with SDG 9. Among these are:

Infrastructure
The National Transformation Program (NTP) includes several initiatives related to the operation and maintenance of infrastructure projects in partnership with the private sector. NTP initiatives also seek to strengthen the Kingdom's international connectivity and trade and industrial value chains by improving the performance of the logistical services sector, along with improved private sector competitiveness. Key among these initiatives are:
 Development of integrated 	 Development of airports to transport sector strategy	sustain economic growth 
 Regulatory reform of Saudi  Development of road ports, Saudi Ports  Authority 	networks
and related institutions
Work is underway for construction of expressways of over 14,000 km in length, at a total cost of about USD 12.27 billion (SAR 46 billion) (2017).
Existing road length (km) up to the end of fiscal year 2017, as per engineering classification1
	Type	length (km)
Single carriageway
49,713
Dual carriageway
13,155
Expressway
5,393
Aqabat roads
264
	Total	68,525
It should be noted that King Abdulaziz Project for Public Transport in Riyadh which is due to be completed by the end of 2018, is one of the largest infrastructure projects worldwide. Designed for a maximum capacity of 4.5 million passengers per day, the project includes a network of trains along six lines with a total length of 179 km, along with a bus network of 22 lines with a total length of 1,900 km. Further details on the project will be highlighted under SDG 11 "Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.
1 Ministry of Transport Yearbook, 1438/1439H
95
Over the past decade, more than 106 billion USD (SAR 400 billion) have been spent on transport infrastructure, resulting in the construction of a robust transport network, covering all parts of the Kingdom


Digital transformation


Digital transformation and the introduction of electronic portals for government agencies have been among the top priorities of Vision 2030. Towards this end, digital transformation unit has been set up to accelerate transition to the digital economy, with an aim to improve quality of services. The unit aims to achieve the Vision's target to position the Kingdom as a leading digital country with a diversified economy, through involvement with various government and private bodies. Cross-sector enabling policies will be pursued and portals and vital infrastructure will be set up for this purpose. It should be noted that penetration rate of advanced mobile telecommunication networks in populated areas remained unchanged at 99% during the past three years.
Programs for self- driving cars || Production of electric cars1
  Maximize utilization of big data to 	 Advanced big data analysis to improve public transport systems	forecast maintenance work required  Provide digital customersi 	 High speed railway transport (e.g. 
services	Hyperloop trains)
 Provide all services in digital 	 Big data analysis to improve and and automatic control way	upgrade customer experience
  Apply automation and artificial intelligence solutions in airport 

Research and innovation
The Kingdom promotes research, technology and innovation, develops national plans and strategies to that end and creates related mechanisms to convert scientific research and technology into industrial products. Within this framework, several programs have been initiated for product development, industrial innovation and localization of technology. These programs involve research in several fields, such as energy, water, oil, gas, health, mining, information technology and communications and address challenges associated with the national innovation system and local content. Under the national transformation initiative "Support universities and research centers" several programs have been launched to boost this initiative.
1 Ministry of Transport Yearbook, 1438/1439H

National Innovation Initiative
Under the Royal Order, no. 35239, dated 17-7-1439H (2018) approval was given to develop an integrated concept for the implementation of a national initiative to promote innovation. The Royal Order states that the initiative should have a wider scope inclusive of the entire innovation spectrum. It should also identify areas of national significance that shall be emphasized, along with specification of the lead agency of the initiative. The initiative shall also specify the roles and tasks of other agencies, along with the mechanisms of coordination among the agencies, besides an adequate governance system.1
Targets of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology as support of research and localization of technology and innovation, up to 20202 350	3,600
	experts (cumulative) qualified 	jobs (cumulative) to be generated in startup 
	through technical leadersi 	companies emerging from the incubator and 
preparation program business accelerator program 17800
enterprises (cumulative) startup technology companies required for content (cumulative) that will be set up and 
developmentsupported through the innovative research support program 125	200
	technologies (cumulative) to 	services (cumulative) to be provided 
be developed and localized in 	to government and private sector targeted strategic sectors	bodies 20,000	5,000
 Annual research papers issued by 	Patents (cumulative) scientific institutions in the Kingdom	issued in the Kingdom

Research and Development2
The following chart shows expenditure on scientific research, innovation and technology, in Saudi Riyal, in 2016:2


Scientific research expenditure 
USD 45.71 million (SAR 171,428,559)



Institutional structures of science, technology and innovation USD 8.18 million (SAR 30,668,773)



Support of inventors
USD 7.47 million (SAR 28,000,000)



Science and technology human resources  USD 13.64 million (SAR 51,146,223)



Science, technology and community USD 13.27 million (SAR 49,777,600)



Advanced strategic technologies  	 USD 31.79 million (SAR 119,201,715)



Science, technology and innovation systems USD 379.11 thousand (SAR 1,421,679)



Research and development capabilities 	 USD 23.00 million (SAR 86,277,807)



Diversification, development and strengthening of support sources for activities USD 5.68 million (SAR 21,291,284)



Technology transfer and development 	 USD 24.62 million (SAR 92,316,281)

1 Royal Order No. (35239) 17-7-1439 H
2 Annual Report, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology - 2016

96	97

Industrial sector
In view of the industrial sectoris role in the achievement of strategic and economic objectives, government efforts to support industrial development span several key themes, including provision of the necessary infrastructure, creation of the two industrial cities of Jubail and Yanbu and construction of industrial cities in various parts of the Kingdom. In the same vein, the government has launched the industrial clusters program, established the Saudi Industrial Development Fund (SIDF) and created a multitude of industrial incentives. 56 new plants were licensed in 2017, with a combined workforce of over 3,500 workers. This brings the number of licensed private sector plants to over 7,500, with a total workforce of over a million workers by the end of this year.7
         Progress in the number of 	Percentage distribution of 9,000	plants over the past years	plants, by province
8,000 Other
7,000 Provinces
6,000
5,000
4,000 Riyadh Eastern
3,000 Province Province
2,000
1,000
 Makkah
	0	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	 Province
Saudi Arabia has made remarkable progress in manufacturing industries. The value added of manufacturing industries in current prices account for 12.91% of GDP, with a per capita share of USD 2,618 (SAR 9,820). The share of value added of small businesses and industries in total value added of the industry stood at 21.1% in 2016.8
	2014	2013	2014
10207	9465	10.8%
2013
9.93%
	201520122015	Value Added Share 	2012
(Manufacturing 
10075937312.68% Industries) at current 9.79%
prices (%GDP)
   20162016 981412.87%
Transport sector expectations as envisaged by the National 
Transport Strategy 2030


   Improve overall strength of the transport  sector to ensure sustainable achievement of
targets, in coordination with MOT agencies

 Upgrade sector performance, through 	 Improve performance of the transport sector and upscale of integration between transport 	 ensure that the sector is integrated as an enabling
modes at asset level and improvement of 	factor for realization of Saudi Vision 2030
connectivity between various transport 
	modes.	Targets	Programs and initiatives to
	Benchmark	Baseline	2020	2030	achieve target
Turn Saudi Arabia into a 	Logistics Performance 	3.16	3.38	3.70	 Infrastructure projects in 
logistics hub	Index (LPI)	individual transport sectors
 Improve service level
 Improve connectivity between transport modes
Upgrade quality of life 	 Reduce mortality/injuries	26	20	8	  Launch a safety program for each 
in Saudi Arabia	per 100,000 population	transport mode
 Create new public transport systems 
Reduce urban congestion 23.5	15	10	in various urban areas level (peak hours spent 	 Increase absorptive capacity of public in congestion during the 	transport in existing urban areas year in five major cities)	 Encourage use of public transport
 Develop and promote energy efficiency 
Promote financial sustainability
capita tonne of oil equivalent (toe) 
 Reduce proportion of  projects with higher cost than planned
 Reduce proportion  of projects that are  more than 20% behind
completion schedule
 Share of private  sector participation  in development and operation processes
-
60%
4%
50%
50%
10%
20%
20%
16%
programs for increased energy efficiency in the transport sector
 Develop and apply strategies to improve asset lifecycle and contracting
 Develop and apply mechanisms for superVision of projects and contractors
 Develop a flexible national regulatory framework for publicprivate partnership designed to attract private sector investors and create a transparent 
Ministry of Transport Yearbook, 1438/1439H



business climate
Reduce energy consumption 1.42 1.32 1.02 programs in the transport sector n per  Establish infrastructure that support 
99
Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC)
Sabic is a leading global manufacturer of diversified chemical products. Based in Saudi Arabiais capital city of Riyadh, the company runs its manufacturing operations across the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and Asia Pacific. The company offers various products, including:

Petrochemicals
The Petrochemicals 
 Business Unit is SABICis largest operating unit that 
manufactures the essential building blocks for a 
wide range of advanced 
chemicals such as ethanol, oxygenates, aromatics, 
glycol ethylene and other products. In addition, the unit provides innovative 
solutions to meet global 
demand in a more efficient, economic and sustainable manner, for products that 
are used in a wide range of industries and key markets.
Agri-nutrients
 SABIC plays a leading role in achieving global food security, as it is 
a significant player in 
the fertilizers industry. 
Through its Agri-nutrients business, SABIC provides 
a wide variety of nutrientsrich fertilizers, from 
general to highly specific fertilizers.
	Specialized products	Metals
 The Specialties business 	SABIC is a leading steel unit provides a wide range 	manufacturer in the Gulf of functional technology 	region. Saudi Iron & Steel 
products, from engineering 	Company (HADEED), a thermoplastic resins and 	subsidiary of SABIC, is 
compounds to composites, 	the worldis largest steel functional surfaces 	production company, with 
substrates, ethylene oxide the largest manufacturing derivatives and additive 	complex in the Middle East. 
manufacturing solutions.	HADEED manufactures a wide range of high 
quality flat and long steel products.
SABIC makes determined efforts to make our modern world a better place to live in and has invested its expertise and capabilities in various industrial fields, including fuel efficient aircrafts and 3D printed cars. SABIC is moving forward to position itself as the worldis leading company of choice in the petrochemical industry.

Saudi Vision 2030
With its full commitment to Vision 2030 and to the National Transformation Program, SABIC has taken up several responsibilities, key among which are:
		  and businessdevelopmentlocal content Promote		medium size enterprises small and Develop (SMEs)
Local content unit
SABIC has created a local content unit, as part of its innovation and business development sector, to lead the companyis role in Vision 2030 and the National Transformation Program. Based on the local content strategy, strenuous efforts are exerted in coordination with the Council of Economic and Development Affairs, with an aim to enhance local content and to develop business. The unit applies several key performance indicators for the main work units and other departments, such that will enable them to upgrade and expand existing programs. In addition, the unit develops new programs that are designed to contribute to the realization of Vision 2030.
SABIC, Annual Report, 2017
100
SABICis local content program is a key element to attract domestic investments in innovation, technology, manufacturing and procurement. It also generates thousands of national job opportunities in advanced and specialized fields, thus helping to promote an industry-friendly culture, strengthen the Kingdom leading stature and create a more vibrant business climate.
Based in Riyadh with business operations in more than 50 countries around the world, SABIC is a global leader in petrochemicals, with activities spanning many fields, including enablement of more fuel-efficient cars and aircrafts as well as techniques to help conserve water supplies worldwide, SABIC contributes to development of solutions for todayis challenges in order to build a better tomorrow. Riyadh	5	5	21	4th Ranking
	 Headquarters and	 Central	 Applications	 Global sites for	 As the worldi largest diversified
 SABICis research and	innovation hubs	centers	industries	petrochemical company innovation center
Main Markets
Transport
Agri-nutrients
Construction
 Medical devices
Packaging
Clean energy
 Electrical and electronics
The transport sector has experienced significant development worldwide, particularly bus transport. Increasing efforts are made by regulatory authorities to reduce the negative environmental impacts of buses, especially in poor urban districts. Through its expertise and innovations, SABIC plays an effective role in this regard by developing stronger and lighter material in substitute for metals and glass.
Many people around the world suffer from hunger and undernourishment. The problem gets even worse with the accelerating pace of population growth and receding of agricultural land as a result of urban sprawl. A feasible solution is to grow more crops on less farmland. SABIC contributes to provision of specialized and innovative agricultural nutrients. In 2015, for example, SABIC provided its Date Palm NPK product and has further consolidated this course by launching two new specialized compounds to meet the needs of farmers in the Kingdom and throughout the Middle East.
SABIC succeeded in developing pre-painted steel products for use as heat resistant ceilings. Integrated ceramic dyes absorb visible light energy, while infrared radiation reflects heat and reduces effective heat transfer through ceilings, with relative cool interiors. The end result is less energy, less pollution, lower costs and more comfort.
SABICis innovative polymers play a key role in development of healthcare devices for millions of people, both in highly advanced hospitals and in small scale clinics that serve local communities in developing countries. This includes advanced medicine delivery systems, simple diagnostic devices used by patients, as well as reusable surgical instruments, patient stretcher trolleys, equipment structures, etc.
SABIC works on developing new materials to meet market demand and to offer thin packaging products. In this regard, SABIC provides a wide range of high quality and environment-friendly recyclable products.
SABIC technical teams work closely with manufacturing companies to develop new materials that offer better choices, with modern technologies and little environmental impact. For example, SABIC manufactures innovative insulation slides, which can withstand higher temperatures compared to commonly used polypropylene slides. This makes it possible for manufacturers of transformers and reflectors to design parts that can stand operation in temperatures as high as 150 degrees Celsius. In addition, SABIC slides reduce the need for use of cooling systems, making it possible to use highly efficient semiconductors.
 SABIC managed to manufacture LED based lighting systems to replace High-Intensity Discharge (HID) lamps. LED systems provide high technical characteristics and high adaptability to meet various needs of lighting systems in homes, businesses and vehicles.
SABIC, Annual Report, 2017
SABIC, Annual Sustainability Report, 2017 
101
Sabicis Most Material Sustainability Issues 

These five issues of relative importance to sustainability are used through three main courses.

Sustainability is an essential pillar of SABICis 2030 strategic Vision. It integrates the companyis core values into the decision-making process through the provision of a scientific framework for improvement at all work courses, along with an unrelenting quest to achieve top performance in areas of innovation, health, safety and security, corporate social responsibility, human capital development and supply chain. It is through all this that SABIC can continue to be the worldis leading company of choice in petrochemical industry. 
SABIC, Annual Sustainability Report, 2017
Innovation and sustainability solutions
At SABIC, innovation and sustainability go hand in hand, with both driven by close cooperation and quick response to requirements. Innovation allows the company to provide solutions to major global challenges, seize on growth opportunities, strengthen current competitive advantage and lay the foundations for sustainable growth in this rapidly changing competitive market.
SABIC develops its innovation efforts through three main courses, namely development and offering of new process technologies, building strong relations of cooperation to achieve the volume required and to reach markets fast, and the development of product solutions that will satisfy renewed customer needs and generate renewed job opportunities.
One key achievement of SABIC has been its cooperation with SAIC General Motors (SGM) of China, for the launch of the worldis largest rear quarter window, molded from SABIC's LEXAN resin, for use in new luxury cars. The new quarter window is 40% lighter than similar glass windows, with lower greenhouse gas emissions. A further example is the program initiated by SABIC to recycle water containing high volumes of dissolved gases, such as ammonia, for use in cooling during steel production operations. The process allows a saving of about 100,000 m3 of water per year, reduces operating costs and lowers the water consumption intensity of the plant by about 2%.
Fuel efficiency
SABIC has set four goals for achievement by 2025. These are: to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, conservation of energy consumption, reduce intensity of water use by 25% and reduce wastage of material by 50% compared to 2010 levels. In this regard, SABIC recognizes that reducing consumption intensity not only serves to minimize impacts associated with a product's life cycle, but also helps improve production efficiency and reduces operating costs. SABIC made remarkable progress towards achievement of these goals, through operating concessions as well as new technologies and projects that are designed to strengthen efficiency. SABIC places all its facilities under close monitoring on an ongoing basis and assesses new sites for possible ways to reduce costs and increase profits through production of larger volumes with less input used. In the process of construction of new plants, SABIC is always keen to assess sustainability and fuel efficiency during the design process, making sure that they are the best in class.

102	103

\0xECEvery citizen in our country and every part of our dear land has all my attention and care. There is no difference between a citizen and another, nor is there a difference between a region and another and I look forward to the contributions of all to serving the homeland.
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques
King Salman bin Abdulaziz
105

Equality and Assurance of Justice
Since its foundation, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has upheld the principle of equality, justice and to prevent influence peddling. The Kingdom's basic Law of Governance, issued in 1991, provides for the promotion of national unity and prevention of all that leads to division, sedition, or discord. The Kingdom has adopted several initiatives and strategies in this regard. A strategy and preventive programs were developed to mitigate certain negative social phenomena or social situations. Among these is the Social Protection Strategy, which aims to develop a consistent and integrated social protection system and strengthen the targeting of eligible beneficiaries by preventing well-to-do people from receiving subsidies.

Relevance of SDG 10 to Vision 2030
 Enhance ease of doing business
 Improve living conditions of expatriates
 Improve work conditions of expatriates
Plan for development of the Social Protection Strategy
The plan for development of Social Protection Strategy aims to develop regulations and policies designed to help poor and vulnerable groups cope with crises and shocks, create job opportunities, investment in human capital and protection of elderly citizens.
Strategy objectives

Resilience through social insurance
This will be pursued through offering of programs that will 
help citizens respond to common risks, such as illness, ageing or 
unemployment. In this context, premiums are collected for eligibility to compensation at 
Utilization of job opportunities in the labor market
Under this objective, programs involving financial support are 
provided to job seekers through skill development programs. 
Support is offered either in cash or in kind.
Equality among citizens
This is pursued through social aid, in which regular non-premium 
based subsidies are disbursed. The 
subsidies are designed to enable targeted poor and vulnerable groups.
occurrence of threats.


SDG indicators1
to loan provisions. Total non-performing loans accounted for 1.40% of total loans, in 2016.

Saudi Human Rights Commission (SHRC)
Saudi Human Rights Commission (SHRC) was established to protect and promote human rights in accordance with universal human rights standards in all areas and to promote awareness and contribute to enforcement of these rights. SHRC is the authority vested with the jurisdiction to express opinion and extend advice as regards human rights issues. Reporting directly to His Majesty the King, SHRC has a judicial personality and enjoys full autonomy in the exercise of its tasks set forth in the statute.
A key achievement in this regard has been the election of the Kingdom, for the fourth time, to the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) for a three-year term, 2017-2019, through a voting that took place in the UN General Assembly in New York. This election underscores the Kingdomis outstanding international status and further highlights the achievements made by the Kingdom both at home and at the international level, in consolidation of principles of justice, equality as well as human rights protection and promotion.
Saudi Human Rights Commission (SHRC) concluded several partnerships, including the memorandum of understanding with the General Authority for Statistics for cooperation with respect to statistics relevant to human rights. SHRC also signed a memorandum of cooperation with the Ministry of Labor and Social Development to promote partnership and direct follow-up of their mandated tasks and for cooperation in such areas as combat of human trafficking, rights of people with disabilities, family, children and womenis rights, protection from abuse and the rights of elderly people. In addition, SHRC signed a memorandum of understanding for technical cooperation with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) in areas related to combat and protection from human trafficking as well as furnishing of assistance, care and shelter to victims of human trafficking.2

National Society for Human Rights (NSHR)
NSHR is an independent non-government body with both financial and administrative autonomy. It aims to participate in building a society of equity, equality and rule of law, in line with the Islamic teachings that advocate tolerance and renouncement of violence and extremism. NSHR seeks to defend human rights in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and abroad, for citizens, expatriates or visitors. Towards these ends, NSHR cooperates with government and private organizations within and outside the Kingdom.
1 Sustainable Development Goals indicators, GASTAT, 2017
2 Human Rights Commission Annual Report 2016 
  World Bank Group

106	107


 Overview of sustainable cities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Over the past few years, urbanization has been growing rapidly in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, particularly in major cities, as a result of the country's marked demographic, economic and social growth. With a total number of 285 cities in 2014. several modern urban challenges have emerged. Against this background, the government has issued a Royal Decree to the Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs (MOMRA) to cooperate with the UN Human Settlements Program (UN-Habitat) in implementing the "Future Saudi Cities Program". The program seeks to achieve sustainable urbanization in response to the urban challenges that have emerged due to rapid growth and to support the country's urban strategy aimed at attaining balanced development. In terms of objectives and results, the Future Saudi Cities Program is closely tied to Vision 2030 and MOMRA's municipal transformation program. 

Future Saudi Cities Program1 
This is a technical cooperation program between the Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs and the UN Human Settlements Program. Its aim is to develop a new vision and a strategic planning framework for sustainable urban development in the Kingdom, in line with world-class standards and in conformity with MOMRA's new strategic transformation plan. The program's key objective is to develop cities that are prosperous, productive, fair, socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable, with sufficient and adequate infrastructure and a high-level quality of life. In addition, the program seeks to promote sustainable urbanization through the following actions:

The National Spatial Strategy (2030) has been updated in cooperation with the UNDP. The strategy will support the realization of Vision 2030 at the level of the Kingdomis provinces, cities and villages. Furthermore, the updated strategy integrates the SDGs as well as new urban agenda objectives into the strategyis policies for spatial development.

1 Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs
110

International Cooperation1
In order to achieve sustainable development in Saudi cities in the future, in line with the recommendations of the World Urban Forum, organized in cooperation with UN-Habitat, a detailed comprehensive study needs to be conducted on how Saudi cities can be prepared to ensure equitable distribution of development gains. The study should also address the challenges faced by cities in the course of attaining a developed and mature economy, along with a green ecosystem. Towards these ends, the study should look into how far the National Spatial Strategy and the present conditions of development in Saudi cities are in line with the requirements of the six themes recommended by the World Urban Forum. 
Theme 1

Theme 2

Theme 3

Theme 4

Theme 5

Theme 6


Study the capability of Saudi cities to provide rewarding job opportunities that can contribute to cities' prosperity and welfare.
Study strengths and weaknesses and develop initial projects through community involvement, in order to develop vibrant cities that are capable of providing a high quality of life.
Develop plans for institutional and legislative reforms for regulation of the urban planning and management process.
Study and propose policies and instruments related to redistribution of growth benefits and opportunities in cities. In addition, provide assistance to municipalities as regards effective mechanisms for optimal land use and related tax systems, in such a way that would achieve justice and equality in access to land, services and basic utilities.
Promote and underline urban identity of cities, through urban renewal of old districts, including preservation of traditional crafts and maintenance of ancient buildings of particular urban importance, such as palaces, places of worship, museums, cultural and entertainment centres, shops and restaurants.
Develop planning solutions and implementation guides to improve the public transport system within cities, such that they will contribute to smooth traffic, ensuring shorter travel times and allowing ease of access to all parts of the city, ultimately contributing to integration and inclusion of city districts. A public transport system can also contribute to energy saving as well as environmental protection against pollutants and gas emissions.

Promote private sectoris role
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is keen on improving publicnprivate partnerships in the transfer and exchange of data, information, knowledge, successful experiences and lessons learned, as well as opportunities for the development of capacities and human resources, with an aim to ensure integration 
Importance of social responsibility 
Saudi Arabia takes due care of the social responsibility concept. The Kingdom values the private sector's efforts in the pursuit of responsible and sustainable environmental, as well as social and economic development. 
Lessons learned
Promote the role of global partnerships
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to raise the level of satisfaction with quality of service, boost competitiveness and urban sustainability of Saudi cities, improve the efficiency of city management and reduce negative environmental impacts. Saudi Arabia also seeks to attract domestic and foreign investments 


and generate job opportunities. This 	towards a sustainable environment will be achieved through several 	and a green economy. initiatives and programs that will be implemented in cooperation with the UN Human Settlements Program (UN-Habitat).
1 Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs

111
Figures and statistics

Population and Housing Survey 2017
Results of the Population and Housing Survey 2017 showed that the number of dwellings occupied with Saudi households totaled 3,504,690 units, compared to 3,417,788 units in 2016. The number of individuals who live in these units totaled 20,931,182 with an average Saudi household size of 5.97 individuals, compared to 6.24 individuals in 2016. Results also indicate that the share of Saudi household-occupied dwellings was the highest in Makkah province (24.8%), followed by Riyadh province (23.6%) and the Eastern province (14.2%). 
Results also showed that 74.8% of Saudi household-occupied dwellings rely for water supply on public water system, while 99.8%of Saudi household-occupied dwellings rely on public electricity system as a main source of electricity supply. 
Percentage distribution of the number of Saudi household-occupied dwellings, by administrative province


Definitions
Dwelling: refers to a building, or part of a building, which is primarily prepared for one family and has one separate door or several independent doors, whether it is occupied or inhabited or vacant.
Houses by source of potable water: Refers to Saudi household-occupied dwellings that are served by the Public water system.
Houses by source of electricity: Refers to Saudi household-occupied dwellings that are served by the Public electricity system.
Houses by source of sanitation: Refers to Saudi household-occupied dwellings that are served by the Public sanitation system.
Number of dwellings: Refers to the number of Saudi household-occupied dwellings.

General Authority for Statistics 

	water system)	electricity system)	sanitation system)

Future Saudi Cities Program 
A Royal Decree was issued to the Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs (MOMRA) to cooperate with the UN Human Settlements Program (UN-Habitat) to implement the "Future Saudi Cities Program". The program seeks to promote sustainable urbanization in response to urban challenges that have emerged due to rapid growth and to support the country's urban strategy with the aim of attaining balanced development. In terms of objectives and output, Saudi Arabia's Future Cities Program is closely tied to Vision 2030 and to MOMRA's municipal transition program.
The program's key objective is to develop cities that are prosperous, productive, fair, socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable, with sufficient and adequate infrastructure and high-Level of life quality, through the following:

112	113
General Authority for Statistics 

Relevance of Future Saudi 
Cities Program to Vision 2030
 Enable suitable home ownership among Saudi families
 Develop and diversify entertainment opportunities to meet the needs of the population
 Reduce all types of pollution
 Upscale quality of services provided in Saudi cities 
 Improve the urban scene in Saudi cities
Program coverage

Program output
	Develop national, 	Promote and 
	A documentary 	Set up a national regional and international develop national 	 New urban
	on Saudi cities	urban committee	partnerships	capabilities	projects

     Prepare an 	Raise public 	Collect data and 	 Conduct workshops	 Analyze institutional integrated work plan awareness	indicators	and training courses	 and legislative
environment

Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs
 King Abdulaziz Project for Public Transport in Riyadh

The Metropolitan Development Strategy for Riyadh (MEDSTAR)
MEDSTAR is a strategic framework that regulates the future development of Riyadh city and governs all factors affecting the cityis growth, through regulatory benchmarking, structural plans, urban policies and an urban management plan. Altogether, these aspects constitute a joint work program for all institutions operating in the city and serve as a strategic framework for the implementation of programs.

   Economic	Environmental Public utility 	Public 	Housing	Transport 	General 	Land use 	Land use and 	Local 	Urban  development	strategy	strategy	services 	 strategy	strategy	structural 	plans	development 	structural 	development strategy	strategyscheme	regulations	schemes	management 	plan
Provide means of safe and easy mobility through development of a sustainable transport system that meets existing and forecasted mobility demand in the city and which contributes to guiding of urban development

114	115
ArRiyadh Development Authority
The project contributes to the realization of Vision 2030 objectives as regards maximization of  benefits of infrastructure projects and services, along with improving the international ranking of Riyadh and achieving the Vision 2030 objective \0xECTo have three Saudi cities recognized in the topranked 100 cities in the world.
High density areas, both residential and employment-wise, have been identified across the main lines and streams of the cityis six main activities.
Public transport gains importance as part of the cityis transport system and as a cornerstone of its economy, as it contributes to increased competitiveness of the city in terms of attraction of investments and creation of job opportunities.
The project helps reduce traffic accidents and congestions on most main roads. It also cuts down on carbon emissions resulting from vehicle emissions and helps improve air and environmental quality in the city.

Figures
 1800
 community bus stops
 3000
stops
 1900
	km long	work sites	km
470 
Train cars
3,600,000
passengers per day
(maximum capacity)
 900,000
passengers per day
(maximum capacity)
1083
 regular line stations

ArRiyadh Development Authority
116
 Wadi Hanifa

Wadi Hanifa is a key natural landmark in Riyadh, with a catchment basin of 4000 km2. The valley runs for a length of 120 km and has always been a vital water resource. A string of towns and villages lie along the valley. Over the last three decades, excessive exploitation of the valleyis natural resources to meet the needs of rapid growth in the city of Riyadh, led to the degradation of the valleyis environment, along with emergence of many problems and negative aspects, such as the accumulation of waste and wetlands, the discharge of contaminated water into the valley and the destruction of historical and heritage sites. In 2003, Wadi Hanifah Comprehensive Development Plan has been approved to deliver the following objectives: 
 Rehabilitation and conservation of 
the valley's natural environment 
 Preparation of the valley as a natural drainage course for Riyadh.
 Preservation of historical and heritage sites
 Utilization of running water 
 Establishment of a balance between the environment and city needs and use the valley as a recreational area in the city
Wadi Hanifa Comprehensive Development Plan consists of a plan for the management of current and future water resources as well as an environmental classification plan. The latter includes sustainable uses and administrative strategies to protect the valley's ecosystems. It also includes a land use plan designed to achieve a balance between environmental conservation and the cityis needs. Wadi Hanifa Comprehensive Development Plan has been awarded the Washington Water Award, in recognition of the fact that the project adopts international sustainable development standards. Direct and indirect outcomes of Wadi Hanifah Environmental Rehabilitation Plan project include the following:
Create opportunities for recreation and 

degradation of the valley	water pools 	treated water 
Environmental rehabilitation addresses all components of the main valley. Parts so far implemented of the project constitute the cornerstone of the valleyis development program. This will be followed by rehabilitation of Al-Haier lakes, Wadi Namar Dam, Wadi Laban region, tributaries and natural reserves, along with a plan for water recycling and reuse. Rehabilitation projects in Wadi Hanifa and its tributaries are of great importance and strategic value for the valley. In fact, these projects had a major contribution towards restoration of the strategic natural role of the valley and its tributaries as a natural drainage course for rainwater and floods, and have helped keep the valley free of pollution. Other contributions of the projects implemented include development of a new strategic source of treated water for agricultural and industrial uses, transformation of the valley and its tributaries into the largest natural park that surrounds most of Riyadh's districts and suburbs, and into a promising and attractive area for investment opportunities in agriculture, tourism and entertainment sectors.
Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs
117
Wadi Hanifa 
Riyadh Urban Observatory (RUO)
Riyadh Urban Observatory monitors and assesses development trends and the impact of rapid growth of Riyadh city. RUO seeks to develop sustainable urban monitoring systems, which will be used to support planning, link indicator results to policy and to promote and facilitate partnerships among sectors.

Organizational structure
The organizational structure sets RUOis identity, mechanisms and jurisdiction. Key components of the structure and the relationships among individual components have been defined on the basis of Arriyadh Development Authority (ADA) in its capacity as the joint planning authority of Riyadh city and the urban information systems which regulate RUOis organizational and technical relations with local and international observatory networks.
General framework of urban indicators and alignment with SDGs 2030
The general framework of urban indicators has been developed based on the local vision, of the Metropolitan Development Strategy for Riyadh (MEDSTAR); objectives of the National Transformation Program 2020 and 2025 and the global vision, as seen through the resource guide of the Global Urban Observatory, including the SDGs adopted by the United Nations Summit, 2015.
International cooperation
 Cooperation agreement signed with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
 UN Human Settlements Program (UN-Habitat)
 International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
 World Council of Cities Data (WCCD)
 Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF)
 Riyadh has been nominated as a local world citiesi data center for SDGs 2030

sex, age and persons with disabilities
This is relevant to the following MOMRA strategic objective \0xECAchieve sustainable and balanced urbanization and improve quality of life in the Kingdomis cities and provinces.

 Proportion of achievement of transport strategy and means of transport in urban 
planning
This is relevant to the following MOMRA strategic objective\0xECAchieve sustainable and balanced urbanization and improve quality of life in the Kingdomis cities and provinces.

    Percentage of work completed towards completion of phases for update of urban strategy
planning and management that operate regularly and democratically
This is relevant to MOMRA strategic objectives \0xECProvide fast and high quality services and Provide a local urban environment with a healthy living

     Indicator of user individuals and businessmenis satisfaction with municipal 
services provided
Figures & Indicators

	 Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	0%	17.20%	100%

	 Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	 3.35	4.27	4.04
	 Linear	 Linear	 Linear
meter/person meter/person meter/person

Number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000 population, direct disaster economic loss in relation to global GDP, including disaster damage to critical infrastructure and disruption of basic services.
This is relevant to the following MOMRA strategic objective \0xECContinued improvement through coverage of cities with highly efficient and high quality utilities and infrastructure and humanization of cities.
	Start	Achieved so far 	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	0%	15%	100%
   Percentage of work carried out towards completion of regional plans of targeted provinces
	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	0%	20%	100%

 Proportion of inhabited land for which cadastral maps have been surveyed and updated in the two cities of Makkah and Medina

	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	25%	35%	100%

Proportion of urban solid waste regularly collected and with adequate final discharge, out of total urban solid waste generated, by city.
This is relevant to MOMRA strategic objective:\0xECProvide a local urban environment 
	Start	Achieved so far 	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	N/A	61.85%	75%
Population satisfaction with food safety in restaurants and public food servicesi centers
	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	30%	59%	70%

Population satisfaction with cleanliness of cities

	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	40%	64%	70%

Population satisfaction as to infestationfree public health

	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	40%	59%	90%
	with a healthy living	Average share of the built-up area of cities 
Proportion of the population served by rainwater disposal projects
Proportion of waste processed

	Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	0%	* Initiative 	40%
not started as yet
Develop municipal waste management systems. Develop municipal control and monitoring mechanisms and procedures. 
that is open space for public use for all, by sex, age and persons with disabilities.
This is relevant to MOMRA strategic objective: \0xECContinued improvement through coverage of cities with highly efficient and high quality utilities and infrastructure and humanization of cities.

Per capita share of open space for public use

	 Start	Achieved so far	Scheduled
	2015	2017	2020
	3.48	4.14	4.44
m2/person	m2/person	m2/person

Start
2015
25%

Achieved so far
2017
N/A

Scheduled
2020
100%


Ministry of Municipal & Rural Affairs



118	119



In recent decades, Saudi Arabia has experienced a boom in the industrial and agricultural sectors, coupled with rapid population increase and urban growth. Such pace of growth in population and number of urban centers poses serious challenges at many levels, particularly with regard to waste management.
The process of waste management, recycling, re-use, energy recovery and circular economy are important elements of the Kingdomis approach to conservation of natural resources, creation of job opportunities, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from landfills and conversion of waste to energy.
The Saudi Vision 2030 lists 4 strategic objectives that support and are in alignment with, SDG 12. These are:
 Reduce all types of pollution (e.g. air, sound, water, soil)
 Safeguard the environment from natural threats (e.g. desertification)
 Improve the urban scene in Saudi cities
 Protect and rehabilitate natural landscapes (e.g. beaches, Islands, natural reserves)
Initiatives and projects
Several projects and initiatives have been launched by the Saudi government to boost waste disposal and to improve issues related to recycling, re-use, energy recovery and promotion of the circular economy concept.

 Initiative to set up a Saudi recycling company

Figures
 Upgrading of municipal waste 
management systems
Initiative for waste 
management in Jubail city
Integrated strategy for waste 
disposal in Riyadh 
city
Initiative to recycle food waste


1.24

1.39




1
.24

1
        1 .18
.20	9.
21



1.15	1
.16





1.22
1.20
1.18
1.16
1.14
1.12
                                       1.10 Domestic waste generation amounted to 1.39 kg per person per day in 20161
Statistics by GaStat for the period 2010-2016 indicate that solid waste generation in Saudi Arabia averaged about 1.15 kg per person per day in 2010, with the average rising to 1.39 kg in 2016. The rise is mainly due to the population increase in the Kingdom.


 Integrated Strategy for
 Waste Management in Riyadh City
Control of 	Curtail the dropping of waste in waste in 	public gardens, parks, streets public places	and open spaces and raise public 
Management and safe disposal of Medical awareness to safeguard city healthcare waste through sustainably waste environment.
environmental techniques, in order 	management to protect public health in Riyadh.
Asbestos 	Handling of asbestos material management	through safe and healthy ways in order to avoid cancer and other negative health impacts.
Apply integrated strategic measures 	Integrated to improve management of waste of 	waste all types in the city, so as to realize 	management
environmental standards and protect Sludge 	Safe disposal and possibly reuse of the environment and public health treatment 	sludge resulting from wastewater from adverse impacts.and disposal 	treatment.
Management and safe disposal 	Management of industrial waste through 	of hazardous environmentally sustainable 	industrial 
methods in order to safeguard public 	waste
health in Riyadh.Municipal 	Increase public awareness to 
solid waste 	reduce waste generated and management	promote waste separation at source 
Management of buildings, 	Management to minimize dumping in landfills. demolishment and excavation 	of buildings, Increase opportunities for recycling debris by means of environmentally 	demolishment and reuse as a new resource for sustainable ways, through reuse 	and excavation economic utilization.
and reduce illegitimate disposal of 	debris debris.

Initiative to recycle food waste1
In cooperation with the food donation society and a specialized recycling company, the Eastern Province AMANAH launched an initiative to use food waste for conversion into organic fertilizers. Work is underway to build a factory for production of organic fertilizers from table scraps and food leftovers, with an annual production capacity of 6000 tons. The project will achieve the dual objectives of exploitation of wasted resources and conservation of the environment.

Key challenges

Increased waste quantities
1 Eastern Province Municipality
   Lack of environmental 
awareness as to hazards of waste
   Waste separation at source 
Coordination between stakeholders
123
 Initiative for Waste Management in
Jubail Industrial City
The Royal Commission for Jubail and Yanbu (RCJY) has launched an integrated environmental servicesi initiative for the management of clean-up operations in Jubail Industrial City. The initiative is designed to make the city free from waste, through smart transformation in waste management and disposal, in a safe and sustainable way. It also seeks to raise the environmental conservation level, extend the lifespan of landfills and activate programs for recycling and waste conversion into energy. Within this context, RCJY has promoted the use of modern technologies in waste management which help raise the efficiency of operations. RCJY has also conducted awareness promotion campaigns on cleanliness with an aim to reduce waste generation and to minimize related environmental impacts.
124
	About 500 tons 
Sustainability in waste 	are recycled every month through 	Develop plans and work schedules to ensure management	sanitary landfilling	sustainability and quality

	assets
Figures & Statistics
New Technologies
Waste disposal methods

The engineering design of Jubail Industrial City environmental landfill allows for environmentally safe disposal of waste through sample analysis of groundwater resulting from decomposition of waste. The process involves examination and disposal of decomposed waste as well as control and measurement of gases resulting from landfilling operations.

Incineration Landfill Recycle  method method method 
	2010	
	25%	41%	34%
91 Equipment with state-of-the-art technology, in operation on a daily basis 7800 waste bins are emptied every day 300 waste bins are washed and sterilized every day Several other modern technologies are used, such as underground pneumatic waste conveying and suction systems, as well as road sweeper trucks. 
Over 200 types of waste are generated in Jubail Industrial City

Daily operations in figures
General figures
Cleaning of residential districts and commercial areas
Waste management services are provided to:
40,000 residential houses
103 commercial centers 281 tons of waste
Cleaning of main roads and internal streets Cleaning and sweeping services are provided to:
	75 km of internal 	65 km of 
	streets	main roads

About 51% of industrial waste have been recycled. In 2018, municipal waste recycling grew by 2.87%, compared to some 0.35% in 2015.
Waste treatment and environmental sustainability
23 tons are sorted every day for treatment
226 paper collection bins posted at all government buildings
By 2020, RCJY looks forward to recycle 61% of all waste generated in Jubail Industrial City, through use of state-of-the-art technology.

125

"In order to preserve the unique environmental character of the region, environmental sustainability laws and mechanisms will be developed. Natural resources will be conserved in accordance with the best practices and standards in place globally.
Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
Mohammad bin Salman
127
Climate change is a major global challenge in the 21st century that has far reaching impacts over the longer term on ecosystems on earth. As such, climate change calls for concerted international efforts to reduce all occurrences that might affect the climate, in order to preserve sustainable nature. For the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, climate change is of great concern, given the countryis total area of 2.4 million square kilometers which makes it the 12th largest country in the world. Accordingly, several measures have been taken by the Kingdom, to reduce causes of climate change. The Kingdom has adopted a number of measures that address both causes and impacts of climate change. Saudi Arabia is signatory to several international conventions and protocols on climate change. These include the Paris Climate Accord, the Kyoto Protocol and the Montreal Protocol. Vision 2030 prioritizes climate change and outlines several initiatives and policies related to it. These include the price increase introduced on consumer fuel products and the Kingdom's Environmental Strategy. In this regard, Saudi Arabia presented its national level contribution to the secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, as part of its contribution under the Paris agreement, within the context of efforts of the international community for adaptation to and alleviation of climate change impacts. The Kingdomis contributions are based on the principles of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, as well as the approach stated in the economic diversification initiative adopted under the relevant decisions. Saudi Arabia participates through measures and plans that are designed to pursue economic diversification and achieve mutual benefits. These benefits include avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions, 
	adaptation to the impacts resulting from global warming, minimizing the impact of response 	The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has been among the first countries that have recognized potential 
measures, along with measures to counter this phenomenon. This helps the Kingdom in achieving risks of natural disasters. In this regard, the Kingdom initiated a set of related regulations, plans its sustainable development goals. and measures that are designed to safeguard lives and property against all natural hazards. Measures and plans are designed to achieve ambitious mutual 
benefits as regards the mitigation impacts of climate change. 	 National Disaster Management Plan: The plan outlines a set These include avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions by 	of likely scenarios, including heavy rain, high speed surface as much as 130 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 	wind, destructive earthquakes, severe dust storms, volcanic of emission reduction per year by 2030, in accordance with 	eruptions, powerful hurricanes, landslides, collapses of the Kingdomis national priorities and circumstances. These measures and plans are being implemented, thus contributing to economic diversification and adaptation to climate change. 	buildings, dams or water reservoirs and measures for how to deal with them.

Programs and initiatives
Contribution to economic diversification and achievement of mutual benefits associated with measures to mitigate impacts of climate change. This includes the following programs1:
Contributions as regards adaptation to climate change. This includes the following measures2:
 National Chemical and Bacteriological Incidents 
Management Plan: The plan covers a set of measures and procedures that should be followed to control and contain chemical and bacteriological incidents.
 National Marine Disaster Management Plan: The plan outlines a set of measures and procedures to address likely disasters in the Kingdomis seas.
 Executive regulations for evacuation and shelter operation: These regulations cover measures, procedures and responsibilities related to pre-disaster evacuation and shelter operations to protect civilians from exposure to risks.
 National Environmental Strategy
128	129

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia seeks to improve the living environment, with climate being the most significant aspect. In pursuit of this, the Kingdom has promoted the use of clean energy and the construction of green buildings. Furthermore, it has placed emphasis on tree planting, especially in cities. Efforts have been made to also develop the infrastructure for adaptation to climate change. The Kingdom has been implementing several projects with positive environmental impacts. They include dam construction, development of agricultural terraces in mountainous areas, development and maintenance of flood control projects, along with preparation work in valleys, in order to reduce greenhouse effects.

A smart phone application on air quality was recently released by Riyadh Environment. The webbased application identifies the useris location and displays air quality indicators as recorded by the nearest air quality monitoring station. It displays the date and time of the latest monitoring conducted by the station. Air quality indicator covers two sub-indicators. The first sub-indicator shows the status of gases (carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide). The second sub-indicator covers the status of aerial planktons that are roughly 10 micrometer diameter or less, which can penetrate the lungs, in addition to suspended particles that are 2.5 micron wide, with a diameter 30 times smaller than a hair width, which enter into human respiratory systems and penetrate into lungs. It is these particles that form an air fog.
1 ArRiyadh Development Authority
130
 Program to increase green landscaping in Riyadh city


64
municipal town squares 
completed out of a total 
of 100 town squares
5
million annual flowers have been planted in Riyadh 
streets and squares
480
childrenis gardens and playgrounds
	26	3750	
main parks completed
ArRiyadh Development Authority
trees planted in 26 streets in 10 municipalities in Riyadh
million m2 in total green 
landscape, as part of 
projects currently underway 
in Riyadh
131




Saudi Arabiais coastlines
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has coastlines of about 2,330 km, rich with coral reefs which serve as habitat for marine life. With a relatively low population density along coastlines, negative impacts of human activity on marine ecology are overall minimal, with the exception of a few major urban centers. On the other hand, the absence of large river systems flowing into the Red Sea makes its marine ecology a unique ecosystem in its own right.
Relevance of SDG 14 to Vision 2030 
 Protect & rehabilitate natural landscapes (beaches, Islands, natural reserves)
 Ensure sustainable use of water resources
 Reduce all types of pollution (e.g. air, sound, water, soil)
Saudi Arabia has affirmed its continued support to international and regional efforts to protect sea and ocean ecosystems and reduce sources of marine pollution. Saudi Vision 2030 gives a high priority to environmental protection, conservation of natural resources and sustainable development, with a multitude of objectives, programs and initiatives geared to serve these purposes. The Kingdom seeks to improve its marine ecosystem as it is important for development and for strengthening of the country's food security. The Kingdom also places emphasis on solutions to address problems faced by marine ecosystems (including marine pollution, plastic debris, marine acidity (pH), marine biodiversity and marine and coastal ecosystems). The Kingdom pursues these solutions to be developed through finding of adequate environmental technologies in order to achieve future sustainable development. In addition, strategies, policies and regulations have been adopted to reduce negative effects on the Kingdomis ecosystem. The National Strategy for Conservation of the Kingdom's Biodiversity, which has been approved in 2005, includes plans for the study of present conditions of biodiversity, including threats and ways for further conservation and development. Furthermore, the strategy covers several aspects of terrestrial, mountainous and marine biodiversity and addresses optimal and sustainable use of biodiversity and marine resources in fresh water and seas. Laws and regulations are in place for the regulation of marine fishing and surveillance of poaching and illegal fishing.10
Several research centers in the Kingdom publish reports on aquaculture of fish and lobster and feed needs and diseases of marine life, besides corals and coral reefs. Key among these centers are:
 Fish Resources Research Center 
 Saudi Aquaculture Society
 Faculty of Marine Sciences, King Abdulaziz University
 Fish Resources Research Center, King Faisal University
 Red Sea Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science & Technology
Fish Resources Research Center1

The Fish Resources Research Center was established in Jeddah in 1982 under a cooperation agreement between the government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The centeris key objective focuses on research and development programs in culturing of suitable fish, lobster and marine life. The center is also active in propagation of technical means of aquaculture and conducts related training programs. The center lies on the Saudi Arabian Red Sea coast, 60 km north of Jeddah. It has been carefully selected to fit the establishment of models for different fish farming systems, e.g. cages, pens and ponds, as well as, other accessory facilities. 
The main objectives of the center include conducting of research programs to select marine fish and shrimp species suitable for fish farming at commercial level under local environmental conditions of Saudi Arabia and evaluation of different means of fish farming systems and selection of those suitable for application in different regions. In addition, the center aims to develop standard fish and shrimp feed formula using locally available components, conduct field and research studies in diseases of cultured fish and shrimp species and carry out quality control of water drainage from fish farms. The center also conducts training programs covering different aspects of aquaculture operations and provides aquaculture projects with the required fish and shrimp larvae and fingerlings. It also publishes and distributes free educational books which cover all aspects of aquaculture operational techniques and offers technical guidance to aquaculture projects. Furthermore, the center selects suitable coastal areas for aquaculture projects and evaluates feasibility studies of aquaculture projects. As a result of the centeris activities, 10 new aquaculture licenses have been issued and output has increased by 131% in 2017, along with exports of 30,000 tons of fish products to markets in East Asia, Europe and North America.
Fish stock within biologically sustainable levels2

1 Ministry of Environment, Water and Agriculture
2 Report on SDG indicators 2017, GASTAT 

134135
\0xECWe will endeavor to encourage tourism in various fields, including historical sites and cultural aspects.
Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
Mohammad bin Salman
137
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has long been keenly concerned with ecosystems, having been 	Climate change is one of the key challenges that constrain in the forefront of nations that took the lead in conservation of the environmental cycle. This 
concern stems from the Kingdomis recognition that healthy ecosystems are the cornerstone for 	development efforts, as it leads to increased desertification and sustainable development. In fact, ecosystem disturbances affect a multitude of basic factors in 	significantly low rainfall. In addition, climate change causes 
	nature (such as climate, plants, animals, water). This consequently impacts the very process of sustainable development, in both direct and indirect ways. Saudi Vision 2030 reflects this concern 	higher temperature with the adverse impact on all efforts for 
through the programs and initiatives that are being implemented.	rehabilitation of ecosystems. Human activities are also to blame for deterioration of ecosystems, such as logging and overfishing. Urban 
Based on analysis of Vision 2030 strategic objectives, SDG 15 has relevance to the following 
Vision 2030 strategic objectives:	expansion, along with the associated activities of soil compacting and the operation of heavy equipment and bulldozers, lead to land degradation. Additionally, succession of generations undermines proper management of land. Climate change is also a major factor of deterioration as it causes low rain and higher temperatures.11
Saudi Arabia gives increased attention to environmental rehabilitation and conservation through setting up of protected natural areas, that are constantly increased and expanded based on related ecological diversity. These areas are set up to protect animal and plant from tampering and extinction and to ensure that they are cared for and that research work is carried out for their development. In this regard, the Kingdomis terrestrial protected areas have increased from 55,034 square kilometers, roughly 2.75% of the Kingdomis total area in 1988, to 85,393 thousand square kilometers, or 4.27% of the Kingdomis total area, in 2016. During the same period, the total area of 
protected marine reserves has increased from 5,408 square kilometers, equivalent to 0.23% of the 
Vision 2030 lists several targets that are bound to achieve SDG 15. In this respect, The Kingdom 	Kingdomis total area, to 7,823 square kilometers, or 0.33% of the Kingdomis total area.2 makes considerable efforts to fight environmental phenomena which pose a direct threat to human and animal life, such as desertification and drought. Seeking to address these phenomena, the Kingdom set up the Regional Center for Drought Monitoring and Early Warning (RDMEC), which conducts on-going monitoring of drought and related impacts for Saudi Arabia and Arab countries. The center provides assistance to government agencies in the Kingdom to plan for future measures to encounter likely negative impacts, with an aim to minimize drought effects on all forms of life (agricultural, pastoral, economic, social and environmental sectors). RDMEC issues related warnings from time to time. Using a quarterly weather forecast program, RDMEC identifies wet seasons and issues alerts on likely extreme weather events. It should be noted that quarterly weather forecasts form a basic element of drought monitoring program in order to determine wet and dry seasons. In addition, RDMEC updates the database on drought monitoring and related impacts, dam water and groundwater levels. Towards this end, RDMEC examines points of reference of drought and plant cover indicators, through field surveys conducted in all provinces of the Kingdom.1
In addition, the Kingdom adopted a number of strategies, including the National Environment Strategy and the Vegetation Restoration Strategy for Riyadh region. Both strategies aim to mitigate the damage associated with drought and related negative impacts. 
The Kingdom has also been keen to issue regulations on protected wildlife and plant areas, hunting of wildlife animals and birds, as well as on trafficking of wildlife species in danger of extinction, or in the products of such species. Government reports indicate that the Kingdom has 15 protected areas covering about 4% of the Kingdom's total area. 
Several initiatives were also launched, most notably the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Environmental 
Management Award. Organized under the generous patronage of the Custodian of the Two Holy 
Mosques, the award is designed to reinforce a wider concept of environmental management in the Arab world. Riyadh Municipality set up a website through which it launched an initiative to plant trees on sidewalks. Entitled \0xECA tree for each building, the initiative is meant to give momentum to tree planting in Riyadh and to redouble the number of trees. The initiative involves planting of trees on front sidewalks of houses and commercial centers. In the same vein, a seed bank was set up with an aim to grow local plants for cultivation into their native regions and to conserve scarce plant species against extinction. On the other hand, concerned authorities look after protection and fencing of natural areas. A smart phone application was recently released by Arriyadh Development Authority to measure air quality status in Riyadh in terms of gaseous pollutants and aerial planktons.12


Umm Al Qamarie Island Reserve
Jubail Marine Wildlife Reserve
Farasan Islands Reserve

Saudi Wildlife Authority
140
Located south-west of Al Qunfudhah city on the coast of the Red Sea, Umm 
Al Qamarie Island Reserve comprises two Islands, Umm Al Qamarie AlBaraniah and Um Al Qamarie Al-Foganiah. The total area of the Islands is about 4,03 square kilometers. The name of Umm Al Qamarie which literary means (the mother of doves) is derived from the turtledoves that inhabit these Islands in large numbers, particularly in the migration season. The surface of these Islands is composed of average 3m coral limestones above sea level and white coastal sand. The coral reefs of Umm Al-Qamari Al-Baraniah Island are mostly alive and diverse, making them extremely distinct for studies. Plants are abundant in the middle of the two Islands, the most important of which are the Salvadora persica (Arak), Suaeda, cactuses, the cyperus and the Saltbush, which also abound on the coasts, as well as migratory and resident turtledoves. In addition, several birds inhabit the Islands, including seabirds, coastal birds and many wild birds such as osprey, heron, Whit Egret and African Collared Dove. Marine life in Umm Al Qamarie Island Reserve feature a huge diversity of coral reefs and marine invertebrates.
Located north of Jubail Industrial City along the western coast of the Arabian Gulf, Jubail Marine Wildlife Reserve covers an area of 2000 km2, in addition to five coral Islands that are expected to be declared as a protected zone under the law on Protected Wildlife Zones. The reserve is home to different environments with various types of wildlife. Terrestrial environment is a habitat for Arabian red fox, jackal, several species of rodents, various birds, including two species of sniper birds and different species of Lacertilia lizards. Coastal environments of the reserve feature flamingo birds, seagulls, tern birds, ducks, heron and Socotra Cormorant birds. Water environment close to the beach are home to several species of invertebrates, such as snails and crabs.
Farasan Islands Reserve is located in the southeastern part of the Red Sea, about 42 km offshore of Jazan. The reserve covers a total area of about 5408 km and comprises 84 Islands. The largest inhabited Islands are Farasan Island, Sajid Island and Qummah Island, in which people mostly work in fishery, as well as millet and corn farming. Farasan Islands consist of coral limestone, with an average elevation 10 to 20 meters and up to 40 meters above the sea level. The maximum height is 75 meters, It also includes a number of short valleys ending into the sea. The coasts are covered with white calcareous sands resulting from the destruction of coral reefs and seashells. Among the most important types of trees there are Acacia tortilis, impatiens balsamina, Ziziphus jujuba, Salvadora persica (Arak), Vierh and Rhizophora which form dense coastal mangroves. Moreover, the trees of Mesquite or Prosopis have recently grown up and spread out through the reserve. The reserve is home to Idmi, or Mountain Gazelle that permanently inhabits some of Farasan Islands, along with white-tailed Mongoose and various types of rodents. There are also many types of birds, especially water, coastal and migratory birds, the most important of which are osprey, gray-backed pelican, black headed gulls, herons, sooty falcon and other species of turtledoves. In addition, the Islands are home to some lizards and snakes. 

85,393
Total area of reserves (2016)
0.33%
Percentage of marine protected areas to Kingdom total area
(2016)
4.27%
    Percentage of terrestrial protected 
areas in total Kingdom area (2016) 
Area: per 1000 Square Kilometers
General Authority for Statistics
4.27%
     Percentage of Protected Areas in total area of Saudi Arabia (2016) 1.35%
Percentage of forest 
- covered land area (2016)
7,823
Total area of Marine reserves (2016)
119
Number of seizure cases of animal 
control cases
(2017)
Saudi Arabia does not allow the export, import or even transit of animals, alive or dead birds except by official and international identification documents. The Kingdom's considerable efforts in this regard have led to a reduction in the number of animal and bird seizures in all ports from 470 seizures in 2014 to 119 seizures in 2017.
141

Figures and statistics

16
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
\0xECAll the rights sought by mankind, including promoting human happiness, raising living standards of people, promoting compassion and consultation, protection of human rights, along with all standards and criteria claimed by people in our present time, are in fact preserved in the Holy Koran and the Sunna of the Prophet. 
142	143
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Salman bin Abdulaziz
SDG 16 is in line with several Vision 2030 strategic objectives. Furthermore, the Kingdom has adopted many strategies, including the National Strategy for Safeguarding Integrity and Combating Corruption, which serves as a comprehensive national framework for promoting integrity and fighting corruption in all its forms and manifestations. The ultimate goal is to protect Saudi society from corruption through religious, moral and educational values and to create a conducive climate for the successful implementation of development plans, particularly in the socio-economic realm. The Kingdom has made remarkable progress in the ranking according to the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) issued by Transparency International. It now ranks 57th out of 180 countries listed, having advanced 5 ranks from 2016.
Saudi Arabia has also made great efforts to fight all forms of violence and ill-treatment, especially violence against children. With the ratification of the Convention on Childrenis Rights, the Kingdom has made headway in the protection of children's rights and is making available legislative and executive means to provide such protection. In this regard, the Kingdom has conducted several studies and developed a number of strategies, including the Saudi National Strategic Plan for the Prevention of and Action on Family Violence. Prepared by the Ministry of Labor and Social Development, the strategy is aimed at addressing the needs of victims of violence and battered people through family visitations and the fostering of children subjected to violence. Furthermore, the Kingdom has made serious efforts to bridge legislative gaps, ensure consistency between all laws and regulations relevant to social protection and develop and update regulations on the protection of children from harm and neglect.13

Relevance of SDG 16 to Vision 2030
 Foster values of equity & transparency
 Enhance transparency across government roles
 Ensure responsiveness of government entities to stakeholders' feedback
 Improve quality of services provided to citizens
Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 populations, by sex and age, (2016)14

	1 National strategy for protection of integrity and combat of corruption
2 Report on SDG indicators 2017, GASTAT

 National Anti-Corruption Commission 1
Chaired by the Crown Prince, HRH Prince Mohammad bin Salman, the National Anti-Corruption 
Commission is made up of the following members

Committee Tasks
 Identify violations, crimes, persons and bodies involved in public corruption cases.
 Investigation, issue of arrest warrants, travel ban, detect and freeze accounts and portfolios, trace and ban transfer or remittance of funds by persons or bodies of whatever status. At its own discretion, the committee may take precautionary measures until the cases are referred to investigation or judicial authorities as may be applicable.
 Take the necessary action against those involved in public corruption cases and adoption of measures, at its own discretion, with respect to persons, bodies, funds, immovable and movable assets within the country and abroad, repatriation of funds to state treasury and registration of real estate as state property. The committee may take whatever measures it deems appropriate for the best interest of the state, particularly with those who responded favorably to the committee.
The Crime Prevention Research Center, an arm of the Ministry of Interior, conducts a full scale monitoring and documentation of crimes in the Kingdom, studies the causes and circumstances that result in criminal behavior and develops programs and initiatives to reduce crime incidence. The Center has launched a number of initiatives to combat crimes, including the initiative to reduce crime incidence through environmental design, which aims to promote a sense of security among the population. There is also the initiative to reduce crime incidence through social development, which is designed to address social and economic factors and to target the circumstances and conditions which encourage commission of crimes.2

144	145

National Information Center
The National Information Center (NIC) reports to the Presidency of State Security. It provides information technology support and services around the clock to the Kingdomis 13 provinces and to over 40 Ministry of Interior agencies, as well as over 35 government agencies with which NIC has concluded information sharing agreements. NIC contributes to the process of preparing the e-government infrastructure, having provided its services to over 7 million citizens and residents through the e-services portal (Absher). In addition, NIC provides a wide range of digital services to businesses, either directly or through NIC strategic partners. The following are NICis key tasks: 
 Provide technical systems to all sectors of the Ministry of Interior
 Plan and implement training programs related to NIC activities
 Coordinate with the technical authorities and represent the Ministry of Interior in IT areas
 Support the Ministry of Interioris bodies and sectors to make the best use of the NIC services and capabilities
NICis Digital Strategy 2017-2019 is based on Saudi Vision 2030 and the National Transformation Program. Three basic pillars have been identified for NIC to realize Vision 2030. These are:
 National security - as this is the cornerstone for the achievement of targeted social and economic transformation.
 National data - this is a key success factor for the achievement of targeted transformation.
 National digital transformation -this is a key factor for the achievement of social and economic transformation.
General strategic objectives
	Strategic perspective 1	Strategic perspective 3
	National & institutional contribution	Internal operations
	General objective	General objective
 Achieve as much contribution as possible towards successful national	 Achieve operational and financial excellence with the highest security and transformation	institutional governance levels
	Targets	Targets
 Effective contribution	 Contribute to promote	 Contribute to achieve	 Promote sustainability	 Enhance efficiency	 Maintain an excellent and  to realization of Saudi	 welfare of society	 the highest security,	 and achieve	 of research and	 high performing technical
Vision 2030	 through excellence	 protection and safety	 excellence at service	 development and	 infrastructure that keeps  in digital services	 degrees as well as	and financial levels	 innovate new products	 pace with demand and available to the nation	 risk minimization at	and services	 which supports service the national level	continuity
  Achieve excellence	 Enhance centrality	 Enhance excellence of	 Improve level of	 Achieve the highest	 Optimal utilization  in electronic services	 of data as national	 government services	 institutional governance	 levels of information	 of modern  and support digital	 assets and achieve	and continuity of work	 and efficiency in	 security and privacy	 technologies as  transformation at	 the highest data	 the management of	 as well as protection	 commensurate with
national level	 privacy protection and	processes and services	 and safety of assets	 NIC requirements and  utilization levels	 and facilities	focus
 Enhance management
 efficiency of programs and  projects and attain the
 highest possible benefits
Strategic perspective 2
Customers and companies
General objective
 Provide pioneering digital services that are bound to support excellence of our customers and promote our strategic partnerships
Strategic perspective 4
Organization and human resources capabilities
General objective
 Develop human resources capabilities within a competitive and safe environment which encourages education and growth
	Targets	Targets
 Broaden the base	 Broaden the base of	 Provide digital	 Improve productivity	 Achieve the	 Recruit and maintain  of our public and	 business partners	 services and solutions	 of staff and optimally	 highest level of job	 staff with outstanding
	 private customers	 and enhance relations	 with the highest	 capitalize on their	 security and career	capabilities
 and improve their	 with them to achieve	 security, quality and	capabilities	 development of NIC satisfaction level	 the highest reciprocal	continuity levels	staff
values
  Make available national	 Continually develop	 Improve efficiency of marketing	 Encourage creativity	 Enhance  digital platforms to enable	 the level of customer	 and communication with	 and continually	 attractiveness of work  customers and partners	 knowledge, skill and	 customers and partners and	 develop knowledge	 environment and
 to build and operate safe qualification promote NIC institutional and skill level of NIC develop corporate  and outstanding digital	image
	services and solutions	staff	 culture

146
During the 4th Absher event, NIC won five awards. These are: Award of Partners for Support of Digital Transformation; Smartphone Application Award for the new Absher Application Version; Security Services Award for Face Recognition System; Strategic Initiativesi Award for Absher Work System and Award of Excellence in Promotion of Services, for NIC Participation in GITEX International Exhibition. In addition, NICis general administration for human resource development obtained ISO 9001:2015 quality management system certification, following the application of quality management systems in all NIC departments and branches with the aim of raising the quality of technical support services provided by NIC to various Ministry of Interior sectors and government agencies. 
National Center for Performance Measurement (Adaa)
	The National Center for Performance Measurement "Adaa" is an independent government Creation and 	body, founded by dint of a decision of the Council of Ministers, no. 3, dated 2016, based 
Establishment	on the recommendation of the Council of Economic and Development Affairs. Adaa 
reports directly to the Prime Minister and aims to integrate performance measurement principles and tools in public organizations by providing the necessary support through the utilization of standard tools and models that will assist these organizations to have better performance. Adaa publishes quarterly reports on progress in the realization of strategic goals, initiatives and key performance indicators (KPIs). It helps public entities to track their progress in realizing Vision 2030, in addition to measuring user satisfaction with their services.

Vision
Measure performance of public bodies through application of world class standards, thus driving organizational excellence and achievement of the national Vision.


Adaa's Mandate
 Develop, approve and continually upgrade performance measurement indicators and instruments for public entities.
 Support public entities in achieving their strategic plans and goals, through indicators that are designed to ensure achievement of their approved goals, initiatives and projects.
 Deliver reports on performance results of public entities which can be used to review and improve government performance.
 Identify and analyze challenges public entities face in the process of achieving their goals and propose adequate solutions.
 Support the process of developing and improving public services, by measuring servicesi quality and user satisfaction. 
 Promote a culture of measurement, revision and performance improvement in public entities and enhance their capabilities in this regard.
147
General Authority for Statistics (GASTAT)15
Statistical work in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia began as early as 1930, having grown into a systematic work, with a legal and administrative framework under the General Statistics Law issued through a Royal Decree. The law regulates the statistical sector and governs relations between the General Authority for Statistics (GASTAT), which is a central statistical authority and other entities, so as to reinforce statistical work, strengthen its impact on planning and raise statistical awareness. 
Key Tasks

   Offer statistical  work, plus advisory  and technical service
 Prepare
 statistical
 bulletins and reports
 Create a central  statistical
 information system
 Implement	 Collect statistical data	 Furnish agencies  statistical	and information	 with official work	statistics

  Provide  statistical services
 Knowledge transfer
 Prepare the national  statistical work strategy
 Enforce  international standards


 Prepare national  statistical indices and classifications
 Tracking and monitoring
 Supervise the process of  creating a comprehensive  system of statistical databases
148

National Statistical Development Strategy
With the successive crises recently experienced by the world in the areas of energy, food, economy and finance, demand for statistical data and information has greatly increased, in terms of both quantity and quality. Demand for Saudi statistics and information sector services has been high, in view of the Kingdomis standing in the international arena and the key role it plays at regional and international levels. On the other hand, significant advancement of information and communication technology has generated an accelerated demand for prompt, comprehensive, reliable and flexible statistical information. The demand is further accentuated by ongoing upgrading of the development path in the Kingdom in order to support the process of decisionmaking, policy formulation tracking of progress, impact assessment and performance evaluation. 
Strategic themes and key targets
Meet usersi needs through timely provision of easy to use statistical data and information and by maintaining a high level of user 
Develop administrative records, improve field operations, such as censuses, surveys and research and apply the latest standards, practices and classifications in 
satisfaction.	data collection analysis and dissemination.
Use the latest technologies in all statistical work.Consolidate principles that govern operation of the 
statistics & information sector and establish a culture of results-based management. 
awareness promotion, and establish a culture of communication among key actors within the statistics & information sector.

General Authority for Statistics
149
Statistical Process

Statistical Process over the past 50 years16
During phase 1 of statistical activity, a survey was conducted covering the Kingdomis population, buildings and establishments in all provinces. It also involved capacity building and development of statistical indicators, including GDP. A survey of private establishments was also carried out.
2 Phase 2 of statistical activity: several surveys were conducted during this phase. Key among these were the population and housing census 1974 and the establishment census 1974. Several sample surveys were also carried out, in addition to consumer expenditure surveys.
3 Phase 3 of statistical activity. This phase saw expansion of coverage of surveys. The consumer expenditure survey, conducted during this phase, covered 10 provinces. In addition, the economic census 1980 was carried out, followed by the agricultural census a year later. Cost of living index was further developed in terms of coverage and has since then been published on a monthly basis.
4 Phase 4: This phase saw implementation of several surveys, including the population and housing census 1993. The national accounts system was initiated for application through a multi-phased process. During 1994, the establishment census was carried out and the harmonized system for classification of foreign trade statistics was put into use. 5	Phase 5: This phase saw the implementation of the population and housing census 2004 in which a uniform census time span of 10 years was adopted. Besides, two establishment surveys were carried out and application of the national accounts system was initiated. Prices programs were developed, along with price indices. Work began in design of a central information system with an automatic link-up to all government agencies.
6	The tenth development plan seeks to ensure easier access to quality statistical data and information in a timely manner, making sure that the data meet usersi needs. The plan also aims to secure a high quality statistical infrastructure, strengthen knowledge of statistics, promote awareness of society as to the importance of statistics, modernize work systems at statistics and information sector, attract highly efficient staff, along with capacity building of human resources and ensure periodic publication of statistical data and reports.
Vision
An efficient and effective statistical and information sector that meets usersi needs in a professional, high quality and reliable manner.
150
National Statistical Data Program \0xECMasdar

Masdar is an ambitious program that is being implemented by the General Authority for Statistics (GASTAT) to build a comprehensive national statistical database in which all statistical data from different internal and external sources are collected to produce the classifications, indicators and analyses needed by data users and analysts inside and outside GASTAT, for use as a statistical reference to support decision-making and to formulate different developments plans.

Program Objective
Build national statistical databases based at GASTAT
	Method of extracting primary data	
Primary data needed for the program are extracted through a link-up of GASTAT with 33 government agencies. These data are compiled in the form of usable information within an integrated information system that supports the process of decision-making for ministries and decision makers. It also provides comprehensive and homogeneous communication mechanisms for users to view the data and make informed decisions. 

Statistical Products
Smart phone applications for statistical indicators
These are applications on smart phones and tablets for interactive statistical indicators, with direct communication between smart device users and GASTAT. 
Interactive statistical data portal
This is the main portal which contains statistical indicators and metadata grouped and classified in interactive graphical interfaces and charts that can be customized by user. The data can be reviewed and downloaded in multiple formats.
Self-service indicator builder
A self-service for data through which a user can build his own data and charts. 
Data Exchange with users
This is a data and metadata exchange service with relevant agencies.
151



Saudi Arabia cooperates with the international community to tackle economic and social hardships faced by developing countries. The Kingdom pays considerable attention to development issues and supports the development endeavors of developing countries in various fields.
During the 2012-2017 period, Saudi assistance saw a considerable increase of up to USD 38.24 billion (SAR 143.4 billion), equivalent to 1.9% of Saudi Arabiais GNI. As such, Saudi Arabia ranks 4th among the largest donor countries, preceded by USA, UK and Germany. In terms of development assistance as a share of GNI, Saudi Arabia topped the list of countries in 2014, having exceeded the UN target of 0.7% of GNI.1
38.24	1	40	500
USD billion in Saudi 	Kingdomis rank among 	countries received official 	USD million channeled by aid during the period 	world countries in 	development assistance 	the Kingdom to finance the 
2012-2017	2014, in terms of 	from Saudi Arabia to the 	humanitarian response plan in official development 	tune of over 1 billion USD- 	Yemen. The funds were pledged assistance as a share 	since the establishment of 	by Saudi Arabia to the UN during of GNI	King Salman Humanitarian 	the 2018 Yemen High-Level 
	Aid and Relief Centre, 	Pledging Event held in Geneva in 
	(2015)	April 2018

King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief) 
KSrelief was established in 2015 as the Kingdom's humanitarian and relief arm. Since its foundation, KSrelief has provided assistance to 40 countries, with a total amount of USD 1.045 billion (SAR 3.918 billion). Over 70% of this amount has been official development assistance in food security, health, education, water, environmental sanitation, shelter, non-food stuff, logistical services, nutrition, protection, early recovery, emergency communications and other sectors.
Saudi Arabia is keen to promote humanitarian endeavors and makes considerable effort to host refugees of countries hit by humanitarian hardships. The following figures show the number of refugees hosted by Saudi Arabia:
	5,611,911	262,573	249,669
	Yemeni nationals	Syrian nationals	Myanmar nationals
 The Kingdomis aid to Yemen totaled over USD 1.543 billion (SAR 5.79 billion) during the past three years. KSrelief implemented 260 projects which targeted food security, refugees, control of cholera, water and wastewater and support to the central bank of Yemen.
 Saudi Arabia has contributed to education projects in 32 countries worldwide. These totaled 132 projects, with a total cost of over 5 billion USD (SAR 18.77 billion). More than two million persons plus 393,000 students benefited from these projects. 

Saudi Fund for Development (SFD)2
Saudi Arabia provides assistance through bilateral development cooperation to recipient developing countries through the Ministry of Finance and other agencies, such as the Saudi Fund for Development (SFD), the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, as well as regional and international multilateral financial institutions and specialized organizations. Through the SFD vehicle, Saudi Arabia had provided up to the end of 2017 about USD 14.6 billion which were used to finance 635 development projects and economic programs in 83 countries. On the other hand, Saudi Arabia is at the forefront of countries in terms of expatriate worker remittances. According to SAMA statistical bulletin, remittances of expatriate workers in the Kingdom totaled about USD 40.5 billion (SAR 151.9 billion) in 2016.
1 King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief) 2 Saudi Fund for Development (SFD)
Capacity building

Saudi Arabia provides financial support to several economic and social programs, as well as programs related to public institutions and structural adjustment programs that are carried out by developing countries in cooperation with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The purpose of this financial support is to provide soft loans in specific production sectors to help developing countries overcome economic hardships that constrain their development programs. This finance contributes to budget consolidation of borrower states and helps these countries address balance of payment deficits, deal with economic slowdowns and bring stability to the economy through treatment of economic, fiscal and monetary imbalances. It also seeks to achieve continued economic growth through reform of national economy structure. In addition, the financial support also contributes to investments of developing countries, through development of transport systems, social infrastructure, industry, energy, research and development and modern technology. It also helps recipient countries upgrade the performance of public institutions, along with the provision of advisory and technical services.
16 countries have benefited from socio-economic development support programs, as well as programs targeting public institutions and structural adjustment. The total includes 14 African and two Asian countries. The cost of the program has totaled SAR 465.1 million (USD 124.03 million).
Programs for support of economic development and structural adjustment have achieved the following objectives: 


Projects financed by Saudi Arabia in the field of alternative energy
Saudi Arabia signed 15 loan agreements to finance construction and improvement of 11 dams for electricity generation. The agreements cover diversion of river courses and construction of mounds, dams and generators to convert hydraulic power into a sustainable, renewable and clean energy source. Loans provided for this purpose totaled SAR 2.4 billion (USD 640 Million) accounting for 22.08% of total sector loans. Four such projects were carried out in Asia through six loan agreements totaling SAR 1.1 billion (USD 293.33 million), in addition to seven projects in Africa through nine loan agreements totaling SAR 1.2 billion (USD 320 million). 
154	155
Saudi Fund for Development (SFD)
Trade
Saudi Arabia is the largest open market economy in the Middle East and North Africa region. It accounts for 25% share of the combined MENA region GDP. It should be noted that Saudi Arabiais geographical position allows it ease of access to export markets in Europe, Asia and Africa.
Saudi Arabia supports national companies by opening new avenues for them in developing countries and by enabling Saudi capital to invest in all parts of the world. Towards this end, the Kingdom provides loans to projects that help attract Saudi investors to these countries, such as energy and water projects for agricultural sector investors.
The Kingdom offers incentives to attract buyers to Saudi products through the Saudi program for promotion of exports. In this regard, SAR 72 billion (USD 19.2 billion) have been approved to support the export promotion program and strengthen finance of exports. In addition, an initiative was launched for indirect lending to small and medium size enterprises (SMEs). The program helps attract foreign direct investment, positions Saudi Arabia as a global logistics and transport hub and opens the door for industries to reach as large number of countries as possible.
Saudi Arabia is a founding member of the recently established Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). In addition, the Kingdom takes part in developing policy and coordination arrangements with BRICS countries (BRICS Development Bank- currently under incorporation) and participates in the India, Brazil and South Africa Dialogue Forum, which helped accelerate free trade agreements and encouraged investment in clean energy resources, such as bio fuel. Along with Arab countries, the Kingdom seeks to strengthen relations with South American and 
African countries in order to boost mutual trade and investment. Saudi Arabia accounts for about 64% of Arab Official Development Assistance (ODA) provided to Africa over the period 1973-2008.
Policy consistency

The Kingdom is keen to attend regional and international meetings and conferences held to promote the alignment of SDGs with regional and international strategies. The Kingdom participated in the meetings convened by the League of Arab States (LAS) to develop an indicative Arab framework to support the realization of the SDG 2030 agenda through the development of strategies, or alignment of current strategies of countries of the region, in such a way as to achieve the SDGs, along with the mechanisms needed. The Kingdom plays an effective role in the Group of Twenty (G20). Saudi Arabia will host the G20 summit in 2020 which is due to address topics related to the promotion of cooperation and achievement of the SDGs. 

156	157
Alignment of Vision 2030 strategic objectives reveals that SDG 17 is relevant to the following strategic objectives:

Examples of Saudi Arabiais Global Partnerships
To Achieve Sustainable Development Goals
A multilateral partnership between Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Islamic Development Bank, and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, represented by King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief), has contributed USD 100 million to the Lives and Livelihoods Fund LLF. A multilateral development initiative launched by Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Islamic Development Bank and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. With a capital of USD 2.48 billion, LLF focuses on combating poverty and on providing livelihoods over the next five years in 32 countries, including 26 least developed and six low and middle income countries. LLF aims to enable recipient countries to eradicate communicable diseases, fight polio, strengthen and provide primary healthcare, support smallholder farming families, support the infrastructure sector, electricity generation and transmission in rural communities, water and sanitation supply projects, as well as other projects which support lives and livelihoods.1
Saudi Aid Platform2
Established in 2018 by King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, Saudi Aid Platform lists Saudi Arabiais humanitarian, development and philanthropic aid provided to world countries. The platform lists data on Saudi assistance contributions in accordance with international standards set by OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC), UN financial tracking platform and international transparency principles. The Saudi Aid Platform is a role model in creating consistency of policies between Saudi donor agencies that provide sustainable development assistance. The platform provides all data on humanitarian, development and philanthropic aid provided by the Kingdom.
UN Counter-Terrorism Centre3
The UN Counter-Terrorism Centre was established in response to a call by the late King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz to the international community to create an international center to fight terrorism, with an aim of promoting global cooperation in the fight against terrorism and strengthening the capabilities of member states to implement a global counter-terrorism strategy. The center was established with a USD 10 million donation from Saudi Arabia to the UN. An additional grant of USD 100 million (2014) was provided by the Kingdom to help finance the centeris operations. Objectives pursued by the UN Counter-Terrorism Center include strengthening the implementation of the pillars of the UN global counter-terrorism strategy in a comprehensive and integrated way through the development of national and regional implementation plans. In addition, the center carries out initiatives that seek to promote cooperation among counter terrorism centers at the national, regional and international levels. The center has carried out over 30 capacity building projects worldwide.
1 King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
2 Website of the Saudi Aid Platform
3 Counter-Terrorism Centre
Prince Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Foundation \0xECMiSK
Since it was founded in 2011, Prince Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Foundation \0xECMiSK has been keen to support positive change in the Kingdom by seeking to foster, develop and invest in youth capabilities, in order to enable young men and women to become effective leaders in the new economy. Towards this end, MiSK is committed to enable youth through initiatives that are geared to bring about change within four key themes, namely education and training, innovation and technology, culture and arts and creative digital media. In fact, MiSK was created to serve as a key instrument of support to young men and women in Saudi Arabia and the world over, through MiSKis centers, initiatives and programs that are designed to bring about change.

Change for Enablement
Change Through Science and Knowledge
MiSK seeks to develop and enable human capital across all age brackets, from kindergarten, through secondary school and up to university and higher education, as well as MiSK fellowships and training courses, through educational institutions, initiatives and programs conducted by MiSK.
Impact In 2017, MiSK educational institutions and programs conducted skill enhancement schemes for 5,271 young men and women. 2,128 participants took part in 11 training programs, along with 3,508 students spanning kindergarten to secondary education and 58 post-graduate students.
Change Through Innovation and Technology
MiSK seeks to enable youth to become creative in charting out their world's future and to acquire a leading position in the creation and development of ideas. In this regard, MiSK supports innovation, people with creative digital capabilities, providers of digital solutions and digital entrepreneurs, with emphasis on five technologies. These are cloud computing, big data, Internet of Things, artificial intelligence and computer programming.
Impact\0xECSaudi Arabia is Programming: a MiSK initiative launched in conjunction with \0xECHour of Code a media campaign conducted by Code.org. MiSK managed to enable over 300,000 young men and women in Saudi Arabia, in cooperation with 4,411 trainers in more than 100 cities, over a time span of 30 days. In the course of this initiative, participating youth learned the basics of programming and technical creativity through various platforms, including electronic platforms, direct encounters and robotic competitions. Saudi Arabia held the 4th rank worldwide in activation of the Hour of Code in terms of participantsi performance and interaction with the event. Another initiative has been \0xECAll Online. Launched by MiSK in collaboration with Google Corporation and the Saudi Ministry of Education, the initiative involved 20,326 students in various parts of the Kingdom, who gained knowledge on the positive and safe use of the Internet and electronic platforms and on enhancing useful content.
Change Through Arts and Culture
MiSK enables Saudi youth to drive arts in the Kingdom by setting the scene for gifted and creative young men and women to express opinions and ideas in various artistic forms. MiSK is confident that young Saudi artists will set the world on fire through their works and creativity. MiSK seeks, therefore, to enable youth to move forward to the international scene through MiSK creative institutions and initiatives.
Impact In 2017, MiSK succeeded in enabling 116 Saudi artists and over 150,000 persons with deep interest in culture and arts, through more than 11 art exhibitions held in Saudi Arabia, USA, France and the UK. More than 250 art works reflecting Saudi art and culture were on display in these exhibitions.
Change Through Creativity in Digital Media
MiSKis creative media enables youth to gain knowledge and skills and allows them to explore their potential capabilities in storytelling arts and sciences. Along with this are other areas of creative media, such as digital and social media, film industry and media production, with an aim to enrich the Arabic content and the creative digital scene.
158	159
Impact MiSK creative media initiatives succeeded in enabling over 350,000 young men and women through four initiatives launched in two countries in which more than 30 leading creative media figures took part. In addition, a number of cartoon series were produced in cooperation with world-renowned film producers.
Global Change to Enable Youth
Seeking to expand its horizons and extend its impact well beyond Saudi Arabia, MiSK has launched initiatives and platforms that are targeted to influence change, in order to enable youth around the world to become effective members in the new economy.
Impact 7,700 youth leaders, plus 600 non-government organizations from 75 countries took part in 2017 in MiSK global initiatives. In addition, MiSK provides support to 100 creative persons around the world through a USD 100,000 grant to help them develop and translate their ideas into real products.
Initiatives and Programs
Launched in 2016, MiSK Global Forum brings together under one roof young leaders, creative persons and intellectuals along with internationally renowned creative persons, with an aim to explore ways and means of addressing the challenge of change. MiSK global forum is held in partnership with leading international universities and companies to deliberate four key themes through the main sessions \0xECIn the Field, along with offering intensive training courses within the \0xECIn-depth Discussion section and the workshops conducted in the Skill Workshops section. These activities seek to grow practical knowledge in the following topics: redefinition of the essence of humankind, forces and trends which influence professional future, planning for smart and sustainable cities and how to build a long and happy life.
Together with the UNDP Youth Program, MiSK Global Forum brings together about 400 world leaders, UN officials, leading public and private figures as well as youth leaders, students and social entrepreneurs. The forum aims to achieve sustainable development goals through promotion of understanding between cultures, tolerance, mutual respect, ethics of good citizenry and sharing of responsibilities.

Multiple training and fellowship programs in over 20 international universities
MiSK offers a wide range of programs that aim to enable youth to gain world class practical knowledge. The programs cover such fields as leadership development, press, digital design, technical education and development of programming skills. These programs are conducted in well renowned international institutions. The MiSK fellowship is designed to capitalize on the dreams and aspirations of youth, helping to turn them into unique implementation plans. The ultimate aim is to furnish youth with the necessary tools to change their future under theme of \0xECAcademicians of influence.
 More than 2126 participants took advantage of training programs in 2017 and these numbers continue to increase. Udacity is the program with the largest number of participants. The Udacity Program initiative aims to help Saudi young men and women acquire technical knowledge and skills needed for the labor market. In fact, this partnership is a proactive step to enhance the technical skills of job seekers in the Kingdom, a step that will prove to be instrumental for our youth and our nation.

"All Online program, in cooperation with Google Corporation
 Through this program, MiSK seeks to promote digital awareness and a culture of safe use of the Internet among students and to encourage them to promote a positive sense through interactive educational media.
  "All Online program has provided training to over 20,000 students kingdom-wide in 2017, in collaboration with Google Corporation.
\0xECSaudi Arabia is Programming initiative
This is a MiSK initiative launched in conjunction with Microsoft. Targeting young men and women in the Kingdom, the initiative is designed to clear confusion as regards programming and to encourage all to learn the relevant basics. Through cooperation between MiSK, the Ministry of Education and Microsoft, opportunities are offered to young men and women to learn the basics of programming in an enjoyable and simple environment. The initiative won the 4th rank worldwide at the \0xECHour of Code initiative level. More than 307,000 participants hailing from the Kingdomis 13 provinces took part in the initiative. Participants ranged between 7 and 18 years of age, with girls accounting for 76% of participants.

MiSK Major Challenges in Cooperation with Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
This is a three- year cooperation initiative between MiSK and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. It is MiSKis largest global initiative that is designed to convert brilliant ideas into tangible work. The initiative aims to help youth to change the world through enablement of young men and women to find unprecedented and creative solutions to global challenges faced by youth. It also aims to enable youth with the skills needed for success in the knowledge-based economy and seeks to inspire youth to confront the most challenging difficulties and to empower a new generation of leaders who possess the capability to transform their society and to change the world.

Change Through Global Partnerships
Recognizing that opportunities are boundless, MiSK pursues cooperation with the worldis key universities, institutions and non-government organizations to chart new horizons for youth to prosper and to be creative. This endeavor seeks to bring to realization MiSKis vision which focuses on education, training, technology, science, culture, arts and creative digital media.

160	161



Saudi Arabiais first Voluntary National Review presents the countryis experience and situation with the adaptation and implementation of the Sustainable Development Agenda, highlighting major achievements, challenges and lessons learned. As has been emphasized throughout this report, the Kingdom is firmly committed to the implementation and achievement of the SDGs and is keen on engaging in the global process of sharing knowledge, experiences and good practices related to the global development agenda. To this end, Saudi Arabia highly values the High-Level Political Forum as a platform for reviewing the implementation of the SDGs, sharing experiences and lessons and strengthening cooperation at the state level.
Saudi Arabiais national ownership of the sustainable development agenda and political commitment to its implementation is evidenced by the establishment of a dedicated team under the Ministry of Economy and Planning responsible for the coordination of SDG-related activities within the government, including the preparation of this report. Efforts are underway to further strengthen the institutional framework underpinning the SDGs and to enhance cooperation within and between relevant governmental and non-governmental stakeholders.
The early implementation of the 2030 Agenda has greatly benefitted from the launching in early 2016 of the Saudi Vision 2030 which outlines a clear path for building a thriving society and economy. The extensive and solid policy planning and management framework established to implement the Vision 2030 agenda provides solid foundations for the implementation of the 2030 sustainable development agenda. This includes several major transformative and executive programs, which set out priority long-term objectives and targets and an extensive network of government entities which were either created from scratch or restructured and /or merged together. 
As this report has shown repeatedly, a significant degree of alignment between the SDGs and Vision 2030 is already in place. Many of the SDGs and targets are incorporated into the Vision 2030 agenda. Hence, the SDGs amplify key priorities of the national development agenda in the three dimensions of social, economic and environmental sustainability. Further work will be undertaken to ensure that sectoral and thematic policies and programs at the national and sub-national levels are further aligned with the SDGs.
As this report has demonstrated, Saudi Arabia has made significant progress towards the achievement of The SDGs. In the social sphere the country has modernized the social welfare system and made it more empowering, efficient and fair. A range of social protection programs provide the population with adequate income, child care, elderly pensions and care, support for women and other types of social assistance. Subsidies for fuel, water, food and electricity have been redirected to those in need and the less privileged citizens, leading to a more equitable distribution. In addition, the Citizen Account program has been established to alleviate the impact of the reform on affected families. In the area of human development, Saudi Arabia has invested considerable resources in healthcare and education which have resulted in significant improvements in health and educational outcomes. Improvements have also been evidenced in food and water security, sustainable agriculture, labor market participation, etc. Saudi Arabia has taken several measures aimed at advancing the status of women in the society, such as the establishment of a national observatory of women's participation in societal and economic affairs, the launch of an electronic portal that allows job seeking women to register and obtain information on job opportunities in all provinces, a program supporting the transport of working women, a program providing childcare for working women, etc.
In the economic sphere, the process of transformation has been remarkable. Saudi Arabia has experienced decades of rapid economic growth that has enabled it to become a high-income country and a member of the G-20. While the foundations for this success have been provided by the Kingdomis abundant natural resources, the government is now committed to diversify the economic base and the capabilities of the labour force. The government has invested significant resources in advanced transport, communications, e-government, water supply, sanitation and energy. Furthermore, the country has established an advanced infrastructure for research, development and innovation and built partnerships between the public and private sectors, CSOs, research centers, universities and other entities. As highlighted in the report, marked improvements have taken place in the business and investment environment to encourage domestic and foreign investments and foster industrial development. According to the World Bank Groupis latest Doing Business report, Saudi Arabia has carried out the largest number of reforms to improve the business climate for small and medium enterprises in the Middle East and North Africa region.
In the environmental sphere, Saudi Arabia has experienced significant investments in efficient waste management, the establishment of comprehensive recycling projects and efforts to reduce desertification and various forms of pollution. To address the challenge of limited water resources and to supply high-quality drinking water to consumers, optimal use of water resources is promoted through reduced consumption and the utilization of desalinated and treated water. The Kingdom is also actively promoting the use of clean energy and the construction of green buildings. Significant investments have taken place in the area of renewable energy, especially solar power. Serious efforts have also been made in the protection and sustainable use of marine and coastal ecosystem. The Kingdom has long been concerned with ecosystems and is an initiator and advocate for the conservation of the ecosystem as a basis for sustainable development. In this regard, the Kingdomis land protected areas have increased considerably.
Furthermore, as highlighted in this report, Saudi Arabia has generously provided development and humanitarian assistance to a number of vulnerable communities and countries around the world. The Kingdom is the fourth largest provider of aid in the world. It has also been the source of considerable remittances to low income countries through transfers by millions of expatriate workers resident in the country. Through these two channels, Saudi Arabia has made a significant contribution to the reduction of poverty and improvement of living conditions worldwide.
Despite the significant achievements that are highlighted in the report, there are major challenges that stand in the way to the achievement of The SDGs. They are related to the availability of data and the capacity of statistical bodies to collect and disseminate SDG-related statistics, achieving more effective coordination among government and non-government institutions to ensure synergies rather than duplication of efforts, building on existing institutional frameworks rather than creating new structures and promoting the SDGs at the sub-national level.
Saudi Arabia is committed to pursuing the implementation of the global development agenda through close collaboration among all relevant stakeholders. SDG-related activities will proceed hand-in-hand with the implementation of Vision 2030 which has already gathered significant momentum. By laying out a transformational path forward for the Saudi economy and society, Vision 2030 constitutes the foundation for the pursuit of The SDGs. The Saudi government is committed to investing significant resources in pursuit of this transformation. The government has earmarked significant budgetary resources for investments in human resource development, including sectors such as healthcare, education, training, etc. The government has allocated more than a billion dollars for the construction of the King Abdullah City for Atomic and Renewable Energy through which it aims to generate 3.4 GW of renewable energy by 2020. It has also launched the Solar Power Project Plan 2030 which aims to generate 200 gigawatts by 2030 from various solar farms all over the country. A pipeline of large-scale infrastructure projects worth hundreds of billions of dollars have been announced, including the expansion of the national rail network, new metro lines and bus routes in Riyadh, Jeddah, Mekkah and Medina, wastewater and desalination plants, etc. Historically renowned for its religious tourism, Saudi Arabia is now looking to attract more leisure tourists through the easing of visa restrictions and investments in hospitality projects.
SDG-related activities will proceed hand-in-hand with the realization of Vision 2030 which is already well underway. Saudi Arabia will continue to incorporate the SDGs into public policies and plans through close collaboration between all relevant stakeholders.
The following are some priority areas for concentrated action in the coming years:
  Continuing the adaptation of the SDGs to the realities of the country through further alignment of national programs, plans and strategies with global development goals, targets and indicators. The concept of sustainable development will be further anchored as a guiding principle in all policy areas. This will require the further mapping of The SDGs at the level of targets and indicators, in close collaboration with the General Authority for Statistics.
  Improving the quality and coverage of SDG indicators and analysis of data by strengthening the methodology and systems for data production and analysis, particularly in a disaggregated format. This will be linked with activities in support of the capacities of the national statistical system based on methodologies harmonized with international standards.

164	165
  Strengthening the monitoring of The SDGs at the national and sub-national level. Reviews of SDG implementation will be conducted on a regular basis to track progress towards the achievement of The SDGs, identify good practices and challenges, as well as undertake appropriate adjustments. Systems for monitoring and reporting on a regular basis will be strengthened. Particular attention will be paid to the adaptation and implementation of The SDGs at the sub-national level and establishing systems for tracking and using SDG-related indicators in local decision making processes. The Ministry of Economy and Planning, as the coordinator for The SDGs implementation, will continue to offer capacity building support to relevant institutions, especially at the sub-national level. Main forms of support will be disseminating information to stakeholders, training on mainstreaming The SDGs in development plans, training on development of The SDGs indicators, training on action plan formulation, etc.
  Strengthening collaboration among relevant stakeholders across public, private and non-profit sectors. This will be achieved by further building on existing governance frameworks, especially the institutional framework around Vision 2030 and developing strategies for strengthening collaboration among actors. More active engagement with the SDGs will strengthen the sense of ownership and commitment by the involved parties. Particular efforts will be made to strengthen the engagement of academia and non-profit sector with the SDGs.
  Enhancing Saudi Arabiais role in the promotion of international partnerships around the SDGs, especially at the regional level. This will include the exchange of lessons, good practices and expertise through bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
166
Statistical Annex
169

%
Total allocations earmarked for private sector stimulus plan	SAR billion	200	$ billion	53.33
Total allocations approved to implement first 17 initiatives within private sector stimulus plan
SAR billion
72
$ billion
19.20
2017
Total amount earmarked for the housing projectsi acceleration initiative
SAR billion
21
$ billion
5.60
2017
Total amount earmarked for private sector finance initiative
SAR billion
17
$ billion
4.53
2017
Total amount earmarked for the initiative to boost efficiency and technology
SAR billion
17
$ billion
4.53
2017
Total amount earmarked for the initiative to incentivize small and medium size enterprises
SAR billion
12
$ billion
3.20
2017
Total amount earmarked for the export promotion initiative
SAR billion
5
$ billion
1.33
2017
Amount channeled to increase the capital of the Saudi Industrial Development Fund 
SAR billion
25
$ billion
6.67
2017
Total amount recently channeled into the National Housing Corporation
SAR billion
15
$ billion
4
2017
Goal 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere





Total amounts provided by the Kingdom in concessionary aid and favorable development assistance over the past three decades
SAR billion
315
$ billion
84
2015
Total annual assistance to cooperative societies
SAR million
100
$ million
26.67
2015
Total annual assistance provided to charitable societies
SAR million
450
$ million
120
2015
Social security allocations in national budget
SAR billion
15
$ billion
4
2017
State budget allocations for health and social development 
SAR billion
95
$ billion
25.33
2017
Total expenditure for social insurance pensions in 2015
SAR billion
17
$ billion
4.53
2015
No. of beneficiaries of the decision to exempt special needs people from visa fees related to recruitment of nurses, drivers and laborers
Beneficiary
136,500
 
 
2017
No. of male beneficiaries of the decision to exempt special needs people from visa fees related to recruitment of nurses, drivers and laborers
Beneficiary
73,500
 
 
2017
No. of female beneficiaries of the decision to exempt special needs people from visa fees related to recruitment of nurses, drivers and laborers
Beneficiary
63,000
 
 
2017
 Proportion of population living in households with access to basic services
%
100%
 
 
2016
Proportion of population using safely managed sanitation services 
%
99%


2016
Proportion of population living in households with access to sanitation services
%
99%
 
 
2016
Direct economic loss attributed to disaster in relation to global gross domestic product (GDP)
%
0.0043%


2016
Proportion of total government spending on essential services (education, health and social protection)
%
36
 
 
2017
Total amounts earmarked for educational scholarships programs of the Social Charity Fund in 2016
SAR million
524.30
$ million
139.81
2016
Total amounts earmarked for training and employment programs of the Social Charity Fund in 2016
SAR million
114.40
$ million
30.51
2016
Total amounts earmarked for \0xECMy Future programs of the Social Charity Fund in 2016
SAR million
18.10
$ million
5.83
2016
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Family heads
Family head
3,710,634
 
 
2017
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Dependents
Dependent
9,237,735
 
 
2017
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Unqualified dependents
Dependent
451,000
 
 
2017
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Unqualified family heads
Family head
85,742
 
 
2017
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program-Qualified recipients, including family heads and dependents
Dependent/ family head
12.948.369
 
 
2017
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program, family heads 
Family head
3,862,346
 
 
2018
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Qualified family heads
Family head
120,173
 
 
2018
Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- Unqualified dependents	Dependent	422,439	 	 	2018 Total beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- dependents	Dependent	9,542,633	 	 	2018
Total qualified beneficiaries of Citizen Account program- including family heads and dependents
Dependent/ family head
13.404.978
 
 
2018
Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture



Value of export of dates through electronic trade, expected by 2020
SAR million
820
$ million
218.67
2020
Ksrelief international food aid (food security) during the period 2015-2018	SAR million	982.5	$ million	262	2018
Prevalence of malnutrition (Wasting) among children under 5 years of age
%
3.30%
 
 
2016
Prevalence of malnutrition (overweight) among children under 5 years of age
%
9.10%
 
 
2016
Prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years of age
%
10.60%
 
 
2016
Prevalence of undernourishment
%
4.10%
 
 
2016
Proportion of plant and animal genetic resources for food and agriculture 
%
20%
 
 
2016
The agriculture orientation index for government expenditures
%
11.1%
 
 
2016
Proportion of agricultural area under productive and sustainable agriculture
%
16%
 
 
2014
Proportion of agricultural area under productive and sustainable agriculture


Allocations for health services and social development sector for 2018 
SAR billion
147
$ billion
39.20
2018
Total amounts allocated for Vision Realization Programs pertinent to health services and social development sector in 2018
SAR billion
33
$ billion
8.8
2018
Number of new hospitals currently under implementation and upgrading in all provinces of the Kingdom
Hospital
36
 
 
2018
Bed capacity of new hospitals currently under implementation and upgrading in all provinces of the Kingdom
Bed
8,950
 
 
2018
Number of medical cities currently under implementation and upgrading 
Medical city
2
 
 
2018
Bed capacity of medical cities currently under implementation and upgrading 
Bed
2,350
 
 
2018
Health worker density and distribution 





Number of physicians, including dentists, per 10,000 population in the Kingdom
Physician
28,3
 
 
2016
Number of nurses, including midwives, per 10,000 population in the Kingdom
Nurse
57
 
 
2016
Number of pharmacists per 10,000 population in the Kingdom
Pharmacist
7,9
 
 
2016
Number of allied medical staff, excluding physicians, dentists, nurses, midwives and pharmacists, per 10,000 population in the Kingdom
Technician/ admin staff
33,8
 
 
2016
Kingdomis worldwide ranking among 190 countries in terms of health services quality
Ranking
26
 
 
2017
Number of participants in Al Hasa Governorateis first female marathon \0xECAl Hasa on the run
Participant
1500
 
 
2017
Number of participants in the hiking events organized in Riyadh, Jeddah and Jubail at the end of 2017
Participant
5,000
 
 
2017
Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all


Number of schools in Saudi Arabia
School
38,368
 
 
2017
Number of school students (Boys and girls)
Student
6,230,108
 
 
2017
Number of school teachers (Male and female)
Teacher
537,147
 
 
2017
Number of public universities in Saudi Arabia
University
28
 
 
2017
Number of private universities and colleges in Saudi Arabia
University/ college
30
 
 
2017
Number of university students in Saudi Arabia (male and female students)
College student
1,489,013
 
 
2017
Number of students on scholarship outside the Kingdom (male and female 	Scholarship 	174,333	 	 	2017
students)	student

170	171
 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year

 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Budget allocations for general and higher education and training in 2018
SAR billion
192
$ billion
51.20
2018

Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Riyadh Province
million m3
483
 
 
2016
Enrolment rate In primary education
%
98%
 
 
2017














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Makkah Province
million m3
693
 
 
2016
Net enrolment rate in primary school education
%
98%
 
 
2017







Net enrolment rate in intermediate school education
%
97%
 
 
2017














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Makkah Province
million m3
7
 
 
2016
Net enrolment rate in secondary school education
%
94%
 
 
2017







Survival rate in primary education
%
97%
 
 
2017

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Medina Province
million m3
148
 
 
2016
Gender parity index in education enrolment
%
1.02%
 
 
2017














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Medina Province
million m3
26
 
 
2016
Student / teacher ratio
Student
11
 
 
2017







Percentage share of private and foreign education
%
17.90%
 
 
2017














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Qassim Province
million m3
6
 
 
2016
Percentage rented buildings
%
23%


2017







Enrolment rate, vocational education
%
24.26%
 
 
2017

Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Qassim Province
million m3
126
 
 
2016
Total enrolment rate, higher education
%
69%
 
 
2017







Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in the Eastern Province
million m3
358
 
 
2016
Women participation rate in the labor market
%
18%
 
 
2017














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in the Eastern Province
million m3
275
 
 
2016
Expected women participation rate in the labor market by 2020
%
25%
 
 
2020







Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (Shura Council)
%
20%


2013

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Asir Province
million m3
10
 
 
2016
Proportion of seats held by women in local government (Municipal Councils) 
Seat
19
 
 
2016














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Asir Province
million m3
73
 
 
2016
Number of commercial registrations held by women
Registrations
27,0001
 
 
2017







Womenis share in private sector investments
%
20%
 
 
2017

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Tabuk Province
million m3
11
 
 
2016
Ratio of females in the Kingdomis total population
%
49.60%
 
 
2016














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Tabuk Province
million m3
59
 
 
2016
Economic participation rate of women
%
19%
 
 
2016







Economic participation rate of men
%
64.60%
 
 
2016














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Hail Province
million m3
0
 
 
2016
Number of Family Council members
Member
16
 
 
2015







Number of new women jobs targeted for creation by 2020
Job
450,000
 
 
2020

Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Hail Province
million m3
55
 
 
2016
Number of Family Council female members
Female member
8
 
 
2015














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in North Borders Province
million m3
0
 
 
2016
Goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all









Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in North Borders Province
million m3
22
 
 
2016
Total number of dams constructed in the Kingdom
Dam
508
 
 
2016







Total storage capacity of dams constructed in the Kingdom
billion m3
2.2
 
 
2016














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Jazan Borders Province
million m3
42
 
 
2016
Total number of dams under construction in the Kingdom
Dam
40
 
 
2016







Total storage capacity of dams, both completed and under construction in the Kingdom
billion m3
2.5
 
 
2016

Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Jazan Province
million m3
36
 
 
2016
Total design storage capacity of all dams in the Kingdom by 2030
billion m3
4,5
 
 
2030

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Najan Borders Province
million m3
0
 
 
2016
Total number of dams designated for drinking water supply in the Kingdom (both completed and under construction)
Dam
58
 
 
2016














Total volume of drinking water distributed (groundwater and dams) in Najan Province
million m3
23
 
 
2016
Total water demand
billion m3
24.83
 
 
2015














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in AlBaha Province
million m3
13
 
 
2016
Total water demand for agricultural purposes
%
84%
 
 
2015







Total water demand for domestic purposes
%
12%
 
 
2015














Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in AlBaha Province
million m3
27
 
 
2016
Total water demand for industrial purposes
%
4%
 
 
2015







Total volume of drinking water distributed
million m3
3.025
 
 
2015

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in AlJouf Province
million m3
0
 
 
2016
Share of desalinated water in total distributed water
%
61%
 
 
2015







Share of water produced from wells and dams in total distributed water
%
39%
 
 
2015

Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in AlJouf Province
million m3
41
 
 
2016
Percentage annual increase of total distributed water, 2014-2015
%
5%
 
 
2015














Water consumption, by province
million m3
 
 
 
 
  Actual volume of desalinated water produced in 2016
  million m3
  1,335
 
 
  2016














Riyadh 
 
974
 
 
2016
  Number of water desalination plants in the Kingdom
  Plant
  29
 
 
  2016














Makkah
 
700
 
 
2016
Total volume of drinking water distributed (desalinated water) in Riyadh Province
million m3
491
 
 
2016














Medina
 
174
 
 
2016


Qassim 
 
132
 
 
2016
172	173

Eastern Province 	 	633	 	 
	 	83	 	 
	 	70	 	 
North Borders
 
22
 
 
2016
Jazan
 
78
 
 
2016
Najran
 
23
 
 
2016
AlBaha 
 
40
 
 
2016
AlJouf
 
41
 
 
2016
Share in total water consumption, by province
%
 
 
 
 
Riyadh 
 
32%
 
 
2016
Makkah
 
23%
 
 
2016
Medina
 
6%
 
 
2016
Qassim 
 
4%
 
 
2016
Eastern province 
 
21
 
 
2016
Asir
 
3%
 
 
2016
Tabuk
 
2%
 
 
2016
Hail
 
2%
 
 
2016
North Borders
 
1%
 
 
2016
Jazan
 
3%
 
 
2016
Najran
 
1%
 
 
2016
AlBaha 
 
1%
 
 
2016
AlJouf
 
1%
 
 
2016
Average per capita water consumption, by province
Liter/day
 
 
 
 
Riyadh 
 
337
 
 
2016
Makkah
 
237
 
 
2016
Medina
 
231
 
 
2016
Qassim 
 
258
 
 
2016
Eastern province 
 
364
 
 
2016
Asir
 
104
 
 
2016
Tabuk
 
211
 
 
2016
Hail
 
220
 
 
2016
North Borders
 
164
 
 
2016
Jazan
 
136
 
 
2016
Najran
 
108
 
 
2016
AlBaha 
 
232
 
 
2016
AlJouf
 
222
 
 
2016
Goal 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all


Share of oil sector GDP contribution
%
43%
 
 
2017
Proportion of electricity services delivery to all provinces of the Kingdom
%
99%
 
 
2017
Expected volume of renewable energy production in the Kingdom, by 2020
GW
3.45
 
 
2020
Expected share of renewable energy in total energy production in the Kingdom, by 2020
%
4%
 
 
2020
Expected volume of renewable energy production in the Kingdom, by 2023
GW
9.5
 
 
2023
Expected share of renewable energy in total energy production in the Kingdom, by 2023
%
10%
 
 
2023
Expected capacity of Sakaka energy generation project by 2019	MW	300	2019 Generation capacity of Al-Midra Tower parking project in Dhahran through 	MW	10.5	 	 	2017
Number of houses expected to be served by Sakaka energy generation project by 2019
House
40,000


2019
solar energy
Expected production capacity of Turaif wind power project
MW
2.7
 
 
2017
Expected production capacity of Huraymla wind power project
MW
2?7
 
 
2017
Expected production capacity of Tabuk solar energy project
MW
1
 
 
2017
Expected production capacity of Solar panels at King Abdullah University of 	MW	2	 	 	2017
Science & Technology (KAUST)
Expected production capacity of Solar panels at King Abdullah Petroleum Studies and Research Center (KAPSARC)
MW
5
 
 
2017
Proportion of houses using solar power
%
1.30%
 
 
2017
Proportion of houses using solar power in Hail city
%
2.84%
 
 
2017
Average fuel use efficiency at Saudi Electricity Corporation (SEC) and private sector power plants
%
38.80%
 
 
2017
Share of transport sector in total domestic consumption of primary energy
%
21%
 
 
2017
Share of land transport in total transport sector consumption of primary energy
%
90%
 
 
2017
Share of buildingsi sector in total domestic consumption of primary energy
%
29%
 
 
2017
Share of buildingsi sector in total electric energy produced
%
75%
 
 
2017
Share of air conditioners in total buildingsi sector consumption of domestic energy
%
65%
 
 
2017
Share of industrial sector in total domestic consumption of energy
%
42%
 
 
2017
Share of iron, cement and petrochemical industries in total industrial sectoris energy consumption
%
80%
 
 
2017
Average fuel economy in Saudi Arabia
Km/litre
12.2
 
 
2012
Expected average fuel economy in Saudi Arabia by 2020
Km/litre
15
 
 
2020
Number of vehicles in Saudi Arabia by the end of 2016
Million vehicles
15
 
 
2016
Expected number of vehicles in Saudi Arabia by 2030
Million vehicles
30
 
 
2030
Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all

Population of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
million
32.60
 
 
2017
Unemployment rate in Saudi Arabia
%
11.60%
 
 
2017
Expected unemployment rate in Saudi Arabia by 2030
%
7%
 
 
2030
Private sectoris GDP contribution by 2030
%
65%
 
 
2030
Expected share of non-oil exports in non-oil GDP by 2030
%
50%
 
 
2030
Value of Public Investment Fund assets 
SAR billion
840
$ billion
224
2017
Expected value of Public Investment Fund assets by 2020
SAR trillion
1.50
$ billion
400
2020
Expected value of Public Investment Fund assets by 2030
SAR trillion
7
$ trillion
1.87
2030
Number of Kingdom-wide initiatives to upgrade cities, promote heritage and support finance in tourism sector
Initiative
23
 
 
2017
Total number of Cooperation agreements held by Saudi Commission for Tourism and National Heritage (SCTH) with partners
Agreement
121
 
 
2017
Proportion of jobs in sustainable tourism industries out of total tourism jobs, Expected by 2020
Million jobs
1,7
 
 
2020
Total tourism sector investments expected by 2020
SAR billion
170
$ billion
45.33
2020
Tourism direct GDP as a proportion of total GDP and in growth rate, Expected by 2020





SAR billion
118
$ billion
31.47
2020

Number of persons listed in the National Registry of Craftsmen
craftsman
3,883
 
 
2016
Number of craftsmen and craftswomen trained through BARE program
Trainee
1,007
 
 
2016
Number of participations by BARE program in local and international Participation 25  2016 exhibitions

174	175
 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year

 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Number of short documentaries on Saudi crafts, along with BARE participations
short documentary
75
 
 
2016

Targeted rate of PIF contribution to GDP by 2020
%
6.30%
 
 
2018







New direct job opportunities targeted by PIF by 2020
Job
20,000
 
 
2020
Number of participations in providing finance to craftsmen and craftswomen
Funding support
42
 
 
2016














New indirect job opportunities targeted by PIF by 2020
Job
9,000
 
 
2020







New building-related job opportunities targeted by PIF by 2020
Job
256,000
 
 
2020
Number of craftsmen and craftswomen who took part in events conducted in provinces
Participation
820
 
 
2016














PIF contribution to local content
SAR billion
32
$ billion
8.53
2017
Number of operating creativity centers for crafts
Center
7
 
 
2016

Targeted PIF contribution to local content by 2020
SAR billion
50
$ billion
13.33
2020
Number of malls taking part as outlets for vending and marketing of craft products
Mall
51
 
 
2016

Share of PIF contribution to total local content
%
1.7%
 
 
2017







PIF contribution to local content by 2020
%
2.3%
 
 
2020
Number of models approved as presents of Saudi crafts
Model
50
 
 
2016














Volume of cumulative non-government investment targeted for 2020
SAR billion
630
$ billion
168
2020
Number of participations in social media (Tweets)
Tweet
8,647
 
 
2016














Expected PIF investment impact on the balance of payments in 2020
SAR billion
47
$ billion
12.53
2020
Number of prize winners in crafts
Person
170
 
 
2016














Expected PIF investment impact on actual household final consumption rate by 2020
%
1.40%
 
 
2020
Number of BARE promotion workshops in provinces
Workshop
12
 
 
2016







Number of BARE program participations in consumer product exhibitions
Participation
147
 
 
2016

Expected PIF investment impact on inflation rate by 2020
%
0.7%
 
 
2020
Share of Saudi working women in total workforce
%
17%
 
 
2016

Technical Colleges, Branches and International Technical Colleges
 
 
 
 
 
Expected share of Saudi working women in total workforce
%
25%
 
 
2020

Number of annual admissions targeted (male)
Student
53,000
 
 
2016
Share of employment of persons with disability who are capable of work
%
7.7%
 
 
2016

Actual number of admissions achieved (male)
Student
46,130
 
 
2016
Expected share of employment of persons with disabilities who are capable of work by 2020
%
15%
 
 
2020

% achieved of targeted admissions (Male)
%
87%
 
 
2016







Number of annual admissions targeted (Female)
Student
11,240
 
 
2016
% compliance with wage protection system
%
50%
 
 
2016














Actual number of admissions achieved (female)
Student
9,636
 
 
2016
Targeted % compliance with wage protection system
%
80%
 
 
2020














% achieved of targeted admissions (female)
%
85.7%
 
 
2016
Kingdomis ranking in the \0xECBest Countries to Live in for Expats"
Ranking
65
 
 
2016














Annual target of total trainees (male)
Trainee
80,000
 
 
2016
Kingdomis targeted ranking in the \0xECBest Countries to Live in for Expats by 2020
Ranking
50
 
 
2020














Actual number achieved of total annual trainees (male)
Trainee
116,643
 
 
2016







% achieved of targeted annual number of trainees (male)
%
145,8%
 
 
2016
Kingdomis ranking in the Global Talent Competitiveness Index
Ranking
39
 
 
2016














Annual target of total trainees (female)
Trainee
19,500
 
 
2016
Kingdomis targeted ranking in the Global Talent Competitiveness Index by 2020
Ranking
37
 
 
2020














Actual number achieved of total trainees (female)
Trainee
21,549
 
 
2016
Sales volume of productive families that receive support from the Social Development Bank
SAR million
360
$ million
96
2016

% achieved of targeted total annual trainees (female)
%
110,5%
 
 
2016







Annual target of total graduates (male)
Graduate
16,020
 
 
2016
Expected sales volume of productive families that receive support from the Social Development Bank, by 2020
SAR billion
2.50
$ million
666.67
2020














Actual number achieved of total annual graduates (male)
Graduate
11,092
 
 
2016







% achieved of targeted annual number of graduates (male)
%
69.20%
 
 
2016
GDP share of non-profit sector
%
0,2%


2016














Annual target of total graduates (female)
Graduate
2,580
 
 
2016
Targeted GDP share of non-profit sector, by 2020
%
0,6%


2020














Actual number achieved of total annual graduates (female)
Graduate
1,556
 
 
2016
Proportion of beneficiaries who opt out from financial support provided by the Ministry of Labor and Social Development
%
1%
 
 
2016














% achieved of targeted annual number of graduates (female)
%
60.3%
 
 
2016
Targeted proportion of beneficiaries who opt out from financial support provided by the Ministry of Labor and Social Development, by 2020
%
12%
 
 
2020

Secondary Technical Institutes 







Number of annual admissions targeted (male)
Student
12,000
 
 
2016
Total number of volunteers in Saudi Arabia, 2016
Volunteer
23,000
 
 
2016














Actual admissions achieved 
Student
5,719
 
 
2016
Total number of volunteers in Saudi Arabia, 2017
Volunteer
55,832
 
 
2017














% achieved of targeted admissions
%
47.7%
 
 
2016
Targeted number of volunteers in Saudi Arabia, by 2020
Volunteer
300,000
 
 
2020














Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
15,000
 
 
2016
Per capita economic value of volunteering in Saudi Arabia
SAR
0.6
$ 
0.16
2016














Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
18,157
 
 
2016
Targeted per capita economic value of volunteering in Saudi Arabia, by 2020
SAR
15
$ 
4
2020














% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
121%
 
 
2016
Total economic value of volunteering
SAR million
45,56
$ million
12.15
2017














Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
5,000
 
 
2016
Total PIF assets, 2015
SAR billion
570
$ billion
152
2015














Actual number achieved of total annual graduates 
Graduate
2,791
 
 
2016
Targeted % increase in volume of PIF foreign investments in 2020 
%
25%
 
 
2020














% achieved of targeted annual number of graduates
%
55.8%
 
 
2016
Targeted % increase in foreign investments through PIF programs
SAR billion
20
$ billion
5.33
2018














On-the-job training and the national system of joint training & vocational military training 
Number of jobs targeted in 2020 by PIF in new fields and R&D
Job
11,000
 
 
2020









Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
3,050
 
 
2016
Investment amount expected by PIF in new fields and R&D in 2020
SAR billion
210
$ billion
56
2020














Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
3,866
 
 
2016
PIF contribution to GDP
SAR billion
110
$ billion
29.33
2016














% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
126.80%
 
 
2016
Rate of PIF contribution to GDP
%
4.4%
 
 
2016














Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
2,450
 
 
2016
Targeted PIF contribution to GDP, by 2020
SAR billion
170
$ billion
45.33
2020















176	177

Actual number achieved of total annual graduates 
Graduate
1,974
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
80.75%
 
 
2016
Girlsi Welfare and Women Prisons
Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
1,200
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
1,101
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
91.75
 
 
2016
Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
1,100
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual graduates 
Graduate
1,050
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual graduates
%
95,45%
 
 
2016
Industrial vocational training program in prisons


 
 

Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
2,400
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
4,992
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
208%
 
 
2016
Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
1,200
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual graduates 
Graduate
1,342
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual graduates
%
111.80%
 
 
2016
Private sector training program

Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
172,200


2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
183,691
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
106.7%
 
 
2016
Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
154,300
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual graduates 
Graduate
180,799
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual graduates
%
117.2%
 
 
2016
E-Training program

Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
80,000
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
34,370
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
43%
 
 
2016
Higher technical institutes of strategic partnerships
 
 
 
 
 
Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
10,000
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
9,943
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
99.4%
 
 
2016
Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
3,400
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual graduates
Graduate
3,672
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual graduates
%
108%
 
 
2016
Training courses (Business center) 

Annual target of total trainees
Trainee
43,295
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual trainees
Trainee
82,725
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual trainees
%
191.1%
 
 
2016
Annual target of total graduates
Graduate
12,000
 
 
2016
Actual number achieved of total annual graduates
Graduate
10,340
 
 
2016
% achieved of targeted total annual graduates
%
86.2%
 
 
2016
Proportion of Saudi workforce in the private sector
%
31.74%
 
 
2017
Rate of Saudization of jobs in the Kingdom
%
18.37%
 
 
2017
Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster inno
vation
Budget amount allocated infrastructure and transport development in 	SAR billion	54	$ billion	14.40	2018
Saudi Arabia
Total expenditure made on transport infrastructure over the last decade 	SAR billion	400	$ billion	106.67	2016
(2007-2017)
Total length of roads currently under construction
Km
14,000
 
 
2017
Total cost of all roads currently under construction 
SAR billion
46
$ billion
12.27
2017
Lengths of existing roads up to the end 0f 2017, as per engineering classification




Single carriageway	Km	49,713	 	 	2017
Dual carriageway
Km
13,155
 
 
2017
Expressway
Km
5,393
 
 
2017
Aqabat roads
Km
264
 
 
2017
Total
Km 
68,525
 
 
2017
Total expenditure made on transport infrastructure over the past decade (2007-2017)
SAR billion
400
$ billion
106
2017
Total length of intercity expressways, under MOT superVision
Km
5,257
 
 
2017
Total length of inner-city asphalted roads, under MOMRA superVision
Km
144,000
 
 
2017
Total length of rail tracks - km
Km
4,500
 
 
2017
Total railway passengers (Riyadh-Dammam)
Million passengers
1.2
 
 
2017
Average TEU of Riyadh n Dammam train 
 
600,000
 
 
2017
Volume of minerals shipped via railways
Million MT
7
 
 
2017
Total number of non-oil commercial ports
Port
10
 
 
2017
Proportion of treated storage units
TEU
7.8
 
 
2015
Total revenues of ports
SAR billion
4.50
$ billion
1.20
2015
Total number of airports in Saudi Arabia
Airport
27
 
 
2017
Total number of international airports in Saudi Arabia
Airport
4
 
 
2017
Total number of regional airports in Saudi Arabia
Airport
9
 
 
2017
Total number of domestic airports in Saudi Arabia
Airport
12
 
 
2017
Number of passengers handled by Saudi airports per year 
Million passengers
86
 
 
2017
Annual volume of air cargo handled through Saudi airports
Million tons
1
 
 
2017
Penetration rate of mobile telecommunication networks in populated areas, 2015-2017
%
99%
 
 
2017
Annual research papers expected to be issued by scientific institutions in the Kingdom by 2020
Research
20,000
 
 
2020
Cumulative total number of patents issued in the Kingdom, by 2020
Patent
5,000
 
 
2020
Total experts expected to be qualified through technical leadersi preparation program by 2020
Expert
350
 
 
2020
Number of enterprises expected for content development by 2020
Expert
17
 
 
2020
Total technologies expected to be developed and localized in targeted strategic sectors by 2020
Technology
125
 
 
2016
Total number of jobs expected to be generated in startup companies emerging from the incubator and business accelerator program by 2020
Job
3,600
 
 
2020
Total number of startup technology companies that will be set up and supported through the innovative research support program by 2020
Company
800
 
 
2020
Total number of services that will be provided to government and private sector bodies by 2020
Service
200
 
 
2020
KACST expenditure on scientific research, innovation and technology





Scientific research expenditure
SAR million
17,14
$ million
45.71
2016
Support of inventors
SAR million
28
$ million
7.47
2016
Science, technology and community
SAR million
49,78
$ million
13.27
2016
Science, technology and innovation systems	SAR million	1,42	$ 1000	37,91	2016

178	179

180	181


 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
35%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
100%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
15%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
1.80%
 
 
2017
Jazan Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
174,196
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
77%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
100%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
18%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
4.9%
 
 
2017
Asir Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
299,571
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
31%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
99.7
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
46%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
8.5%
 
 
2017
AlBaha Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
66,080
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
77%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
100%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
4%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
1.80%
 
 
2017
Medinah Province 





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
243,930
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
71%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
99.90%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
49%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
6.90%
 
 
2017
Tabuk Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
117,656
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
79%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
100%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
59%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
3.30%
 
 
2017
AlJouf Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
56,280
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
91%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
100%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
48%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
1.60%
 
 
2017
Eastern Province





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
500,465
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
93%
 
 
2017


 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
99.80%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
82%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
14.20%
 
 
2017
North Borders Province 





Number of dwellings
Dwelling
37,072
 
 
2017
Houses by source of potable water (Public water system)
%
95%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of electricity (Public electricity system)
%
99,9%
 
 
2017
Houses by source of sanitation (Public sanitation system)
%
47%
 
 
2017
Relative distribution of dwellings in total number of dwellings (Saudi household occupied dwellings)
%
1.06%
 
 
2017
Percentage of work carried out towards completion of King Abdulaziz Project for Public Transport in Riyadh
%
68%
 
 
2017
Riyadh Metro Project





Number of train lines
line
6
 
 
2017
Train line length
km
176
 
 
2017
Number of train cars
Car
470
 
 
2017
Number of train stations
Station
85
 
 
2017
Number of maintenance and parking centers
Center
7
 
 
2017
Number of work sites
Site
250
 
 
2017
Number of control & maintenance centers
Center
5
 
 
2017
Number of passengers per day (maximum capacity)
Million passengers
3,6
 
 
2017
Riyadh Rapid Bus Transit Project





Number of bus lines 
Line
22
 
 
2017
Length of bus lines
km
1,900
 
 
2017
Number of Terminal stations
Main stops
7
 
 
2017
Number of bus stop points
Terminal stations
3,000
 
 
2017
Number of buses
Bus
906
 
 
2017
Number of community bus stops
Community stop
1,800
 
 
2017
Number of regular line stations
Stops
1,083
 
 
2017
Passengers per day





(maximum capacity)
Passengers
900,000
 
 
2017
Wadi Hanifa catchment basin area
km2
4,000
 
 
2017
Length of Wadi Hanifa
km
120
 
 
2017
Proportion of achievement of transport strategy and means of transport in urban planning
%
17.20%
 
 
2017
Expected proportion of achievement of transport strategy and means of transport in urban planning, by 2020
%
100%
 
 
2020
Per capita share of road length
Linear meter
4.27
 
 
2017
Expected per capita share of road length, by 2020
Linear meter
4.04
 
 
2020
Expected proportion of the population to be served by rainwater disposal projects, by 2020
%
100%
 
 
2020
Percentage of work carried out towards completion of phases for update of urban strategy
%
15%
 
 
2017
Percentage of work carried out towards completion of phases for update of urban strategy, by 2020
%
100%
 
 
2020

182	183

184	185

 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Total amounts provided by KSrelief, since it was founded in 2015
SAR billion
3,92
$ billion
1.04
2017
Share of government humanitarian assistance (official development aid) in total humanitarian aid extended by KSrelief
%
70%


2017
Total amounts provided by the Kingdom in development assistance to other countries through Saudi Fund for Development (SFD)


$ billion
14.6
2017
Number of projects supported by Saudi Fund for Development
Project
635
 
 
2017
Number of countries that received support provided by Saudi Fund for Development
Country
83
 
 
2017
Total amount of remittances made by expatriate workers in the Kingdom
SAR billion
151,90
$ billion
40.50
2016
Number of countries that benefited from the socio-economic development support program, as well as aid programs directed to public institutions and structural adjustment
Country
16
 
 
2017
Number of African countries that benefited from the socio-economic development support program, as well as aid programs directed to public institutions and structural adjustment
Country
14
 
 
2017
Number of Asian countries that benefited from the socio-economic development support program, as well as aid programs directed to public institutions and structural adjustment
Country
2
 
 
2017
Total cost of socio-economic development support program, as well as aid programs directed to public institutions and structural adjustment
SAR million
465.10
$ million
124.03
2017
Number of finance agreements signed by the Kingdom for construction and improvement of hydraulic power dams 
Agreement
15
 
 
2017
Number of hydraulic power dams covered by finance agreements 
Dam
11
 
 
2017
Total loans extended for construction and improvement of hydraulic power dams
SAR billion
2.40
$ million
640
2017
Total loans extended for construction of hydraulic power dams in Asia
SAR billion
1.10
$ million
293.33
2017
Total loans extended for construction of hydraulic power dams in Africa
SAR billion
1.20
$ million
320
2017
Share of Saudi Arabia in MENAis free market economy as a share of the combined GDP of MENA
%
25%
 
 
2017
Total amount approved for the export promotion and export finance program as well as the initiative for indirect lending of SMEs 
SAR billion
72
$ billion
19.20
2017
Total Saudi contribution to the Lives and Livelihoods Fund (LLF), through KSrelief
SAR million
26.66
$ million
100
2017
Lives and Livelihoods Fundis Capital 
SAR billion
9.30
$ billion
2.48
2017
Number of Yemeni refugees hosted by the Kingdom
Person
591,191
 
 
2018
Number of Syrian refugees hosted by the Kingdom
Person
262,573
 
 
2018
Number of Myanmar refugees hosted by the Kingdom 
Person
249,669
 
 
2018
Total amount of aid extended by the Kingdom to Yemen over the past three years (2015-2018
SAR billion
5.79
$ billion
1.54
2018
Number of projects implemented by Saudi Arabia in Yemen, through KSrelief, which targeted food security, refugees, cholera control, water and wastewater.
Project
260
 
 
2018
Amount of the Kingdomis grant to the UN to finance Humanitarian Response Plan in Yemen
SAR billion
1.88
$ million
500
2018
Number of beneficiaries of MiSKis educational programs and initiatives, 2017
Project
5,721



Number of participants in training programs among beneficiaries of MiSK education programs and initiatives, 2017
Trainee
2,128



Number of participants in school education programs (Kindergarten-to-secondary school levels) among beneficiaries of MiSK education programs and initiatives, 2017
Participant
3,508



Number of participants in postgraduate study level programs among beneficiaries of MiSK education programs and initiatives, 2017
Participant
58



Number of beneficiaries of MiSK n sponsored \0xECSaudi Arabia is Programming initiative
Person
300,000





 Indicator 
Unit
Value
Unit
Amount USD
Year
Number of trainers enlisted for cooperation with MiSK to train young men and women on programming and technical creativity basics
Trainer
4,411



Number of cities in which MiSK conducted training courses to train young men and women on programming and technical creativity basics 
City
100



Number of beneficiaries of \0xECAll Online initiative, launched by MiSK in collaboration with Google Corporation and the Saudi Ministry of Education
Person
20,326



Number of artists enabled by MiSK in 2017
Artist
116



Number of persons with deep interest in culture and arts, who benefited from culture and arts initiatives conducted by MiSK
Person
150,000



Number of domestic and international art and culture exhibitions organized by MiSK
Exhibition
11



Number of art works displayed at domestic and international art and culture exhibitions organized by MiSK
Art work
250



Number of young men and women who have ben enabled in Creative Digital Media through related MiSK initiatives
Person
350,000



Number of youth leaders who took part in MiSK global initiatives
Person
7,700



Number of non-government organizations that took part in MiSK global initiatives conducted in 2017 in 75 countries
NGO
600



Total number of beneficiaries of worldwide Inventor Support Programs conducted by MiSK
Inventor
100



Amount of financial support provided by MiSK for development and realization of innovations and ideas, per individual inventor
SAR 
100,000
$ 
26,670

Number of beneficiaries of Training in Science program conducted by MiSK, 2017
Person
2,126



Number of participants in \0xECHour of Code program conducted by MiSK in conjunction with Microsoft, in 13 provinces of the Kingdom
Programmers
307,000



Share of participants, aged 7-18 years, who took part in the \0xECHour of Code program
%
97.5%



Share of girls who took part in the \0xECHour of Code program, in total number of participants
%
76%

