
2.1 	The Future is Now  
 
The Government of the Republic of Slovenia identified the drafting of a new development strategy for the nation as one of the priority tasks of its current mandate. The basic starting point in the drafting of key development documents was to ensure that the process is as open and inclusive as possible and that the vision of the future of Slovenia reflects the vision of its inhabitants. The first discussions about the future of Slovenia made it clear that the creation of a long-term development framework that will ensure the well-being of current generations and ensure high 
                                                          
2 The Government Office performs the following tasks: 
- drafts the proposal for Sloveniais Development Strategy in cooperation with the Institute of Macroeconomic Analysis and Development (IMAD) and Ministry of Finance, 
- coordinates development planning as well as the development documents of the Republic of Slovenia and monitors the implementation of development policies and its programmes, 
- is responsible for the coordination of documents pertaining to development planning and compliance of national development planning programmes and the 
quality of life for the generations to come was necessary. The Vision of Slovenia 2050 (See Annex) was conducted through 27 events throughout the country with several hundred participants who devoted more than 100 hours of debates and talks on the future of Slovenia. Furthermore, a survey on wellbeing has been conducted throughout the country. Results of all the activities reaffirmed that Slovenians are committed to sustainable development and that this is the only way forward for the nation.  
 
Before the preparation of the new national development strategy, a clear decision in line with the principle of the 2030 Agenda under Article 74 (f) has been made, stating that for Slovenia the follow-up and review process on the implementation of the 
Sustainable Development Goals will\0xD6 
 
\0xD6 build on existing platforms and processes, where these exist, avoid duplication and respond to national circumstances, capacities, needs, and priorities. They will evolve over time, taking into account emerging issues and the development of new methodologies, and will minimise the reporting burden on national 
administrations\0xD6 
 
Slovenia decided to incorporate the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda in its new national development framework to avoid duplication and to respond to national circumstances, capacities, needs, and priorities. However, the decision to participate in the VNR in the second year since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda also had another reason. Slovenia embraced the VNR process as a significant and helpful tool to raise awareness among stakeholders, to internalise the ownership among ministries, and to understand the universal nature of the 2030 Agenda as well as to foster coordination and cooperation in order to track the progress in implementing the global goals. 
European Union and other international organisationsi development documents, 
- manages the preparation and coordination of the strategic documents with the European Union, on the basis of which the Republic of Slovenia can absorb the available Cohesion Policy funds under the EU budget and performs management tasks for EU Structural Funds, the Cohesion Fund and other financial mechanisms, 
- advises the Government of the Republic of Slovenia on adopting the necessary actions and acts pertaining to the implementation and monitoring development and Cohesion Policy implementation. 


Figure 1: The system of dynamic governance of strategic excellence of Slovenia 

 
2.2 Establishing the whole-ofgovernment approach, breaking siloes, 
and building partnerships  
 
To successfully address the 17 SDGs and their 169 associated targets, which are integral and indivisible, a whole-of-government approach is necessary. The Slovenian approach was based decision by the Government that Slovenia, while realising its own development path in a sustainable and inclusive way, is also firmly aware of its responsibility for world peace and prosperity, and that an integrated approach is needed to implement the 2030 Agenda. To this end, a coordination mechanism has been set up with the aim of increasing the awareness among the ministries of the 2030 Agenda and the equal responsibility of all departments for its implementation, as well as establishing a long-term partnership with all stakeholders. 
Political commitment 
 
A clear political commitment was given at the beginning of the current Governmentis mandate with a decision that Slovenia needs a new development strategy and that it must be sustainable. Following the decision that Slovenia will be one of the 44 countries preparing the VNR and presenting it at the 2017 HLPF, the Minister for Development and European Cohesion Policy, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs informed all the ministers about the process and called for their commitment and leadership to mobilise their ministries. In addition to the letter sent by both ministers, showing that the 2030 Agenda calls for action both at home and in the international community, all the ministers have been regularly informed about the ongoing process at the governmental sessions. The reporting consists of the follow-up reporting to the integrated approach of the drafting process of the new national development strategy and the VNR, the monitoring of the achieved steps in the process, and the reviewing of the timeframe. The final report of the VNR has been adopted by the Government of Slovenia.  
  
Integrated Approach 
 
Through the process of drafting the new national development strategy, the Government Office for Development and European Cohesion Policy carried out numerous activities involving representatives of ministries and other state institutions, as well as representatives of non-governmental organisations, local communities, the private sector, professional organisations, and academia. Thus, in the summer of 2016, nine discussions on strategic priorities were organised, and representatives of stakeholders from all segments of society participated. The discussions were followed by five consultations on specific issues, and a government-wide consultation with 56 directors-general from 16 ministries was carried out. All events included special modules related to the implementation and integration of the 2030 Agenda into the national development framework. Within these activities, the Government has put the dimension of the universality of the 2030 Agenda in its operations in all areas. 
 
In this regard, the fact that the 2030 Agenda reached far beyond the Millennium Development Goals was presented to a wider spectrum of stakeholders. While the 2030 Agenda continues foundational development objectives, such as eradicating poverty, establishing universal education, health, and food security, it also sets out a wide range of economic, social and environmental objectives to empower people to flourish. Moreover, it gives a clear definition of the means of implementation with a crucial lesson that an integrated approach is needed to reach the sustainable goals. None of the three pillars of sustainable development should prevail over the other two and, in this regard, before making policy proposals considering inter-linkages between economic, social and environmental policy areas, as well as ensuring consistency with the international engagements, is of great importance for the successful implementation of the SDG. At the same time, the key governmental representatives from all the ministries have begun to discuss the need to integrate all the areas needed in order to effectively achieve national development goals as well as the Sustainable Development Goals. During discussions and activities, a broader debate was held on how to set up our own effective development plans while simultaneously implementing the 2030 Agenda. 
 
Coordination mechanism 
 
The framework of organised discussions and workshops presented in this report has been replaced by a more systemic solution. The Permanent Inter-Ministerial Working Group on Development Policies was established by the Government at the beginning of 2017 as a coordination mechanism to promote policy coherence and to solve possible policy conflicts. The group is coordinated by the Government Office for Development and European Cohesion Policy and composed of two representatives from each ministry, who represent and work as focal points for development policies and the 2030 Agenda at their ministries. In this regard, their work was crucial in the preparation of the VNR, since the focal points at the ministries represented a communication network with their own coordination architecture at their respective ministries. The coordination mechanism enabled coherent and prompt communication that also resulted in gradually internalising the ownership of the SDGs among ministries, as well as raising awareness of the universal nature of the 2030 Agenda. 

 
Figure 2: Inter-ministerial coordination mechanism 
 
Figure 3: Equilibrium of 5 strategic orientations of the new Slovenian Development Strategy and the inclusive 

approach to achieve well-being for all
Creating Ownership 
 
The final and probably most important exercise in creating ownership has been done through the (primary) gap analysis of all the policies and measurements that Slovenia already has in place and that are contributing to the SDG and their targets. All the ministries have been asked to closely look and analyse their existing strategies and action plans and all the measurements or programmes they are already exercising through the lenses of the 2030 Agenda, through the goals, targets, and the indicators. A comprehensive analysis provided important inputs for the VNR on where Slovenia stands, which indicators we are already measuring, and what concrete actions we are already taking towards achieving the SDGs (discussed in the next chapter). The analysis was also a significant attempt for all the ministries to systematically consider the effects of policies on the wellbeing of people \0xEBhere and nowi, \0xEBelsewherei, and \0xEBlateri. It also provided a valuable overview of trans-boundary and interconnected effects of the policies on the sustainable development. By the end of the year 2017, the analysis will be added to national targets and action plans that will serve as guidelines towards fully achieving the SDGs by 2030.  
 
Building partnerships 
 
In the process leading to the creation of the Vision of 
Slovenia 2050 and to the drafting process of the upcoming national development goals, the various key stakeholders have been involved, from the civil society, non-governmental organisations, businesses, academia, parliament, and youth.  
 
There are more than 27,400 NGOs in Slovenia. The partnership of the Slovenian Government with them has thus far been multi-layered and dispersed covering different areas, fields of work and all line ministries. Considering the preparation of the new national development strategy, first steps have been taken to establish a more integrated approach, especially in establishing more centralised and integrated partnerships with stakeholders in sustainable development. 
 
Within the framework of the preparation of the VNR, gaps in this area have been identified and, above all, the need for a more comprehensive approach to dialogue with civil society, which would integrate sustainable development at the national level, as well as aspects of international development cooperation. The original goal of our first VNR was to fully establish these functional coordination mechanisms with civil society, which could be actively involved in the preparation of reviews and new solution spaces to achieve Sustainable Development Goals. Due to the large scale and intensity of activities in establishing internal mechanisms and the process of the preparation of a new national development strategy, this goal was not entirely achieved this year, but significant first steps have been taken, and the activities will continue in the coming months. During the preparation of the VNR, representatives of NGOs have been invited to participate in the process to prepare an assessment of Sloveniais biggest challenges in achieving sustainable development. Regular discussions during the VNR preparations have been taking place with the representatives of youth in Slovenia, and their report is included as a special chapter of this report.  
 
Incorporating the 2030 Agenda into new national development strategy 
 
When adopted, Sloveniais Development Strategy 2030 will present the framework development plan based on the guidelines of Sloveniais Vision 2050, the basis for development and on Sloveniais international commitments and trends and challenges on the national, European, and global levels. To fulfil the goals of the strategy, an active approach to its effective implementation will be required in the next step.  
The central goal of the strategy will focus on ensuring a high quality of life for all. It will be achieved through a balanced economic, social, and environmental development that creates the conditions and opportunities for the current and future generations. At the level of an individual, a high quality of life is reflected in: (i) good opportunities for work, education, and creativity, (ii) a decent, safe, and active life in a healthy and clean environment, and (iii) inclusion in democratic decision-making and in the co-management of society.  
 
In this regard, our national development strategy will set ambitious objectives across all three dimensions of sustainable development and will seek balance between five strategic directions: (a resilient, inclusive, safe, and responsible society, a highly productive economy that provides value for all, learning for and through life as a value and driver of development, efficient and competent governance driven by cooperation, and a well-preserved natural environment.  
 
The national development goals will be embedded in these five strategic orientations as well as intertwined with the Sustainable Development Goals. They will share characteristics of the SDGs, such as deep interconnections and cross-cutting elements, tackling and addressing the three pillars of sustainable development and inclusiveness. Through national development goals, SDGs will be linked to strategic orientations (See Figure 4). 
 
 
2.3 	Overview of the International 
Development Cooperation of Slovenia  
 
At the regional and global levels, Slovenia contributes to poverty eradication, sustainable development, and gender equality on the basis of updated legal and strategic documents, which were prepared in line with the new paradigm and with the aim of pursuing new trends. The new Resolution on International Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Assistance has just been approved by the Government and is proceeding to Parliament for adoption. The International Development 
Cooperation Act is also being revised.  
 
Particular attention in Slovenia's development cooperation will continue to be given to the strengthening of peaceful and inclusive societies, with focus on good governance, equal opportunities, and quality education, as well as addressing climate change, with focus on the sustainable management of natural and energy resources. The empowerment of women is a cross-cutting priority, in line with our dedication to the respect of human rights. The new Strategy on International Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Assistance of Slovenia will define our priorities in detail, and set objectives and actions to promote SDGs in developing countries in line with their national priorities, capacities and Slovenia's niche advantages. 
 
\0x7F 
ODA rose by 26% in comparison to 2015. 
\0x7F 
Multilateral aid of Slovenia increased by 32% in comparison to 2015, specifically due to increased contribution to the EU ODA budget, increased contribution to the European Development Fund, selected missions of UNDPKO and the International Development Association (IDA). 
\0x7F 
Bilateral aid increased by 18% and amounts to around 29 million USD, of which 2.3 million USD is for humanitarian assistance.  
In the regional context, Slovenia will continue its work in the Western Balkans, European Neighbourhood and Sub-Saharan Africa, with special attention to the least developed countries. We will also work for the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda in the development cooperation of the EU, actively promoting innovative, diverse and inclusive partnerships with civil society and the private sector. We believe that micro, small and medium-size enterprises are important drivers for sustainable development and engines of growth, employment, innovation, and social development, including the empowerment of women, and will therefore continue to promote their role.  
 
Regarding the 2030 Agenda, we have also foreseen an Action Plan for the gradual increase in the share of GNI for ODA in the timeframe of agenda with a view to achieving our ODA commitment. Slovenia's international development cooperation in 2016 in numbers: 
 
\0x7F Slovenia's ODA in 2016 is estimated to be 80 million USD, which represents 0.18% of the GNI. 
 

 
Figure 4: Links between Sloveniais strategic orientations and Sustainable Development Goals 
13 
 

3. 	TOWARDS THE 2030 AGENDA AND ACHIEVING THE SDGs  

 
 
 
        An overview of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda covers an assessment of Slovenia through an analysis of globally agreed indicators and examples of good practice in Slovenia, as well as through benchmarking. The review covers the implementation of the 2030 Agenda from the perspective of national policies and activities, as well as from that of international development cooperation. 
	3.1 	How does Slovenia compare? 
 
In evaluating the position of Slovenia in achieving the SDGs, we used international studies and analyses, among which the SDG Index and the OECD Study on Distance Measurement to the SDGs' Goals proved to be the most appropriate ones. 
 
 
SDG Index 
 
According to the SDG Index developed by the Bertelsmann Stiftung and UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network, Slovenia ranks 17th among 149 countries with an overall SDG performance rate of 76.6%.  
 
 
 

 
Figure 5: SDG Index for Slovenia 
 	 
 	 
 
Note: SDG Index methodology is based on absolute thresholds. To assess a countryis progress on a specific indicator, such absolute quantitative thresholds differentiate between situations in which an SDG threshold has been met (green), where significant challenges remain (yellow), and where major challenges must be overcome if the country is to  meet the goal (red).  
Figure 6: SDG Index Dashboard for Slovenia 
 
 
OECD SDG Pilot Study 
 

The OECD Pilot Study on Measuring Distance to the SDG targets, based on the 126 available indicators allowing coverage of 95 out of the 169 SDG targets, shows that most countries have already achieved between 8 and 23 targets. In 2016, Slovenia fully 
achieved eight targets, and this year that number has increased to 12. The remaining distances to achieve the targets are small in several areas, but a few open challenges remain  (See Figure 7).
 
 
 
Figure 7: Sloveniais current distance from achieving SDGsi 2030 targets base on OECD Study
Note: The chart shows how far Slovenia has already progressed towards each measured target. The longer the bars, the shorter the distance is to be travelled by 2030. Targets are clustered by goal, and goals are clustered according to the \0xEB5Psi of the 2030 Agenda (outer circle). 
 

On average, Slovenia is closest to reaching all goals in the Planet category (Figure 6). It also has outstanding outcomes in goals including poverty and cities and does not have significant areas with very low outcomes at the goal level. Relative to the OECD average, Slovenia outperforms others on goals 5 
 
                                                   0.00
(gender equality) and 15 (biodiversity) and is either ahead, or fairly close to the OECD average distance on many other goals (See Figure 8). The main exceptions to this are Goals 2 (food), 3 (health), 6 (water), and 17 (partnerships), for which performance is slightly below the OECD average.  

Figure 8: Sloveniais current distance from reaching the Goals and the 5Ps of the 2030 Agenda, compared with the OECD average 
 
Note: This figure shows Sloveniais distance to travel towards each of the 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda. Bars show Sloveniais performance, while diamonds show the OECD average. The y-axis indicates the distance from reaching the target in standardised units. 0 indicates that the level for 2030 has already been attained, and the axis starts at \0xEB3i as most OECD countries have already attained this level. Distances to target are aggregated at the goal level (all targets weighted equally). To make the level of achievement within the country more distinct, data on Official Development Assistance (ODA) are excluded in Goals 1 to 16 in this figure. Nonetheless, total ODA, ODA focusing on capacity building and national planning as well as ODA commitments to statistical capacity building are included in Goal 17 \0xEBimplementationi and under Partnership. 
 	 

 
3.2 	The Story of Slovenia 
 

Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
 
Based on the inputs from all the ministries and the prepared primary gap analysis of all the policies and measurements that Slovenia already has in place and are contributing to the SDGs and their targets, the following part of the VNR represents Slovenian stories of good practices for all 17 SDGs. 

The material condition of the population in Slovenia has been improving in parallel with the improvement of the economic situation since 2014. Current individual consumption per capita, which is an index of living standard, however, is still below the EU average. The risk levels for social exclusion and poverty, which are even higher than at the beginning of the crisis, though below EU average levels, have also started to fall. In this regard, mainly the reduction of the risk of poverty among the elderly, especially women, presents a challenge. On an international scale, income inequalities, which are reduced in Slovenia more than in other countries by the taxation of labour, have remained low. Inequalities with regard to gender are also low. Since the beginning of the crisis, the segmentation of the labour market, which mainly affects young people, has increased institutions and mainly public financing, the level of access to public services is relatively good, but the current financing system is unsustainable in the long term. Slovenia strives to address key challenges in securing quality life for all, and our activities will be focused on: 
\0x7F Providing a suitable income level for a decent life, with the goal of decreasing the risk of poverty and social exclusion; 
\0x7F Maintaining a low level of income and 
property inequality; 
\0x7F Forming 	sustainable 	social 	protection systems; 
\0x7F Enhancing cooperation, solidarity, and volunteerism, including through promoting 
social innovations; and 
considerably. Due to the diversification of public 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators2  
Data for Slovenia 
1.2 	By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women, and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions 
At-risk-of-poverty rate 
14.3% (2015)  
 

Social exclusion rate 
19.2% (2015) 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
\0x7F Eliminating all forms of discrimination. 

Slovenia @ home  
 
? Social security programme   
 
The Republic of Slovenia uses public tenders to cofinance 	preventive, 	curative, 	and 	so-called maintenance social security programme for the most vulnerable groups with higher risks of social exclusion. This applies to children and adolescents, the elderly, women who experience domestic violence, people with mental health problems, homeless people, at-risk users of illicit drugs, people with various forms of functional disability, Roma, and immigrants. These programmes complement the social security services and measures carried out by the public service. They are carried out by nongovernmental organisations present on the field and who are often the first to detect the hardships and the needs of the people.  
 
By co-financing social security programmes over a long period, the Republic of Slovenia promotes and provides employment to more than 500 experts (social workers, psychologists, educators, etc.) in a range of 400 positions of full-time employment. These programmes include approximately 8,400 volunteers, whose work and (in particular) experience is a significant contribution to the greater quality of the implementation of the programmes. As a rule, the funds are used to cover the labour costs of professional staff and the material costs necessary for the implementation of the programmes. 
 
? Transparent and accessible system of social transfers  
 
Slovenian legislation defines twelve different benefit payments and subsidies (rights from public funds) to assist people in easing their social distress as well as to increase their quality of life.3 Since the aid applies to various fields, the applications for assistance had to be filed with different forms and at different institutions prior to 2012, which made the system very inconvenient for the users. With the adoption of the new law that applies from 2012 onwards (Exercise of Rights to Public Funds Act), the users can now file a single application to exercise their rights at the local competent social work centre. 
 
? To actively tackle the challenges of long-term poverty and social exclusion by following the \0xEBsocial investment approachi (measure under 
development) 
 
Despite substantial improvement in recent years, the percentage of persons exposed to long-term poverty remains relatively high. The Republic of Slovenia is aware of the need to address the challenges of poverty and social exclusion more actively and innovatively mostly by considering the \0xEBactivation and social investment approachi. In accordance with this policy, the ministry of labour and social affairs highlighted the reform of social work centres and the activation of the recipients of transfers among the key priorities in the coming period. The most vulnerable individuals and groups will be included in the overall social activation programmes, with the aim of: 
\0x7F setting up an integrated model of social activation, 
\0x7F empowerment of target groups to move closer to the labour market, 
\0x7F prevention of slipping into poverty or social exclusion and reduction of inequalities in health. 
 
It is typical for social activation to combine the measures from the field of social security with the measures of active employment policy, including other possible forms of aid and support of the state, the private sector, and the non-governmental sector. This will enable individual treatment on a case-bycase basis in specific local environments and integrated solutions for each user. We will also promote effective partnership with civil society and the private sector to address the SDG Target of the 2030 Agenda 17.17. On the one hand, the measure is intended for the timely detection and prevention of increases in the at-risk-of-poverty rate, and on the other, for tackling the problem of poverty and social exclusion. 
  
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
At the regional and global levels, Slovenia contributes to poverty eradication and sustainable development on the basis of the latest legal and strategic documents on international development cooperation. We address all forms of poverty in different categories of development countries. We contribute substantial funds to LDCs through multilateral channels (for example, the European Development Fund), and bilaterally through projects in partner countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, Slovenia envisages the construction of a school for 300 pupils in Kabingo, Burundi, a project that will have long-term effects on target groups, who will be provided access to education and knowledge, respect for human rights and, consequently, offered a better and safer future. 
 
Slovenia pays special attention to middle-income countries (MICs) in its neighbourhood and addresses their development needs and potentials as well as their challenges, such as growing inequality and potential fragility. The main instruments of our development cooperation in MICs in the Western Balkans are various forms of technical assistance, green infrastructure projects, and projects for the empowerment of women. 

 
  
 	 
lunch for primary-school pupils, exemption from payment of social services, contribution to payment of home care assistant, rental subsidy, right to cover the difference in the full value of health services, right to payment of compulsory health insurance contributions.  
 
 
Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
 
Slovenia faces the challenge of a rise in excess weight and obesity: 66.6% of men and 42% of women (2012), as well as 25.8% of boys and 21.6% of girls (2013), have a body weight that exceeds the recommended guidelines. The goal of Slovenia in this field is to reduce the percentage of adults and children with excess body weight by 2025.  
 
Poor nutritional status is reflected in two ways: in excess body weight (particularly male adults and children), and in malnutrition of many older adults who need institutionalised forms of care, and of certain groups of patients (e.g. cancer patients). Slovenia has been addressing the challenges of nutrition policy through national nutrition policy programmes since 2005, through a national programme for promotion of physical activity in order to promote health and through systemic measures carried out in educational institutions and relevant to the development and consolidation of dietary habits in working life. We also prepared the Dietary Guidelines in Educational Institutions, which were introduced in schools with the School Meals Act. This act establishes the subsidising of school meals and thus also enables adequate nutrition to the pupils with poor socio-economic situation, defines the educational functions of nutritional education and prohibits the use of vending machines on school premises, as those had an impact on the consumption of sugary beverages and foods with high content of sugar, salt, and fat.  
 
A variety of measures is turning schools into an environment with healthy and balanced meals. The nutrition in kindergartens is also a successful example. The majority of daily meals there prepared in accordance with the recommendations of healthy eating. The dietary guidelines for students were drawn up for subsidised student meals. We recorded positive shifts in the population such as more frequent 	consumption 	of 	breakfast, 	greater consumption of olive oil, and an increase in the share of the physically active population, especially among women. However, these positive trends are not characteristic of all population groups, in particular of socio-economically deprived groups. 
 
As an EU Member State, Slovenia helps to shape and implement the measures of the common agricultural policy of the EU in the field of promoting sustainable agriculture and ensuring food safety. In the light of the priorities of the agricultural policy, Slovenia establishes and implements the measures taking into consideration the promotion of the concept of sustainable development of agriculture, guaranteeing the greatest possible degree of food self-sufficiency, the promotion of development of agriculture that will be adapted to mitigate the effects of climate change and will contribute to a lasting improvement of the status of natural resources and biodiversity, and the implementation of precautionary principle in issues related to GMOS (genetically modified organisms). Protection of agricultural land is one of the priorities of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia. 
 
High-quality natural resources are necessary for providing a greater level of self-supply of high-quality food and water, which are strategic goods. Slovenia is facing a downward trend in producing key groups of foodstuffs, which increases our vulnerability. This vulnerability will also increase due to the adverse effect of climate change on food systems and because that the area of arable land in Slovenia is decreasing. Not only is the agricultural system dependent on natural resources, but it is also one of the key factors in environmental degradation.  
 
The new national development concept of Slovenia will address the key areas for realising the goal of achieving food security and improve nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture through: 
\0x7F Introducing an ecosystem approach in managing natural resources and going beyond the sectoral way of thinking, including by means of the timely coordination of interests in the interface areas waternfoodnenergy, which will also change in the future due to the results of climate change; 
\0x7F 	Preserving a high level of biodiversity; and 
\0x7F 	Permanently 	protecting 	high-quality 
agricultural land and promoting the agricultural practice of increasing the self-supply of sustainable locally produced food that positively affects human health.

 
 
 
 	 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
2.4. By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality 
 
Percentage of agricultural land involved in productive and 
sustainable agriculture 
 
91% (444,197 hectares) (2016) 
2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed 
 
Number of plant and animal genetic resources for food and agriculture, protected in the facilities for medium and long-term preservation 
As at 01.01.2017, the Slovene Plant Gene Bank stored 5,345 accessions. 
As at 01.01.2017, the gene bank of local breeds of domestic animals stored genetic reserves of 97 breeding males and 2,062 tissue samples 

 
Level of endangerment of domestic animal breeds  
Out of 12 indigenous breeds of domestic animals in Slovenia, 7 are critically endangered and 3 are endangered. 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Traditional Slovenian Breakfast  
 
In the autumn of 2012, the Government of the Republic of Slovenia adopted a decision on the declaration of Slovenian Food Day, which is celebrated every third Friday in November. By celebrating it, we remind the general public about the importance of providing quality food from the local environment, and raise awareness about the importance of domestic production and processing of food and its consumption. The main objective is to promote self-sufficiency with local quality food from the immediate vicinity and a healthy way of eating. Food from the local environment is seasonally more accessible; fruits and vegetables have more vitamins and, consequently, a higher nutritional value. Due to the proximity of its production and preparation, fewer food additives such as preservatives and colourants can be used, and such food can also be recognised by its rich and traditional taste. By promoting local self-sufficiency, we express our support to the Slovenian producers and processors of food, we encourage the awareness and the importance of maintaining a clean, healthy environment and rural population density, and we inform young people about the procedures of the production and processing of food, thus encouraging their interest in agriculture and food technology. This way, young people see the profession of a farmer or a food technologist as something positive and as an activity for the achievement of vital economic objectives. Strong focus is also given to the overall awareness of the importance of a healthy lifestyle, including the importance of physical activity and doing sports. Slovenian Food Day is also used to educate, inform, and raise awareness about waste prevention, proper handling of waste generated in everyday activities, rational handling of packaging, and reducing quantities of discarded food. 
 
One of the main activities of the Slovenian Food Day is the project called Traditional Slovenian Breakfast, which will be carried out for the seventh time in 2017 with the participation of kindergartens and primary schools. The project is primarily intended for Slovene kindergartens and primary schools, as cultivating healthy eating habits is the most effective in early childhood when the children are most open to adopting values and are thus also the most inclined to nutritional education. It is important to enjoy breakfast on a regular basis and to have balanced nutrition when growing up to allow for optimal health, growth, and intellectual development, and to prevent the formation of health problems and related diseases in childhood or adulthood. New governmental and non-governmental organisations in Slovenia are joining the project each year, and it is also carried out at an international level. The following institutions cooperate in the Slovenian Food Day and the Traditional Slovenian Breakfast: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food, Ministry of Education, Science and Sport, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Slovenian Beekeepers' Association (initiator of the project), National Education Institute, Chamber of Agriculture and Forestry of Slovenia, Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Slovenia- Chamber of Agriculture and Food Companies, Association of Fruit Growers Societies of Slovenia, National Institute of Public Health, Cooperative Union of Slovenia and Chamber of Craft and Small Business of Slovenia. 
 
? School fruit and vegetable scheme  
 
The School Fruit and Vegetable Scheme (SFVS) is a measure of the common agricultural policy of the EU and provides the free distribution of additional portions of fruits and vegetables to children in educational institutions. The aim of the measure is to increase the consumption of fruits and vegetables among children and to improve their nutritional habits and consequently reduce the number of overweight and obese children and decrease the risk for the occurrence of the health problems of the modern age. Compulsory accompanying measures in SFVS have a vital role: connecting the children with agriculture, educating them on agriculture, healthy eating habits, local food chains, organic production, sustainable production and the prevention of waste of food. SFVS has been carried out for seven years in Slovenia. The target group is all children attending primary schools or institutes for the raising and education of children and adolescents with special needs (schools). The scheme includes 90% of all schools (over 400), i.e. approximately 150,000 children. Each year, the schools are invited to participate in the accompanying measures such as school garden (180 schools), workshops for chefs (app. 250 schools) and project contents in school camps in the facilities of the Centre for School and Outdoor Education (app. 350 schools/school year). In one school year, school pupils are given ca. 560 tonnes of fruit and vegetables from SFVS, on average 34 portions per child, 110 g per portion.  
 
The results of the evaluation of SFVS showed that it is effective when it comes to the interest of schools and the diversity of distributed fruits; however, this unfortunately does not apply to vegetables (only 5%). Multi-annual effects indicate an increased frequency of the consumption of vegetables at school and at home, while the attitude towards the consumption of vegetables is also improving (mainly among boys, older pupils, and pupils with higher socio-economic status). Knowledge about healthy lifestyle is improving in the long term among girls and older pupils. Fruits are consumed by a relatively large percentage of pupils, and no major changes were detected throughout the years of implementation. School fruits and vegetables are the most popular among younger pupils, girls, and pupils with lower socio-economic status. The success of the SFVS is also reflected in the good cooperation with local farmers and the diversity of implementation of accompanying activities at school. SFVS is very successful in connecting at the level of state institutions and ministries (agriculture, health, education). With the 2017/2018 school year, SFVS will be completed and upgraded into a new school scheme that will include the distribution of milk in addition to that of fruits and vegetables. 
 
? World Bee Day 
 
Slovenia also underlines the importance of honey bees and, in this context, raises awareness of food production and food safety with the initiative for declaring 20 May as World Bee Day at the level of the United Nations (UN) to raise global awareness of the importance of bees and bee products. With this special day, we want to draw attention every year to the importance of preserving bees and to remind people that we are highly dependent on them and other pollinators, particularly in terms of global food security.  
 
Bees 	are 	of 	utmost 
importance to sustainable agricultural production, food safety in the world and nutritional safety of the population. One third of the food produced in the world is directly dependent on pollination. An international study from 2008 assessed that pollination is worth \0xC4153 billion at the global level or \0xC422 billion every year in Europe, while the estimated value in Slovenia amounted to \0xC4100 million. In addition to the importance of bees for successful agricultural production, thus ensuring food security, it is also necessary to mention their role in maintaining the ecological balance and ensuring biodiversity conservation in the wild. We can achieve better results in the protection of bees and bee-keeping development with international cooperation, in particular by strengthening our common care for bees. The initiative will make a significant contribution to international cooperation in solving global problems, such as ensuring global food security, the eradication/elimination of hunger and preserving the environment in the sense of the prevention of further loss of biodiversity and degradation of ecosystem services. This would significantly contribute to the sustainable development goals. The proposal has already been widely recognized and endorsed by the Food and Agriculture Organization and its Members (FAO). 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We are improving the security of food and drinking water supply among refugee and local populations in Ndejje, near Kampala, the Ugandan capital city. The project enhances the resilience of Ndejje's refugee and local population, predominantly women, who suffer from chronic deprivation of basic dietary needs caused by extended periods of drought. As a member of the Food Assistance Convention, Slovenia supports the humanitarian activities of the World Food Programme, mainly in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel Region. 




 
 
Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 

 
Slovenia is among the countries with the lowest infant mortality rate in the world. This is the result of highquality and efficient pre- and post-natal health care and organised child health care. The life expectancy of infants born in 2015 was 77.7 years for boys and 83.4 years for girls. The number of people infected with HIV is low (less than 1 per 1,000 people). The new National Strategy for Prevention and Control of HIV Infections 2017n2025 aims to make Slovenia a country with very few new HIV infections, which will be detected at an early stage and treated successfully. The strategy also addresses prevention of spreading of other sexually transmitted diseases.  
 
Challenges remain in the field of use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco. The Restriction on the Use of Tobacco and Related Products Act, adopted in 2017, sets the provisions of the directive and also lays down measures for the implementation of the World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. For example, the Act will introduce generic packaging from 2020 onwards. The primary goals of the new law are to prevent the initiation and the progression to higher smoking levels among children, adolescents and young adults, to promote smoking cessation, reduce exposure to tobacco smoke among minors and consequently reduce morbidity and (premature) mortality and social costs due to tobacco use. In line with the National Health Care Plan 2016-2025 "Together for the Health Society," we want to reduce the consumption of tobacco by 30% by 2025, that is also the goal of the 
World Health Organization's Global Strategy for the Prevention and control of Non-Communicable Diseases. 
 
Slovenia recognizes that ensuring a good health of people also in the future will be a great challenge, as the ageing of the population will contribute to an increase in chronic illnesses. Reducing inequalities in health is one of the key challenges in creating conditions for a high quality of life, whereby the health condition of the population, particularly among the elderly, socially weaker and less-educated groups must be improved.  
 
Care for mental health is also important, as it enables individuals to utilise their mental and emotional capabilities and to successfully face challenges and contribute to the communities in which they live. Mental illness present social and economic burden that is projected to continue to increase in the future, according to WHO. Quality programs for strengthening mental health, prevention, early detection and treatment of mental disorders, psychotherapy, rehabilitation and social integration of people with mental health problems are not yet equally accessible to all population groups in Slovenia. In order to ensure continuous and effective treatment of people with mental disorders, Slovenia is builing an institutional structure to better coordinate between the primary and secondary level of health care as well as community care.  
 
In the future great attention will be paid to the transition from various forms of institutional care to the services in the community. A special attention will be given to those with mental health problems coming from vulnerable groups of the population, also in terms of better coordination between health and social care, education and non-governmental organizations. Particularly challenging is the increasing number of population suffering from various forms of dementia, which most heavily affects fiscal sustainability of the health system. Due to the rapidly aging society a national strategy on dementia management has been adopted in 2016.  

SDG Target 
Indicator 
Data for Slovenia 
3.4  	By 2030, reduce by one 
third premature mortality from noncommunicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and wellbeing   
Mortality 	attributed 	to cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases 
704.8 	per 	100,000 	population 
(2015)  
Circulatory diseases (I00-I99) Neoplasms (C00-D48), diabetes (E10 and E14), respiratory diseases (J00-J99) 

Mortality due to suicide 
20.5 per 100,000 population (2015) 
 
 
 
23 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Organised screening programme for early detection of cancer 
 
Treatment of most cancers is more effective if they are detected at an early stage of development. Screening programmes can discover cancer or precancerous changes prior to the development of symptoms or signs of the disease. Three screening programmes for early detection of cancer are carried out in Slovenia. All three were recommended by the Council of the European Union in 2003: ZORA n early detection of premalignant and malignant changes of the cervix; DORA n early detection of breast cancer; SVIT n early detection of colorectal cancer.  
 
The primary purpose of all cancer screening programmes is to reduce the mortality caused by these diseases by treating precancerous lesions and to reduce the incidence of these cancers (the number of new cancers). For these programmes to be successful, all processes in the programmes must be of adequate quality, and they must be participated in by at least 70% of the target population groups. The programmes show measurable results: ZORA, the oldest programme, managed to halve the mortality rate for cancer of the cervix; the SVIT programme has already indicated a decrease in the incidence of cancer of the colon and rectum; the DORA programme is successfully being expanded in the screening centres throughout Slovenia with a view to bringing this quality service closer to all women. 
 
ZORA is the national screening programme for cervical cancer, organised by the Institute of Oncology Ljubljana in cooperation with the Ministry of Health and the Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia to reduce morbidity and mortality from cervical cancer in Slovenia. The method applied by the programme is to actively screen all apparently healthy women aged between 20 and 64 years. Their Pap smear cells are tested once every three years (if the results of the first two tests carried out within one year are negative). The programme began in 2003; to date, the incidence of cervical cancer has been reduced by half. In 2014, the lowest incidence of cervical cancer in the past 60 years was recorded: 105 women were diagnosed, which is nearly half less than in 2003, when the ZORA programme was launched, and 211 women were diagnosed. The aim of ZORA is to perform the three-year tests on 73 to 75 per cent of the target population of NP ZORA by the end of 2021 and to maintain the incidence of cervical cancer to between 100-120 new cases per year.  
 
DORA is the national screening programme for breast cancer, organised by the Institute of Oncology Ljubljana in cooperation with the Ministry of Health and the Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia. The programme provides treatment for women aged 5069, who are invited to mammography screening every two years. The programme has been running since 2015, and we have managed to include 72 per cent of all the relevant Slovenian women by expanding the programme. The objective of the DORA programme is to reduce the mortality in breast cancer in the screened group of women by 25-30 per cent.  
 
SVIT is the national screening programme organised by the National Institute of Public Health in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and the Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia with the aim of the prevention and early detection of cancer of the colon and rectum. The programme includes Slovenian men and women aged 50 to 74 years, with screening tests conducted every two years. SVIT can prevent many colon and rectum cancers due to discovery and removal of polyps that are the precursors of cancer.  
 
The programme has been in place since 2010 and achieved the following results: in 70% of the programme participants, the detected cancer was limited to the intestine (it did not extend to lymph nodes and other organs), while prior to the implementation of SVIT, this was the case with only 12-14% of patients, so the achievement of the screening programme is significant. In 2011, 2012, and 2013, we observed a reduction in the incidence of colon and rectum cancer by 10 per cent per year for the first time. The aim of the programme is, inter alia, to increase participation in the programme to 65 per cent of the target population by the end of 2019. 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We strive for improved health and better living conditions for children and women in the Mukungu and Musango regions of Rwanda by providing information to couples who are planning the birth of their children, raising awareness among pregnant women about reproductive health and the need to give birth in maternity hospitals, and providing training on healthcare, hygiene and food for newborns and young children. 






 
 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all  
 
Primary education in Slovenia is compulsory and is primarily publicly funded (municipal and state budgets). Primary schools are established by municipalities. Public secondary schools are established and financed by the state. In the 2016/2017 school year, there were 772 primary schools in Slovenia with a total of 178,633 children enrolled. Programmes of secondary education are carried out in 111 public secondary schools and school centres (as well as six private secondary schools and six institutions for youth with special needs). At the beginning of the 2016/2017 school year, a total of 74,010 pupils was enrolled.  
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
4.2. By 2030, ensure that all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood development, care, and pre-primary education so that they are ready for primary education 
Percentage of 5-year-olds enrolled in kindergartens 
92% (2015) 
4.3. By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable and quality technical, vocational and tertiary education, including university. 
Percentage of adults (25-64 years) involved in education or training 
11.9% (2015) 
4.6 By 2030, ensure that all youth and a substantial proportion of adults, both men and women, achieve literacy and numeracy 
 
The results of the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). 
Percentage of boys and girls aged 15 years reaching reading literacy and numeracy above the OECD average.  
READING LITERACY  
Boys 79%  
Girls 91.1%  
Total 84.9%  
 
NUMERACY 
Boys: 83.9%  
Girls: 83.9%  
Total: 83.9% 

Percentage of persons aged 30 to 34 years with tertiary education  
43.4% (2015) 
In the last PISA survey (2015), Slovenia recorded encouraging results. The achievements of 15-year olds in Slovenia both in reading literacy and numeracy were above the OECD average. In PISA surveys in 2009 and 2012, the reading literacy was revealed as a weak area of knowledge and skills of Slovenian pupils, as the achievements were below the OECD average. At the time of the most recent measurement, there was a substantial leap forward in this area: progress was revealed not only in the ranking above the OECD average but also in a significantly higher percentage of pupils with the highest achievements as well as in a significantly lower percentage of pupils with low achievements. 
 
In Slovenia, educational institutions at all levels are autonomously engaging in a number of development projects and networks that enable and support the development and increase in competences in the field of education and training for sustainable development. The most popular is the network of ECO schools (as many as 700 educational institutes participate in the 2016/2017 school year), UNESCO schools, HEALTHY schools, etc. In 2016, in cooperation with the Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning, the National Education Institute carried out a pilot research and development study Knowledge and Competences relevant to the Achievement of the Objectives of the Green Economy in Conjunction with Climate Change. They carried out a review of the existing formal and implemented curricula for primary and secondary education from the perspective of integration of contents from the field of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD). The Ministry of Education, Science and Sport is preparing to appoint a coordinating interdisciplinary and interdepartmental body that will connect the existing numerous (currently scattered) activities in the field of promoting ESD. In this manner, we will significantly address SDG Target 4.7.  
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Open Education in Slovenia 
 
Almost a decade ago the \0xECJo\0xFBef Stefan Institute in Ljubljana (Slovenia) has started adopting the practices of Open Science and Open Access and break new ground in bringing closer state-of-the-art research and education to everyone, everywhere. It created the website VideoLectures.Net which currently has some 20.000 video lectures by 15.000 authors. Following the success of VideoLectures.Net, recognized by the UN and UNESCO in 2009 and 2013 as one of the most outstanding examples of creative and innovative e-Content in the world in the last decade, the \0xECJo\0xFBef Stefan Institute has successfully established a UNESCO Chair on Open Technologies for OER and Open Learning. The UNESCO Chairs Programme promotes international inter-university cooperation and networking to build institutional capacity. The Chair is currently expanding its vision and strategy in collaboration within OpeningUpSlovenia and with the Knowledge 4 All Foundation Ltd. 
 
In 2014 all stakeholders in Slovenia focused and centralized their achievements and efforts in open education in the OpeningUpSlovenia initiative via showcasing its best practices. OpeningUpSlovenia proposed to make Slovenia strategically committed in becoming a reference country in the development and deployment of open education. Its members together with the Government of Slovenia and UNESCO initiated a formal process to establish a \0xECUNESCO Recommendation on OER and deploy Open Educational Resources (OER) into all UNESCO member states national policies.  
 
In the frame of this process, Slovenia and UNESCO are organizing the 2nd World Open Educational Resources Congress in Ljubljana on 18 to 20 September 2017. Its themen OER for Inclusive and 
Equitable Quality Education: from Commitment to Action n reflects the role that OER must play in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular its SDG 4 on Quality Education. 
 
Open Educational Resources (OER) are any educational resource that may be freely accessed, copied, re-used, adapted and shared and which are available under an open license or are in the public domain for use without paying royalties / license fees. OER are dramatically increasing in number, notably via the transfer of information through ICT, as part of a revolution in the generation and sharing of openlicensed knowledge and information. OER has the potential to play a pivotal and innovative role, in an era of often tight budgetary resources. 
  
? Childrenis Parliament  
 
The Childrenis Parliament is a project of the Association of Friends of Youth, which has been running for several years and is an example of global good practice. It operates at meetings that enable participation of all primary school pupils. Meetings take place in the classes of primary schools and in the school parliament. The pupils of each school appoint a delegation that represents them in the municipal children's parliament. The municipal children's parliament then appoints a delegation for the regional children's parliament, where they represent the interests of their peers at the national children's parliament, which takes place in the hall of the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia. The Childrenis Parliament is a public forum of children discussing the topic selected by the primary school pupils at the national children's parliament. It also enables the children to participate in the social development and to acquire knowledge on human and civil rights. Childrenis parliaments are an education programme that teaches children and adolescents about democracy. They are carried out in schools throughout Slovenia as a form of democratic dialogue. This project has been running since 1990 and is one of the original forms of encouraging children to express their own views on issues they choose themselves in accordance with a democratic process. The Children's Parliament is attended by primary school pupils who are assisted by headmasters, mentors, teachers, advisers and others in schools and by the employees of the Slovenian Association of Friends of Youth outside of school. The Children's Parliament was established at the initiative of the pupils for them to be able to speak in public, present their opinion, ideas, and dilemmas on issues that are important in the period of growing up in the environment in which they live, go to school or spend their free time. They expect consideration from school authorities and local authorities and from governmental and non-governmental organisations, who must listen to the initiatives of the youth. The topics of children's parliaments in recent years include: 
 
2013 SOCIAL CONDITIONS 2014 EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL ORIENTATION 2015 TRAPS OF ADOLESCENCE. 
2016 	CHILDREN AND PLANS FOR THE FUTURE 
 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Slovenia has developed a scholarship programme for students from our priority partner countries. Linking scholarships into programmes and projects contributes to the more strategic use of the instrument of scholarships. In Cape Verde, for example, Slovenia has supported telemedicine and e-health programmes which connect all the Cape Verde islands and linked the project with medical scholarships in Slovenia. We are continuing with this project, which involves installing additional equipment, training medical personnel and supporting technical staff. 
In Jordan, we are promoting the social and economic rehabilitation of the most vulnerable children through schooling and of women through greater employment opportunities. Some 270 children will take part in nine-month courses in mathematics, Arabic, and English, which will be based on the Jordanian curriculum. Their mothers and other women will participate in three-month programmes of vocational training and workshops on entrepreneurship and labour market participation. 

 
 
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls  
 
At the end of 2016, slightly more than 374,400 women in Slovenia were in work, of which 92.4% employed and 7.6% self-employed. Among women in work, 43.3% have tertiary education; in general, women are predominant among new graduates each year. In 2015, 61% out of a total of 18,631 new graduates were female. At the end of 2015, there were almost 4,800 female PhDs, which is 41.4% of all PhDs. Slovenia records one of the lowest average gender pays gaps in the EU-28; on average, women earn \0xC4101 per month less than men do. Women are generally more satisfied with life than men are (self-assessment). The employment situation is positively influenced by a number of legislative instruments that prohibit the discrimination based on gender. The area of employment is among the most comprehensively regulated areas with regards to ensuring equal treatment. The competent authorities rarely identify cases of employment discrimination on the grounds of gender and receive very few of such complaints. Nevertheless, women in leading positions remain a minority in Slovenia, but their percentage in this group is slowly increasing. Ten years ago, there were 23.0% of women among the directors-general and members of the management board of companies; this number increased by 1.0 percentage point by the end of 2016. 
 
Women are more exposed to the risk of poverty than men are. In 2014, the at-risk-of-poverty rate for women was 15.2% (men: 13.7%). In 2015, the people in the most difficult situation in Slovenia were women aged 65 or more (22.2% below the at-risk threshold) and unemployed women (the at-risk-ofpoverty rate among them was 45.9%; from 2005 onwards, it increased by 19.8 percentage points). From 2010 to 2014, an annual average of approximately 1,600 women experienced physical, psychological or sexual violence. Sexual violence in the wider context was reported on average by approximately 200 women per year. Police data show that women who have been the victims of reported violent crimes were most often the victims of domestic violence. 
 
Slovenia started the activities of gender mainstreaming at the government level in 1997 with a pilot project, and committed to the implementation of gender mainstreaming in 2002 with the adoption of the Act on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men, and with the approach to the implementation of gender equality policies at the level of the European Union and other international organisations. The gender equality policy of Slovenia has been designed so that it introduces a horizontal approach to gender mainstreaming in all policies on one the hand and carries out concrete measures and activities to improve the position of women and men in those areas where they are discriminated in comparison with the other gender on the other. Gender mainstreaming is of key importance for ensuring gender equality, since the specific position of women and men and the impact of policies on both sexes are considered in the preparation of regulations covering the areas relevant to creating equal opportunities. 
The 	new 	National 	Programme 	for 	Equal 
Opportunities for Women and Men is in force from 2015 to 2020. The programme sets out key objectives and measures of the Government for the realisation of gender equality in the Republic of Slovenia in the period from 2015 to 2020, with the aim of reducing gender inequality in eight key areas: economic independence, reconciliation of work and private life, knowledge-based society without gender stereotyping, social inclusion, health of women and men, balanced representation in decision-making positions, violence against women, and gender equality in foreign policy and international development cooperation. The Protection Against Discrimination Act, adopted in 2016, is a general or a framework law that provides protection against discrimination on the grounds of any personal circumstances (gender, ethnicity, race or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, social position, financial situation, education, or any other personal circumstance) and in various areas of social life (in particular in the areas of work and employment, upbringing, education, training, access to goods and services, social protection and social benefits). Among other things, this Act also establishes an independent national authority for the promotion of equal treatment: the Advocate of the Principle of Equality.  
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
5.5 Ensure womenis full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life. 
Percentage of seats held by women in national parliaments and local authorities 
a) 38% (National Assembly) 
47.1% (ministers) 
b) 31.8% (municipal council) 
7.7% (mayors) 
(2017, source: EIGE) 

Percentage of women in managerial positions 
41.8% (4th quarter of 2016) 

Gender pay gap  
8.1% (2015) 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Gender equality 
The representation of women in political decisionmaking positions in the past was generally quite low. For example, the percentage of female members of the parliament in 1992 amounted to 16.8%, but in 1996, it dropped to 8.4%, while it reached 13.3% in 2000 and 2004. By amending the legislation in the middle of the last decade, laying down the gender quotas for different types of elections, except for the elections to the National Council of the Republic of Slovenia, the representation of women high-level decision-making positions in politics was increased.  
The Local Elections Act, which was amended in 2005, stipulates that the lists of candidates must include at least 40% of the candidates of the opposite gender, while the positions on the first half of the list of candidates must be listed alternating by gender. It seems that the compulsory quotas did not have a significant effect on the positions of mayors; despite certain positive trends during the most recent elections, the percentage of female mayors remains low. In most recent local elections, which were held in 2014, we witnessed the greatest percentage of elected female mayors (7.7%, i.e. 16 out of a total of 212 mayors) in comparison with ten female mayors out of a total of 208 mayors (4.8%) at the local elections in 2010.  
Based on the available data, the trend is far more positive with regards to the councillors elected into municipal councils. At the local elections in 2014, 1069 female councillors were elected (31.8%), while only 730 women were elected in 2010 (22%).  
The National Assembly Elections Act was the last to be amended. This was done in 2006 and lays down that no gender on the list of candidates must be represented by less than 35 per cent of the total number of candidates on the list. At the last two parliamentary elections, there has also been a significant increase in the percentage of female deputies elected to the National Assembly. After the early elections held in 2014, there are currently 32 women (35.6%) among the 90 deputies of the National Assembly, which is above the EU average (28%) according to the latest available data. Twentynine female deputies were elected in the early elections in 2011 (32.2% of all deputies) and 13.3% in the parliamentary elections in 2008 (12 elected female members). The National Council Act, which regulates the work of the National Council, i.e. the upper house of the parliament and its elections, has not yet been amended with quotas. After the last elections in 2012, there are currently three women among the 40 members of the National Council. 
Women remain in the minority in leadership positions in the private sectors, but their percentage is slowly increasing. Ten years ago, there were 21.8% of women among the directors-general and members of the management board of companies, and this number increased by 2.8 percentage points by the end of 2015. With the support of EU funding, the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities and the Section of Women Managers at the Managers' Association of Slovenia implemented a number of activities on the topic of unbalanced representation of women and men in decision-making positions in the economy. Among other things, the extensive media campaign introduced a discussion about this democratic shortage in the public space and shed light on a number of issues that need to be addressed if this is to change. Two studies served as a basis for the identification of critical areas: a study of the career paths of men and women managers and a study on the transparency of appointment/recruitment procedures.  
 
Guidelines for employers were prepared, and several workshops were organised in order to address this problem in practice and to eliminate the obstacles identified in the studies; the topic has become an important political issue. An inter-ministerial working group was set up as an upgrade to those activities, and they prepared an analysis of the situation in the area of good foreign legislative practices and some other ways to achieve balanced representation. 
 
The group, which consisted of representatives of the academic sphere, professional associations, trade unions and individual employers, established that the uncritical transfer of foreign practices into the 
Slovenian legislation is not possible, because the Slovenian companies are quite specific due to the small size of their management boards. The line ministry and certain stakeholders continue with the activities in the areas of expertise to introduce regulatory measures for the balanced representation of women and men in decision-making positions in the economy. 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We are strengthening the economic independence of women in Puk\0xCE and improving the situation of women in Albanian society. Unemployed women in rural areas will become self-sufficient by engaging in goat breeding. They will be provided with appropriate working conditions and training on breeding, and 

 	 

product processing and marketing. Slovenia is committed to gender equality through all development cooperation projects and programmes. 

 
 
Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
 

 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimising release of hazardous chemicals and material, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increase recycling and safe reuse globally.  
Waste 	water 	treatment 	at municipal and combined treatment plants 
58% of the population connected to treatment plants (2014) 

Quality of groundwater 
 
 
 
No. 	Of 
water bodies 
NUV I 
(2006 -
2009 
NUV II 
(2009 - 
2013) 


GOOD  
17 
18 


BAD 
4 
3 

Biochemical oxygen demand 
1.02 mg O2/L (2012) 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
Slovenia is rich in water resources, which is our great advantage. It contributes to a high quality of life as well as offers opportunities to develop a green economy and creates green jobs. Sustainable water management is an important contribution to the enhancement of prosperity, in the form of quality drinking water supply and the reduction of flood risk. The existing government measures and programmes that are actively implemented and address the SDG 6 are collected in the framework of programme documents: Flood Risk Management Plan for the 2016-2021 period, the River Basin Management Plan for period 2015 - 2021, Action plan for water supply and Action plan and Operational programme for the discharge and treatment of urban waste water.  

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Right to water in Constitution  
 
In 2010, the General Assembly of the United Nations declared the right to water a fundamental human right. By writing the inalienable right to water into the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia, Slovenia joined its objectives too. The Constitutional Act Amending Chapter III of the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia was adopted by the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia on 25 November 2016. The newly introduced 
Article 70a stipulates that everyone has the right to drinking water, that water resources are public good managed by the state, that they preferentially and sustainably serve to supply the population with drinking and household water, and that in this regard they are not tradable goods. Since then, it has also been written in the Constitution that the supply of the population with drinking water is directly and on a non-profit-making basis provided for by the state through self-governing local communities. The first paragraph obliges the state and subsequently municipalities to provide drinking water in accordance with the infrastructure (access to the network, access to public and village water distribution systems, leg of drinking water, etc.) to each resident of the Republic of Slovenia. In remote places, isolated hamlets, and farms in mountainous and hilly areas, the population assumes the obligation of municipalities and the state to ensure the right to drinking water through self-sufficient supply. The text of the provision of the second paragraph excludes the ownership concept of water resources. In that way, all water resources are protected from privatisation. The state only manages water resources, thereby, of course, also assuming their protection. The supply of drinking water and water for the requirements of households is not a commercial activity and is also exempt from the marketing rules and the internal market of the European Union. This means that water supply is performed by a mandatory institution of public utility. 
 
By defining the right to water as a fundamental human right, we assume the obligation and clear commitment to preserving natural resources, which also includes Slovenian waters and water resources, for descendants. To sustainably provide the population with water resources, measures must be taken that will enable future generations to access quality drinking water, so it is necessary to prevent and reduce pollution, protect the environment, and act preventively. 
 
 
 	 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Slovenia is supporting the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace and works for better crossborder water cooperation to ensure international peace and security. In the Western Balkans (Albania, Montenegro, Macedonia and Serbia), we are implementing 	water-management 	projects, 	in particular for improving water quality and wastewater treatment. We are also contributing to international and cross-border cooperation in water-related activities, in particular in the Sava and Danube basins. 






















 
 
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
 

In Slovenia, only 0.8% of occupied dwellings do not have access to electricity. Material consumption per capita in Slovenia is equal to the EU average. However, with regard to the efficiency of the use of resources and energy, we are below the EU average, and our progress is also too slow concerning the productivity of carbon use.  
 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix  
Percentage of renewable energy sources in final energy 
consumption 
21.96% (2015) 
 
7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency  
Energy intensity n energy supply/ GDP (TOE/EUR m, 2010) 
176 toe/EUR m, 2010 (2015) 
 

Percentage of persons who cannot afford to keep their home adequately warm n Eurostat indicator 
7% (2015) 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? 2010n2020 Renewable Energy Action Plan 
 
Since 2010, Slovenia has had an Action Plan for renewable energy, which is consistent with the EU Directive. The target set regarding the RES in the total final energy consumption by 2020 is 25%. Slovenia, with its RES in total final energy consumption in 2015 at 21.96% is well on the way to reaching this target.  
 
The action plan determines the way to achieve at least 25% of RES of the gross final energy consumption in Slovenia and a mandatory percentage of 10% for RES in transport that all European Union Member States should achieve by 2020. To meet the objectives in renewable energy sources, the Action Plan envisages the following 
measures, regarding which the state also ensures a stimulating environment:  

  
\0x7F 
\0x7F 
\0x7F 
\0x7F 
\0x7F 
\0x7F 
energy-saving renovation of existing buildings, particularly in the public sector, and construction of nearly zero-energy buildings, which are the technologically most advanced structures; substitution of heating oil for wood biomass and other renewable energy sources; systems of heating with renewable energy sources and heat and electricity cogeneration; substitution of electricity in the preparation of household hot water for solar energy and other renewable energy sources; 
electricity generation from renewable energy sources; 
increase in the share of rail and public transport; 
35 
 
With its new national development framework, Slovenia aims to give one of the central roles to the successful transition to a low-carbon circular economy. To achieve this, the connection between economic development on the one hand and increasing material and energy consumption and the resulting increased environmental pressures on the other must be severed. Efficient material and energy consumption are interdependent, as strategies for increasing material efficiency can contribute at least as much as energy efficiency measures to the reduction in energy consumption. Reliable, sustainable and competitive energy supply is of key importance for development, whereby the advantage afforded to effective energy use (EEU) and to renewable energy sources (RES) is one of the main principles of the development of the energy sector. The simultaneous priority increases in EEU and RES will enable a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (GGEs), which is also a part of Sloveniais commitments within the international 2020 climate and energy package and the commitments from the Paris Agreement to be implemented by 2030.  

\0x7F 
introduction of biofuels and other renewable energy sources in transport and agriculture, and introduction of electric vehicles; 
\0x7F 
development of distribution networks for integrating the dispersed generation of electricity, including the development of active/smart networks; 
\0x7F 
development of industrial production of the technologies for efficient energy use and renewable energy sources. 
 
Households and small legal entities may also invest in devices for self-sufficient generation of electricity from renewable sources (sun, wind, water). Households are also eligible for non-reimbursable investment grant by the Eco Fund for a selfsufficiency device in the amount of \0xC4180/kW, but no more than 20% of the investment. 
 
? Eco Fund, the Slovenian Environmental Public Fund 
 
The Eco Fund's main purpose is to promote development in the field of environmental protection. It is the only specialised institution in Slovenia that provides financial support for environmental projects. The financial assistance is offered mainly through soft loans from revolving funds and, since 2008, also through grants. In comparison with commercial banks, the Eco Fundis principal advantages in the market for environmental financing are that it provides soft loans at lower interest rates than prevailing commercial market rates and it is able to lend for significantly longer periods than commercial banks. Recent evaluations of the effective interest rates of the Eco Fundis loans in comparison to those of commercial banks have shown that a total of 15% of the cost of investments can be saved by opting for an Eco Fund loan. The Eco Fund is also the financer of the ENSVET project, offering financial support and free professional advice on improving energy efficiency to owners of residential houses and apartments in Slovenia. 
 
The Eco Fundis subsidies have had a positive effect on tax revenues, reducing the grey economy, providing new green jobs, sustainable development of the construction planning and business, and the development of the use of strategic resources (e.g. wood). These effects, which simultaneously contribute to the fight against the environmental crisis and against the economic crisis, point to a positive role of the Eco Fund in the process of green growth and development achievement, which can be further enhanced through growth in the range of assets and tasks given to the Eco Fund, if so decided by the Government. To fulfil its mission, the Eco Fund has made use of the following loan or grant financing programmes: 
 
\0x7F 
Loans to legal entities (municipalities and/or providers of public utility services, enterprises, and other legal entities) and sole traders for investments in environmental infrastructure, environmentally sound technologies and products, energy efficiency, energy saving investments, and use of renewable energy sources; 
\0x7F 
Loans to individuals (households) for conversion from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources, energy saving investments, investments in water consumption reduction, connections to the sewage system, small wastewater treatment plants, and replacement of asbestos roofs; 
\0x7F 
Grants to individuals (households) for investments in electric cars and in residential buildings (energy efficiency and use of renewable energy sources); 
\0x7F 
Grants to legal entities (municipalities and/or providers of public utility services, enterprises, and other legal entities) for investments in electric cars and buses for public transport running on compressed natural gas or biogas; 
\0x7F 
Grants to municipalities for investments in buildings where public education takes place (schools, kindergartens, libraries, etc.), newly constructed as low energy and passive buildings or renovated to the passive standard. 
 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, we implemented a reference accreditation laboratory for the study of the quality of petroleum products. Regulation of this sector will have positive effects in many other fields, in particular on environmental sustainability and cleaner fossil-fuel technology. 

 

36 







 
 
Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 

 
In the years prior to the financial crisis in 2008, Slovenia experienced high economic growth, but numerous structural weaknesses even then indicated that the development model of the time was unsustainable. GDP experienced a significant decline during the crisis, which substantially weakened economic stability and negatively affected the welfare of the population. As of 2014, after five years, Slovenia once again began catching up with economically more developed countries, and in 2016 GDP increased for the third consecutive year. Nonetheless, the economic development of Slovenia (measured in GDP per capita, purchase power parity), according to the latest data (for 2015), reached 83% of the EU average and was thus still significantly lower than at the beginning of the crisis (90% in 2008). The stability of the banking system and of public finances, which was undermined during the crisis, has also been restored in recent years. 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
8.1 Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least developed countries 
Annual changes in the level of GDP growth per capita 
Real GDP growth per capita: 2.4% (2016)  
8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in accordance with the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on 
Sustainable Consumption and Production, with developed 
countries taking the lead 
Domestic material consumption, domestic material consumption per capita, domestic material consumption per GDP 
DMC: 27,394,100 t,  
DMC/capita: 13.3 t (2015) 
8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value 
Unemployment rate by gender and age class 
8.1% (total),  
- 7.9% (men),  
- 8.3% (women)  
(2016, fourth quarter).  
8.6 By 2020, significantly reduce the percentage of youth not in employment, education or training  
Percentage of persons aged 15n 24 who are neither undergoing education nor are they actively working  
9.5% (2015) 
 
The effective operation of the labour market and the adaptability of its policies can considerably contribute to economic development. The labour market in Slovenia is mainly known for its segmentation. In order to establish an inclusive labour market and high-quality jobs, flexicurity systems must be improved, as this could increase the employment rate, reduce segmentation, and enable effective allocation of the labour force. Furthermore, Slovenia has placed social economy among strategic government projects with the goal to create 7% of GDP through social economy by 2027. 
 
As in the majority of developed countries, Slovenia is facing a changed age structure of its population, which is reflected in a decreased supply of workforce, which could limit the opportunities for providing and increasing the welfare of the population in the future. Demographic changes will therefore require adjustments of the labour market. From the perspective of development, it is essential to increase the level of employment in younger and older age groups, ensure the development of suitable skills for life and work, and provide high-quality jobs to young people as soon as they enter the labour market.  
8.9 By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products 
Percentage of overall effects in tourism (in GDP)  
 
13% GDP (2015) 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Green Tourism 
 
Slovenia has a strong commitment to sustainable tourism. Our national devotion to green and sustainable tourism, together with appropriate policies and actions at the levels both of the country and of particular tourist destinations within our Green Scheme of Slovenian Tourism (GSST), secure Sloveniais prominent position among the most environmentally rich and most biodiverse destinations in Europe. These concrete measures give Slovenia the credibility to position itself as a green, active, and healthy destination. Activities in sustainable tourism take place in close collaboration with the Slovenian tourism economy and other players who together build and implement the philosophy of sustainable development in Slovenian Tourism, i.e. the Ministry of Economic Development and Technology, the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Goodplace Institute, etc. Tourism is a strongly inter-ministerial activity, and the establishment of both horizontal and vertical cooperation is of the utmost importance. There is, however, room for improvement on how to be even more green, on how to connect the various pillars, areas, and subjects into an integral green community. Sustainability is a never-ending path of improvements in tourism. 
 
The GSST is the central mechanism in developing and promoting sustainable tourism in Slovenia. This national programme is designed to promote sustainable tourism based on the European ETIS and global GSTC criteria. The programme, which allows comparison with other sustainable destinations around the globe, includes the national character, which makes Slovenia unique. In terms of communication, the scheme has been supported by the Slovenia Green Destination brand, which is awarded to destinations, and the Slovenia Green Accommodation brand, which is awarded to accommodation facilities. Ljubljana was the first city to receive the Slovenia Green Destination award, and since then the Slovenia Green mark has been awarded to 21 destinations, 13 providers, and three parks. This certification scheme works as a tool for consumers to verify green and sustainable efforts and as a platform for organisations to build upon in order to follow our slogan Slovenia. Green. Active. Healthy. and to achieve the goal: Slovenia n 100% green.  
 
Earlier this year, Slovenia won the National Geographic World Legacy Award in the Destination Leadership category. This award is given to places that demonstrate environmental best practices, protection of cultural and natural heritage, benefits to local communities, and educating travellers. National Geographic wrote: 
 
As the United Nations heralds 2017 as the International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development, one place rises above the rest: Slovenia. Last year this Adriatic enclave, nestled amid emerald fields, snowy peaks, and sparkling waters, was declared the worldis most sustainable country. Slovenia achieved an eyeopening 96 out of 100 detailed sustainability indicators (think environment and climate, culture and authenticity, nature and biodiversity, among others.)  
 
? Youth Guarantee  
 
The Youth Guarantee is a set of state measures directed towards achieving the following key objectives: improvement of the transition of youth from education into employment, quick activation of young unemployed people, and the reduction of the number of unemployed people. The Youth Guarantee scheme has proved effective, as from 2014 to 2016, it included over 55,000 young people; aided by its measures, 22,261 of them were employed, while the total number of engagements of young people surpassed 73,300. A particularly successful measure within the Youth Guarantee programme has been shown to be the intensification of counselling to youth by the Employment Service of Slovenia, aimed at intensifying work with young unemployed persons, along with an increased number of counsellors, and improving the quality of counselling and directing youth in their professional career. The counsellors, who are mainly young people themselves, have received training in various aspects of modern customer management. They use the counselling methods directed towards solutions, organise quick meetings with employers, and prepare the participants for them. The intensification of counselling to youth by the Employment Service of Slovenia has also been recognised by the European Commission as an example of good practice of implementing the Youth Guarantee.  
 
? For Decent Work 
 
With the For Decent Work project, Slovenia began tackling the issue of an increase in non-standard forms of work and providing appropriate legal, economic, and social security to all workers. In 2016, the strategic document \0xEBFor Decent Worki was presented, which contained an assessment of the situation, identification of the reasons for the increase in non-standard forms of work and a set of possible proposals for resolving this problem. At the same time, the document already indicated some challenges regarding legal, economic, and social security from the aspect of new forms of work emerging on the market. In 2017, Slovenia began amending labour legislation to address some of the key questions in this area, particularly from the aspects of supervising and preventing the illegal use of non-standard forms of work as well as reducing reasons for the legal use of non-standard forms of work. 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We are empowering Kosovois young entrepreneurs and start-ups. Entrepreneurial and innovative thinking is the basis of healthy economic growth, leading to prosperity and the appropriate development of all citizens. Within the project, 20 young people from Kosovo will be given an opportunity annually to participate in the largest regional start-up conference, where they will meet like-minded peers, investors and representatives of large corporations and learn from experienced teams from the world of start-ups. Young people with the best ideas will thus be able to further develop their entrepreneurial vision and have a chance to attract investors. 


Source: STATiOiBOOK - Statistical Overview of Slovenia 2016, Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia.

 
 
Goal 	9: 	Build 	resilient 	infrastructure, industrialisation, and foster innovation 
 
For Slovenia, a competitive and socially responsible corporate sector is an important driver of development. The competitiveness of the Slovenian economy is mainly negatively affected by its low productivity. By creating products and services with high added value, not only would the development lag behind more economically developed countries 
 
 
promote 	inclusive 	and 	sustainable 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and, by 
2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and double its share in least developed countries 
Employment in industry as a share of overall employment 
Employment in the processing activities: 20.5% of the entire employment (2016) 
 

Employment in high and mediumhigh technological manufacturing activities and in knowledge-based services   
9.4% (2015) 
 
9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and significantly increasing the number of research and development workers per one million people and public and private research and development spending 
Expenditure on R&D as a share of 
GDP 
 
2.21% GDP (2015) 
 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
be eliminated more quickly, but the resulting increase in employment and income would also improve the material condition of the population. A globally competitive, highly productive corporate sector would also enable the financing of high-quality public services for the population by enhancing fiscal capacity.  

Slovenia @ home  
 
? Slovenian Digital Coalition n digitalna.si 
 
The primary objective of the Slovenian digital coalition is to increase the competitiveness of the economy, create new job opportunities, ensure social development and an inclusive society, and foster faster digital transformation of the society by positioning Slovenia as a green reference country in digital Europe. This includes the creation of a development-supportive legislative and regulatory environment, the digitisation of industry and entrepreneurship, the development of e-services, efficient 	digital 	public 	administration, 	the improvement of digital skills, ensuring a secure cyberspace, and the development of smart cities and communities.  
The coalition is an ecosystem of government, the economy, the research and development area, and civil society, which creates an open forum of stakeholders guided by the coalition board, which comprises elected or delegated representatives. Digitalna.si was designed in accordance with the DIGITAL SLOVENIA 2020 strategy and the strategic orientations of the European Commission in its promotion of the establishment of national coalitions in the wake of the Great Coalition for digital jobs. 
43 
 
 	 
? Slovenian Smart Specialisation Strategy (S4) 
 
With the Slovenian Smart Specialisation Strategy, an implementing document, and its related activities and establishing partnerships, Slovenia will, among others (targets 8.2 and 8.3), significantly address targets under SDG 9. S4 addresses the four objectives set under Sloveniais previous Development Strategy, for the 2006n2013 period, which pertain to establishing an \0xEBinnovative knowledge societyi, for which Slovenia has already identified three key field-specific strategies, namely the Research and Innovation Strategy of Slovenia 2011n2020 (RISS), the Slovenian Industry Policy (SIP), and the Digital Agenda, as well as other specific and relevant strategies in the fields of nature protection, energy, education, etc. Sloveniais guidelines are thus integrated in a more concrete manner within a single and a consistent framework facilitating the implementation of focused and synergistic measures. Concrete goals of S4 are increasing the value added per employee, improving Slovenian competitiveness on global markets with an increased share of knowledge and technology in Slovenian exports (Increasing the share of high-tech-intensive products in exports from 22.3% to the EU-15 average of 26.5% and increasing the share of export of knowledgeintensive services in total exports from 21.4% to 33%, which means halving the lag behind the EU average), and increasing overall entrepreneurial activity from the current 11% to the EU average of 12.8%. S4 is strategically focused on sustainable technologies for a healthy life that will help turn Slovenia into a green, creative, and smart region with outstanding conditions fostering creativity and innovation, focused on the development of middle- and high-tech solutions in niche fields. S4 facilitates Sloveniais transformation from a follower to a co-creator of global trends. 
 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Slovenia supports environmental infrastructure projects in partner countries, especially in the Western Balkans and Eastern Europe. In the eabljak community in the north of Montenegro, we contribute to developing mountain tourism and focus on completing the environmental infrastructure (wastewater treatment, waste-sorting centre, and remediation of landfills) and building tourist infrastructure, thus promoting entrepreneurship in connection with sports and environment protection. 

 

44 
  
Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries  
 

A decent life for all is the responsibility and commitment of society as a whole and stems from respect for human integrity. It depends on the income and property of individuals or households, access to education, health, a suitable living environment, highquality food, energy, a clean environment, and personal safety. Slovenia is among the countries with a low level of income inequality and a relatively low level of the risk of poverty; the efficiency of social transfers is also relatively high. As technological progress and demographic and climate changes intensify, maintaining a decent life for all poses a challenge.  
Creating circumstances in which all people can realise their potential in a decent, equal and responsible manner provides key leverage. 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
10.7 Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed 
migration policies 
 
Established startegy on migration flows  
Drafring an European Integrated Border Management Strategy 

Inequality of income distribution 
(Gini coefficient)  
 
24.5 (2015) 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Therefore, economic, social and cultural factors that cause inequality and deepen poverty must be addressed simultaneously. In order for all people to have a decent life, it is also important to form and promote activities focused on controlling poverty and material deprivation. In addition to social protection systems, the central role in this is also maintained by the strengthening of cooperation. 

Slovenia @ home  
 
? Publishing of a dictionary aimed to facilitate the communication between the immigrants and the medical staff 
 
The numerous experiences of aliens as well as of persons employed in the Slovenian medical institutions testify of difficulties in communication with the persons who speak languages with which the health workers are not familiar: many language and cultural misunderstandings appear. Within the project \0xEBPublishing of a dictionary aimed to facilitate the communication between the immigrants and the medical staffi, the handbook in eight languages (Slovenian, English, Arabic, Farsi, French, Russian, Albanian, and Mandarin) was formed in 2016, issued in a paper form and available electronically on-line, in which the most common questions and answers arising from the standard course of treatment are included, and which is intended for the health workers of all profiles who work in different medical institutions of Slovenia, as well as for the persons who do not understand the 
Slovenian language and need medical care in 
Slovenia.  
 
Healthcare services have not been sufficiently trained about a proper treatment of persons from other environments, while thus far, the quality support to the health workers in treatment of persons who are speaking foreign languages has also not been provided (i.e. by ensuring the sufficient number of interpreters and intercultural mediators, as well as by developing the tools for the successful communication with them); therefore, the training \0xEBPatient does not speak Slovenian! Challenge for the health workers in Sloveniai that takes seven hours and shall be conducted free of charge at different locations in Slovenia from March to November 2017 is also a part of this project. The interdisciplinary group of experts takes part in this training. In its first part, the basic concepts are explained via the interactive classes, key information is provided, and the internationally established approaches to the work with the users of the healthcare services who are speaking foreign languages are presented. Special attention is paid to the presentation of the Multilingual Aid for Better Communication in Healthcare that is given to each participant of the training. In its second part, the participants are developing different skills for the 

45 
 

quality medical treatment of persons who are speaking foreign languages in concrete cases at workshops.  
 
The Faculty of Arts, the Faculty of Medicine, the Faculty of Health Sciences of the University of Ljubljana, the National Institute of Public Health, and the Medical Chamber of Slovenia are taking part in this project that is co-financed by the European Union from the Asylum, Migration, and Integration Fund and by the Ministry of the Interior.   
The project shall be conducted for 18 months (until 12 January 2018).    
 
 	 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Slovenia offers direct assistance to the Montenegro working groups engaged in the EU accession negotiations and to the competent state bodies participating in drafting the negotiating positions. Slovenian experts provide counselling on specific negotiation chapters. The implementation will follow the dynamics of drafting negotiating positions and activities for the opening and provisional closing of chapters, and on other conditions that Montenegro has to meet in order to join the EU. 




 
 
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable 

 
Positive shifts have been made in Slovenia in recent years with regard to decreasing pressures on the environment, which Slovenians are still overburdening due to our current lifestyle and production processes. Greenhouse emissions, the cause of one of the greatest environmental problems, have decreased due to the reduced economic activity during the crisis, but they remain higher than the EU average per GDP unit. Due to lower consumption in households and industry, total energy consumption has been decreasing but, due to the large proportion of energy-intensive activities, it remains relatively high per GDP unit. The increase in road transit and general unsustainable mobility are particularly problematic for the environment. 
 
The current situation in terms of the sustainable mobility and use of the public passenger transport (PPT) remains a challenge in Slovenia, thus the implementation of the measures that lead to the sustainable mobility in the 2014n2020 period is one of the main priorities of the Government. In connection with this, the cooperation of local communities is of exceptional importance. By introducing the sustainable mobility at all levels, Slovenia significantly contributes to the reduction of negative impact of traffic on the environment, to the improvement of the quality of the habitat in the urban areas and traffic safety, and to the increase of mobility of inhabitants of remote areas.  
 
Slovenia strives for sustainable mobility so as to reverse this trend by ensuring the accessibility by means of public transport or by providing the conditions for sustainable mobility, including walking and cycling. In order to improve public passenger transport, the development of the integrated, sustainable and accessible mobility will be implemented in towns and cities, while advanced technologies for the more efficient monitoring and management of this traffic will be introduced.  
 
The SDG 11 targets are also addressed by the current Spatial Development Strategy of Slovenia (adopted in 2004). They will be even more comprehensively address in the new spatial development strategy, which is currently being prepared. The guidelines are primarily directed to areas of urban settlements; internal development takes precedence over the spread to new areas. The expansion of settlements in Slovenia is permissible in the absence of suitable land in the settlement and if this settlement has the potential to develop into the centre of a given area. An essential element of sustainable development of Slovenia is the protection of cultural heritage sites, which is included in the preparation of all spatial acts at the municipal and state level.  
 
A part of the preservation of the rich cultural heritage is also the preparation and promotion of the nominations of the Slovenian cultural heritage for enrolment on the international lists of UNESCO World Heritage and the European Heritage Label. Under the UNESCO World Heritage list, Slovenia currently has three sites: \0xE4kocjan Caves with an underground river canyon, Idrija with a mercury mine and the Ljubljansko barje with the heritage of ancient pile dwellings. 
 
In 2016, the capital city of Ljubljana was granted the title Green Capital of Europe; it is the first and only city in Central and South-Eastern Europe to have the title. Each year, the title is awarded by the European Commission. Ljubljana received the award due to the rapid increase in the environmental awareness of the city and the inhabitants in a very short time due to the well-designed strategy \0xEBVision Ljubljana 2025i and the implementation of numerous green measures in the last decade. Sustainable Development Strategy \0xEBVision Ljubljana 2025i, followed by an integrated approach to environmental management in Ljubljana, The Environmental Protection Programme, the Sustainable Mobility Plan, the Sustainable Energy Plan, the implementation of urban green measures and the reorganisation of the transport network together make up the vision of the city until 2025. With the city centre, where there has been no traffic for the last decade, but also with a reorganised transport in some other city areas and with underground waste collectors, Ljubljana proves that a small city can influence sustainable development. 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying particular attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management  
Percentage of recycled municipal waste 
54% (2015) 

Trend 	of 	average 	annual 
concentration of PM10 in PM2.5 
PM10 Maribor, 2015: 28 ug/m3 PM2.5 Maribor, 2015: 21 ug/m3 

Share of passenger kilometres in bus transport and in relation to entire land transport 
16 km 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? 	E?Driving 	Innovative 	SOlutions 	and Networking n EDISON 
 
Due to its geographical position, Slovenia has the potential to become the reference laboratory of green mobility and the leading country in demonstrating and transferring green technologies onto the market. One of the key priority areas of the Slovenian Smart Specialisation Strategy (S4) is that of mobility. In order to achieve the goals as specified in the S4 document, a strategic development and innovation partnership has been established, bringing together members of the Automotive Cluster of Slovenia and the Section for Transport at the Chamber of Commerce of Slovenia. EDISON is a holistic partnership concept, consisting of separate projects aimed at development, testing and demonstration of green mobility technologies and their transfer to the market. EDISONis projects on multiple focus areas will contribute to an improvement of the general awareness on the meaning of green mobility, advanced electrification and infrastructure implementation, which brings green mobility closer to and possible for and friendly to each individual. EDISON is based on five distinct project areas, which are complementary and support its integrity: 
\0x7F 
demonstration 	and 	development 	of 	new technologies 
\0x7F 
new technology transfers to the market 
\0x7F 
development of new business models 
\0x7F 
establishment 	of 	a 	support 	innovation 
environment for creation of new ideas, 
\0x7F 
development of new solutions, education, and technology demonstration. 
 
? The project of the public passenger transport integration  
 
The establishment and ensuring of the appropriate infrastructural conditions for the operation of the integrated public passenger transport (IPPT) have been successfully addressed, whereby the scientific bases in the field of transport solutions were prepared (arrangements of the system of the PPT stations and stops, arrangements of the system of timetable data, forming of proposals for the PPT tariff and system solutions), the intelligent transport system (ITS) for the public passenger transport with the hardware and software to regulate all areas was established, and the project Introduction of IPPT was implemented, in the framework of which all systems came to life in practice, and the conditions for the comprehensive PPT management and administration were set. In December 2016, the entire system for the biggest group of the public passenger transport users (secondary school pupils and students), which represents 60 per cent of all passengers, came to life in production. In this system, the other groups of passenger shall be gradually included, for which it is necessary to assure the optimal offers regarding the type of tickets, tariff policy for individual groups (e.g. the employed, retired, unemployed, and young) and to harmonise the timetable data that responds to the challenges of sustainable mobility by means of new forms of transport (transport on call, combination of the special line transport of school children via the PPT and ensuring the mobility in the sparsely populated areas of Slovenia. The implementation of the project shall be continued by preparing the procurement for awarding concessions, the conclusion of transport contracts, and the harmonisation of timetables. The planned implementation deadline is in December 2019. Thus, Slovenia is one of the first countries to have introduced a uniform multi-operator (i.e. valid with all transport operators) and multi-modal (i.e. valid for train, bus and urban traffic in cities) ticket at the national level.  
, 
 
 
Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 
 
 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and 
efficient use of natural resources 
Direct material consumption, direct material consumption per capita, direct material consumption per 
GDP 
DMC: 27,394,100 t,  
DMC/capita: 13.3 t (2015) 
 
DMC: 26,989,200 t,  
DMC/capita: 13.1 t (2014) 
12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimise their adverse impacts on human health and the environment 
Amount of hazardous waste generated per capita and share of processed hazardous waste by treatment method 
71 kg / inhabitant (2015);  used as fuel 2%, recycled 43%, dumped 8% and incinerated for the purpose of removal 7%. The remaining share indicates other treatment (pre-processing) 
12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse 
National recycling goal, tons of material recycled 
54% (2015); 501,000 tonnes (only municipal waste) 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
The use of resources and energy has been constantly increasing globally, as technological progress has failed to counteract the environmental pressures from the increased population and consumption. Transition to a low-carbon circular economy is one of the main priorities in Slovenia. The Slovenian economy depends on the import of raw materials, so a more restricted access to them can affect us considerably, as Slovenian companies are below the EU average with regard to taking measures concerning the transition to a circular economy. Regarding emissions, transport is especially problematic, so Slovenia will have to take advantage of its potentials of innovation in the area of new mobility concepts. The elimination of legislative and social obstacles, of market inactivity, and of external costs and a change in consumption patterns are also essential for a quicker transition into a low-carbon circular economy. The closing of material loops is connected to suitable reverse logistics, in which the favourable geographic location of Slovenia also plays a key role; transport infrastructure will also have to be more suitable.  

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Partnership for Green Economy 
 
A green economy is Slovenia's strategic objective; it represents an opportunity for the development of new green technologies and green jobs, efficient management of natural resources, and the promotion and expansion of Slovenian know-how. Furthermore, it represents an opportunity for economic growth and improvement 	in 	terms 	of 	international competitiveness while also reducing environmental risks, which adversely affect the quality of life and well-being. The Government adopted a framework programme for the transition to a green economy in 2015 and established an interdepartmental working group, which supervises the implementation of the set measures. A partnership for Sloveniais green economy with interested parties from the economy, non-governmental organisations, and local communities has also been established to connect major players and establish a place where people can exchange their ideas and experiences, which should then be applied to develop relevant measures and policies. Cooperation of all relevant stakeholders in various areas and at different levels is required in order to achieve an efficient, long-term transition to the green economy. 
 
The Government is aware that the country itself can set an important example and lead change. The forthcoming adoption of the Decree on green public procurement will make it procurement mandatory for larger number of items (so far, there are 12 of them, following which it will be 20), including the road rehabilitation, street lighting, textile and fittings. The decree lays down the objectives for individual items that will have been achieved by the contracting authorities regarding the respective contract award (e.g. 10% of food has to be ecological, 50% of electricity has to be from the renewable sources, and 100% of computers have to be the most energyefficient type). This simplifies green public procurement and promotes the diversity of practices and innovations. The decree also promotes the circular economy, integrating of the economy into the environmental management systems, obtaining environmental certificates, and reducing the carbon footprint. 
  
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We offer support for the development, adoption and implementation of environmentally responsible policies in Montenegro. We assist in identifying the potential of those economic growth solutions that respect natural resources, such as the new development paradigm of the circular economy, which is intended to stop negative trends in the exploitation of non-renewable resources and curb excessive pollution, while simultaneously providing an impetus for the economy. The public sector can serve as an important model, as it can signal the Montenegrin market how to improve and increase the supply of products and services with a smaller impact on the environment. Training will include a presentation of green public procurement, which is an important lever for transitioning to a circular, lowcarbon economy. 


 
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 

 
Slovenia supports the international vision of preventing dangerous consequences of climate change and keeping global temperature growth below 2 \0x221EC. It will actively contribute to make this vision a reality with the transition to the economy, the growth of which will not be based on the increased use of natural resources and energy, but will, by means of the efficiency and innovations, reduce the greenhouse gas emissions, improve competitiveness, and promote growth and employment instead. Slovenia recognises the strategic environmental assessment as an important sustainable development tool. At recent Espoo Convention meeting in June 2017, Slovenia presented several examples of effective climate change integrations practice. 
The Sloveniais objective by 2020 is that greenhouse gas emissions will not increase by more than 4% compared to 2005, i.e. that they will be smaller than 12.117 kt CO2 eq. in 2020. The trends of emissions differ by sectors: in the period from 2005 to 2011, the emissions from traffic increased, namely by 28.7%, while the emissions from the fuel consumption in households and service activities reduced by 24.4%, and in farming by 5.1%. The Operational Programme for Reducing GHG Emissions by 2020 (OP GHG) defines the following indicative sectoral targets: 

\0x7F 
halt the fast growth of emissions in transport so that they will not increase by more than 18% by 2030 compared to 2005 (meaning that they will decrease by 15% by 2030 compared to 2008) with the aim of reducing the emissions by 90% by 2050;  
\0x7F 
in general use, reduction by 66% by 2030 compared to 2050 with the aim of using carbonfree energy in this sector by 2050;  
\0x7F 
in farming, the objective is to keep the GHG emissions at the maximum level of +6% by 2030 compared to 2005, while simultaneously increasing Sloveniais food self-sufficiency and ensuring food security;  
\0x7F 
in industry, reduce emissions by 32% by 2030 compared to 2005 with the aim of their reduction by 90% by 2050;  
\0x7F 
in waste management, reduction by 57% by 2030 compared to 2005 with the aim of emission reduction by 90% by 2050;  
\0x7F 
in energy (where fugitive emissions prevail), the objective is to reduce the emissions by 16% by the end of 2030 with the aim of carbon-free energy supply by 2050. 
 

SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries 
Number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction strategies 
 
The Republic of Slovenia has not yet drawn up a national strategy to reduce the risk of disasters 
(situation as of April 2017). 
There are 12 risk assessments for disasters, and protection and rescue plans in use (also at the local level). 
Drawing up of the national strategy to reduce the risk of disasters by 2020. 
The indicator of Sloveniais vulnerability to climate change is being developed. 
The risk management capability assessment is being prepared 
(deadline: August 2018) 

Greenhouse gas emissions (1990n 2014 index)  
89.23 (1990n2014 index) 
 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? FRISCO1 programme  
 
Slovenia is often faced with the challenge of floods, which are occurring increasingly frequently due to climate change. In the last 25 years, the biggest flood events caused approximately \0xC41.8 billion worth of damage in Slovenia. In the last decade alone, the biggest flood events in 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012 and 2014 caused approximately \0xC41 billion worth of damage in Slovenia. In the last decade, Slovenia was faced with an average \0xC4120 million worth of damage caused directly by the floods every year, while it can be roughly assessed that there was on average \0xC4150 million worth of damage every year when the additional indirect damage is also estimated (loss of income by the economic operators, collapse of companies, interrupted infrastructural and communication links, long-term consequences, etc.).  
 
Flood risk management and reduction are conducted by implementing the so-called flood protection measures that are roughly divided into the structural and non-structural measures. Several years ago, a set of 20 flood protection measures was made, which reduce the flood risk and prevent the occurrence of the new or additional flood risk. The consequences of floods have cross-border implications; thus, cooperation is essential to successfully address the challenge of floods and implementation of measures. The FRISCO1 project (Cross-Border Harmonised 
Slovenian-Croatian Flood Risk Reduction 1 n NonStructural Measures) is a vital strategic project aimed at reducing flood risk in the river basins of Dragonja, Kolpa, Sotla, and Bregana, as well as in parts of the Drava and Mura River basins; it is carried out within the framework of INTERREG V-A Slovenia n Croatia cooperation programme. The aim is to tackle common challenges that have been recognised by both sides in the border area, and at the same time exploit untapped growth potentials and strengthen the cooperation process for the overall harmonious development of the European Union. 
 
 	 
FRISCO1 deals with non-structural measures to reduce the flood risk and to improve the system of flood risk management. Improved and harmonised cross-border mapping of flood risks along with the development/improvement of cross-border harmonised models for flood forecasting will provide the necessary expertise and documentation for the selection of cross-border harmonised construction measures to reduce flood risks, which is the second phase of the overall FRISCO project, i.e. FRISCO2 in the Kolpa, Sotla, Drava, and Mura river basins. Furthermore, the FRISCO1 project also provides for activities to raise the publicis awareness about flood risks, for institutional capacity building for improved cross-border management of flood risks and to establish/upgrade early warning systems (mainly sirens to alert the population in case of floods) that will contribute to increased system resistance in the event of floods and greatly reduce flood risk. 
The main goal of the planned FRISCO1 measures is protecting human lives and property and reducing damage in the event of floods. Apart from the increased flood safety in these cross-border river basins, the conditions for sustainable tourism development, and the preservation of the rich biological diversity of the border area will also be improved. 
 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Slovenia is contributing to climate change action through a project targeting water management in the Western Balkans. In 2017, the Conference on Climate Change in the Western Balkans will be organised by the Drought Management Centre for South-Eastern Europe, financed by the Slovenian Climate Change Fund. Projects of mitigation and adaptation will also be co-financed in the Western Balkans. 

 
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for 
sustainable development  
 
As a maritime state situated on the Adriatic Sea and in the broader Mediterranean region, Slovenia recognises the multifaceted challenges related to the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources. This is particularly true as its characteristics place the Adriatic Sea among the class of small seas in which flora and fauna are especially vulnerable to human activities. Due to climate change, small seas are warming up much faster. This affects their water balance and, in turn, their biodiversity. Additional significant pressure is caused by factors such as changes in acidity and salinity, marine litter, and excessive fishing.  
 
With a view to promoting the sustainable development of fisheries, Slovenia supports traditional fishing practices which have a minimal impact on the marine environment. Small-scale coastal fisheries now represent about 90% of Slovenian fisheries. In this context, Slovenia attaches great importance to regional cooperation in the sustainable management of fisheries. It is also actively tackling marine pollution, including marine litter. Slovenia is an active party to the Barcelona Convention, under the umbrella of which guidelines for tackling marine litter have been adopted.  
 
Very recently, Slovenia's achievement in the context of the importance of interconnectedness between marine and coastal ecosystems and addressing the coexistence of a port with the natural reserve in its immediate vicinity was established with the closure of the road between two coastal towns, Koper and Isola. Slovenia has dedicated almost one-tenth of its coast to sustainable use of the coast and the sea. This measure created a green corridor, i.e. a connection between ecosystems and habitats, with our two neighbouring countries, Italy and Croatia.  
 
 
In Slovenia, the National Environmental Action Programme has been in force since 1999, providing for the measures that have already contributed to the achievement of targets of Goal 14 at the national level. Moreover, Slovenia is obliged to implement the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive 
(56/2008/EC). In line with the commitment of the 
European Marine Strategy Framework Directive (56/2008/EC), the adoption of the Marine Environment Management Plan and commencement of the programme of measures to achieve and maintain the good status of marine water, which are a part of the plan, are foreseen in 2017. Slovenia is also obliged to implement the Water Framework Directive (2000/60/EC). In 2016, the Water Management Plan in the Adriatic River Basin District was adopted. Moreover, the implementation of measures to achieve and maintain the good status of coastal water began in 2016, that are a part of the Water Management Plan in the Adriatic River Basin District.  
 
Slovenia is responsible for implementation of the Maritime Spatial Planning Directive that obliges the EU Member States to establish the process of maritime spatial planning and prepare a maritime spatial plan by 2021. The key preserved and for the nature protection crucial areas are protected (Se?ovlje Salina, Strunjan Salina, \0xE4kocjanski zatok, while the maritime domain is protected as part of the Strunjan Nature Reserve and natural monuments Debeli rti? and Rt Madona). Special requirements apply to the Natura 2000 sites, Se?ovlje and Strunjan Salinas, Ankaran n Sv. Nikolaj and Debeli rti?. The majority of the maritime domain is defined as an ecologically important area. 

SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
14. 5. By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information 
Share of marine areas and types from those listed in the Habitats Directive is, considering their number, extent, distribution and representation (according to the estimate), sufficient (Eurostat) 
 
60% (2013) 

Bathing water quality  
The quality of sea bathing water is excellent, which places Slovenia at the very top among European Union countries. 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 

 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
Since 2014 Slovenia has been hosting biennial meetings of the International Whaling Commission (IWC). This year, the meeting of the Scientific Committee of the IWC has been organised in Slovenia for the third time. One of the aims of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling is to provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus contribute to ocean protection. 
 	 


 
Goal 15: Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably   
 

 
SDG Target 
Indicators 
Data for Slovenia 
15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements 
Forest ratio 
58.3% (2015) 

Proportion of important sites for terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity that are covered by protected areas, by ecosystem type 
33.33% (freshwater)  
31,.43% (terrestrial) (2016) 
15.2 By 2020, promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and significantly increase afforestation and reforestation globally 
Sustainable forest management  
n Timber growth  
n Timber harvesting     
n Intensity of timber harvesting (ratio between harvesting and growth) 
 
7.27 m3/ ha/year1 
5.62 m3/ha /year 
70.1% annually  
(2015) 
 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
Ecosystems and their services are of key importance for our health and quality of life. Natural resources provide benefits that contribute to economic development, offer opportunities for investments and employment, and improve the standard and quality of life. Sustainable and efficient management of natural resources is necessary for the long-term preservation of the quantity and quality of our natural resources, which is one of the key pillars for providing a healthy living space, food production, and the performance of economic activities with high added value, and the provision of high-quality jobs. High-quality natural resources are also important for providing a greater level of self-supply of high-quality food and water, which are strategic goods.  

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Natura 2000  
 
Key terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems are included in the Natura 2000 network and, partially, in the protected areas. These are the two main mechanisms to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources (Natura 2000 Management Programme and the protected area management plans as the mandatory basis for the preparation of sectoral plans for the use of natural resources) by integrating the objectives and measures of nature preservation into other sectors. The main principle is integration of nature conservation goals and measures into other sectorial plans. For those areas appropriate assessments are obligatory for all plans or projects. In this way nature conservation concerns are taken into account while implementing development goals. Regarding financing nature conservation measures on Natura 2000 areas LIFE financial mechanism is playing a crucial role. From 2000 29 projects were implemented (total amount 58,659.729 \0xC4). 
 
In Slovenia, Natura 2000 sites cover 37.8% of the national area, of which 70.7% are forests and 4.72% lie above 1600 m.  There are 14,970 designated natural values in Slovenia. Protected areas comprise 12.57% of national territory. 
 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
We are promoting reforestation in Albania by preventing the triggering of landslides above the town of Ersek\0xCE, contributing to land restoration, combating climate change and, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), reducing CO2 emissions and, as such, contribute to climate policy goals. 
 
 
Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable and inclusive 
institutions at all levels 
 
Slovenia is one of the safest countries in the world, which positively affects the quality of life of its people. However, there are numerous new challenges that will have to be addressed to ensure Slovenia's safety. The increasingly rapid development of information and communication technologies, on the one hand, brings benefits for modern society, but, on the other, it affords the occurrence of new and more technologically sophisticated cyber threats. The intensifying political, social, economic, security, and other conditions in the world can also cause more frequent and extensive law and order violations. At the same time, the dynamic changes in the world bring changes in the protection of the state border. It is important to constantly provide for the personal safety of the population, the protection of property and the operation of critical infrastructure. The high level of security of the country and its citizens will be preserved by monitoring and predicting security threats and risks and by providing timely and coordinated responses to them. It is necessary to enrougace the adoption of policies that lay foundations for peacfus and open societes. Such policies and programmes include among others global learning and human rights education, prevention of intolerance and discrimination, and fight against violent extremist.  
 
Slovenia is a globally responsible and solidary country, which will also remain its focus in the future. It cooperates within international organisations and operations and missions that ensure a stable international environment and the security of people. 
SDG Target 
Indicator 
Data for Slovenia 
16.1 Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere 
Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000  population, by sex and age 
Men: 0.9689 (nominal n 20) 
Women: 0.2906 (nominal n 6) 
(2016) 
 

Conflict-related deaths per 100,000 population, by sex, age and cause 
Negligence deaths: 
n men: 0.097 
n women: 0.145 
 
Grievous bodily harm: 
n men: 0.048 
n women:  0.048 
 
Mayhem: 
n men: 0.048 
  
It makes efforts to strengthen peace, security, and stability and to jointly face global challenges, such as managing migrant flows, mitigating climate change, and observing human rights. By means of international cooperation with regard to development, it contributes to a more balanced and just global development and the eradication of poverty and inequality. 
 
The legal system is of national and strategic significance for protecting the rights of citizens, economic development, and welfare, as the operation of all social systems and subsystems depends on it. Legal certainty is one of the key factors of the quality of democracy and economic development. In order to establish a trustworthy legal system, integrity must enhanced; therefore, the prevention of possible abuses and zero tolerance for corruption are of special significance. Slovenia has performed poorly in international comparisons concerning the detection of corruption. In comparison with other OECD members, satisfaction with the judiciary in Slovenia is low, and the resolution of matters takes longer. From the perspective of access and quality, the operation of the judiciary system considerably affects the trust of citizens in public institutions and the Government; thus, maintaining the independence of courts plays an especially significant role. Success in prosecuting all types of crime, especially economic crime, contributes to a better business environment and a higher level of competition; investment attractiveness is thereby also enhanced.


n women: 0.097 
 
Abandonment of infirm person 
n men: 0.048 
(2016) 

Proportion of population subjected to physical, psychological or sexual violence in the previous 12 months 
0.096% 


16.2 End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children 
1. Number of sexual offences on persons under 15 years of age 
2. Number of criminal offences related to sexual exploitation of children via the internet 
134 
 
110 


16.5 Substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms 
Number of the corruption offences under consideration 
199 



Transparency 	International 
Corruption Perceptions Index  
60 (ranked 
countries) (2015) 
35th 
out of 167 

Trust in institutions (Eurostat) in police in legal system in political system 
 
5.5 
2.7 
1.8 (2015) 


16.10 Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and international 
agreements 
Number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information 
The right to know laid down in the Constitution n YES 
The right to know established by law n YES 
Control mechanisms n Information Commissioner, judicial protection n YES 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? Online access to public records and corruption prevention 
 
The public can access a large amount of data from the public sector (e.g. geographical and business data, provisions in force, and other data) from the public registers in a simple and direct manner and, for the most part, free of charge via websites of individual bodies. The e-uprava State Portal is a uniform web portal via which the public can access a large amount of data from the public sector. The data regarding numerous public administration services in the context of life events are published on the portal by the bodies themselves. In the framework of euprava, insight into the public administration data from which the effects of the Government's work and actions are evident is offered by the so-called ISPO Information Service; namely, the data on the public official salaries, use of mobile and fixed phones, company cars, employees of the state administration bodies, working bodies, road traffic safety, etc. can be reviewed. 
 
Taxpayers have the right to know how the funds they have entrusted in management to the state are spent. In line with the principle of openness to the public and transparency regarding the use of the budget funds, the access to the records on the paid salaries in the public sector (so-called ISPO Information Service) is available for public on the website of e-uprava. The access to the up-to-date records on regular and extraordinary payments and arrears paid to the officials by their position is also enabled. 
  
 The Integrity and Prevention of Corruption Act, the proposal of which was prepared by the Ministry of Public Administration in 2010, also compels the open and transparent functioning of the public sector. The objective of the Act is that the state provides conditions for the staff and officials to perform their work in a fair, professional and transparent manner. The Commission for the Prevention of Corruption has set up a web application to monitor the expenditure of the public-sector bodies (so-called Supervizor). The public demonstration of the financial flows between the public and private sector increases the responsibility of the public office holders for the efficient and effective use of public funds, enables debate on the adopted and planned investments, reduces the risks for poor management, abuse of power and, above all, limits systemic corruption, unfair competitiveness and patronage. The CPC also keeps records of lobbyist contacts. Furthermore, the new Court Rules which entered into force on 1 January 2017 gave a legal basis for the free-ofcharge access to the data from records and better access to judicial decisions; thus the Ministry of Justice will set up a special central point to access case law in 2017, including the anonymised judgements of courts (so-called court supervisor) with the judgements at first instance included, thereby enabling citizens insight into the judicial proceeding in real time, which certainly will have an impact on the transparency and thus the efficiency of the judiciary. The names of the involved members of the judiciary will also be published, thereby increasing the transparency of functioning of the judiciary as well as of the State Prosecutor's Office. 
 	 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
During the two-year project, the Centre for European 
Perspective will build Macedoniais capacity to fight organised crime, serious forms of crime and corruption. One of the main tasks of the Macedonian law enforcement bodies is to improve their capacity for seizure, temporary securing and forfeiture of proceeds of crime and illegally acquired property as early as pre-trial investigations. 

 
Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development 
 
In 2016 Slovenia allocated 0.18% of GNI for ODA. Slovenia is committed to achieve its individual ODA target by 2030. In this regard, we envisage the preparation of an action plan for the gradual increase in the share of GNI for ODA in the timeframe of the 2030 Agenda.  
 
We are also strengthening partnerships with civil society and the private sector for sustainable development. Also at the EU level, Slovenia promotes micro, small and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) as important drivers for sustainable development, stakeholders, and partners in the 2030 Agenda implementation. 
 
 
SDG Target 
Indicator 
Data for Slovenia 
17.2 Developed countries to implement fully their official development assistance commitments, including the commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance (ODA/GNI) to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to least developed countries; ODA providers are encouraged to consider setting a target to provide at least 0.20 per cent of ODA/GNI to least developed countries 
Percentage of official development aid (ODA/GDI) in 2016  
 
0.18% of GNI (EUR 72 million) 
 
 
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
Selected Measures, Activities, and Examples of Good Practice 
We are also building the capacities of ten NGOs in the Transnistria, G?g?uzia, and Ocni?a regions and the south of Moldova through intergenerational cooperation in order to help them to independently conduct activities to empower the most vulnerable groups of society, raise the awareness of the public and decision-makers and influence policies. During extensive training, they will acquire the necessary knowledge and skills to promote and advocate for human rights.  

 
Slovenia @ home  
 
? The \0xECPartnership for Change Programme 
 
Partnership for Change is a programme involving innovative collaboration between Sloveniais public administration and private sector, who work together by temporarily exchanging employees, sharing best practices, and solving real challenges. Employees in the public administration and the private sector can together remove barriers, break down stereotypes, and create positive stories. The three mottos of the programme are: Working Together in Partnership; Playful Innovation; and Bold Responsibility. 
 
The business sector and public administration learn how to work together, how to connect, and how to work as a team.  The main goal of the programme is to increase understanding and trust between the two sectors. The programme also emphasises gamification and experimentation as two of its key pillars.  
 
The third season of the programme involved 75 civil servants, 36 companies, and 6 ministries, who searched for and implemented 5 challenges in practice. The challenges encompass motivation in public administration, interdepartmental cooperation, the school curriculum for the 21st century, friendly eservices, and the brand \0xECI feel sLOVEnia. Furthermore, 32 mentoring pairs have been created. The role of mentors is also assumed by the government ministers as well as by the Prime Minister, which demonstrates their willingness to lead by example. 
 
Slovenia as a Responsible Global Citizen  
 
The ITF Enhancing Human Security (previously named International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine Victims Assistance) is a humanitarian nonprofit organisation established in 1998 by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia. Its initial mission was to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing its peace agreement and the country's post-conflict reconstruction through de-mining activities and projects helping mine victims in that country after the war. The ITF has gradually widened the geographical scope of its activities to South-East Europe, the South Caucasus, Central Asia, the Middle East, North and West Africa, Latin America, and the Baltic States. The mission of the ITF is to enhance safety and to enable the recovery and development of conflict-affected countries by addressing the immediate and long-term impact of mine/ERW and other hazards following armed violence. Since its establishment, the ITF has raised over USD 415 million and completed more than 3,100 projects. Over 135.9 million square metres of land has been cleared in South-East Europe through the ITF, over 2.1 million square metres in the South Caucasus and over 1.3 million square metres in Lebanon. The ITF has found and destroyed 90,824 mines and UXO in the region of South-East Europe and 1,037 in Lebanon. A total of 1,277 mine survivors have been rehabilitated through the ITF. Over 440,000 schoolchildren and adults living in minepolluted areas have received mine-risk education directly and over 610,000 family members indirectly. Over 1,100 individuals have been trained in the field of Mine Action (MVA, humanitarian demining, management) and two countries (Macedonia and Albania) have achieved mine-free status in accordance with Article 5 of the Ottawa Convention. 

3.3 	Special Report: Youth in Slovenia in the context of the 2030 Agenda 
 
The Government of Slovenia sets youth education and employment among its priorities. Current actions and plans towards our common future development are of great importance for youth in Slovenia. Therefore, the Government Office for Development and European Cohesion Policy has held regular talks with the representatives of the National Youth Council of Slovenia and the UN Youth Delegate of Slovenia during the preparation of the VNR and invited both to participate in it. This chapter presents the views and analysis of youth in Slovenia. 

 
 
The Voice of Slovenian Youth 
Where is Slovenia on the 2030 Agenda? 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Engaging youth in the global vision for the future is of the utmost importance as they are the key driver of successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Young people are a dynamic force of social transformation when given a choice in decision-making processes. As one of nine groups of major stakeholders in civil society engaged in the process of implementing the 2030 Agenda, youth in Slovenia has been given a voice through the biggest umbrella youth organisation: The National Youth Council of Slovenia. This chapter will first present our work and offer an overview of the youth in Slovenia and insight into the results of the research conducted among young people and youth organisations. The second part will address specific SDGs that are crucial for youth in Slovenia. 
 
National Youth Council of Slovenia (MSS) 
As an umbrella association of the national youth organisations, and a non-profit and non-governmental organisation, MSS represents the Slovenian youth a national and international levels. Advocacy for the interests of youth, encouragement of cooperation on youth policies and creation of a youth-friendly environment in which young people can develop into autonomous, responsible, and active individuals and members of the society, are at the core of the MSS mission. The MSS works together with its 16 members (which are also umbrella associations with a nationwide network of member organisations operating in the field of environment, health, student rights, sports, democracy, etc.) and 43 local community youth councils across Slovenia to further develop the national network of youth organisations, initiates youth policies, and encourages development of youth work and non-formal education. As the key representative of Slovenian youth, the priority areas of MSS are youth employability, housing issues, education, health, participation, mobility, information-sharing, volunteering, and youth organising.  
 
UN Youth Delegate Slovenia 
The UN Youth Delegate of Slovenia was established in 2014 by the MSS in cooperation with the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia, the Office of the Republic of Slovenia for Youth, and the United Nations Association of Slovenia. The delegateis main aim is to represent Slovenian youth in the UN System, and it connects the challenges and efforts of youth and youth sector on the local, regional, and national levels with the international framework. The delegate follows the programme, recommendations, and policies of the UN and communicates them with youth in Slovenia; it also identifies the needs and challenges of youth in Slovenia and voices them at international forums. Through such a two-way approach, good practices from abroad are brought to Slovenia, and successful policies and solutions from Slovenia are recommended to other countries and regions. The UN Youth Delegate of Slovenia in 2017 is focused on youth participation, including economic participation (decent work, accessible housing, quality education, non-formal education, employability, and entrepreneurship), political participation (formal and informal participation, active citizenship, and advocacy), and community participation (youth policies on local level, youth organising, volunteering, youth work, and intergenerational and intercultural dialogue). 
 
 
Overview: Youth in Slovenia 
Young people between the age of 15 and 29 years represent 15.5% of the Slovenian population,4 while the projections forecast a nearly 1% decrease (to 14.8%) of the young population by the year 2030.5 A country that fails to recognise the needs and aspirations of youth through its development policies and programmes pays a multi-dimensional and long-lasting high cost. Investment in youth strongly impacts the present and contributes to our common future.  
 
 
Overview: The Key Challenges of Youth in Slovenia 
 
 
  Structural 	Unstable 	Delayed transition 	Low fertility and 	Lack of skills and unemployment 	employment 	to adulthood 	aging population 	competencies that  	employers seek 
 
Overview: The Key Strengths of Youth in Slovenia 
 

  Awareness of Well-recognised Participation of Highly educated High level of global citizenship youth sector and youth in decision- population gender equality and active state support making volunteering 
 
Importance of an Active and Engaged Youth Sector 
Participation and inclusion of young people in the civil society and youth organisations lead to active and responsible citizenship and improve the quality of young peopleis lives. They not only enable acquiring learning outcomes, skills, and competences, but also transfer values and promote social responsibility. The activities of the youth sector increase the quality of life of youth and foster new ideas, boost intercultural and intergenerational solidarity, and initiate change and development. 
 
Youth and the 5 Ps n Young People 
Although it is of tremendous importance to understand that the youth should and must be involved in all the five \0xEBPsi (People, Prosperity, Planet, Peace, and Partnerships), we decided to ask young people and youth organisations in Slovenia about their priorities. In the research conducted in May 2017, for young respondents SDG 4 (78%), SDG 8 (67%), SDG 12 (58%), and SG 16 (51%) are the most important goals, while youth organisations through their activities emphasise on SDG 4 (56%), SDG 8 (44%), SDG 10 (67%), and SDG 17 (44%). The following analysis will, therefore, be focused on the goals that were identified as priorities of youth in Slovenia. 
 
 
SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
Data show that 14.7% of youth6 in Slovenia lives below the at-risk-of-poverty threshold,7 while the share is higher than among the population as a whole. MSS is involved in the public debates and preparation of legislation with an aim to improve the living conditions for youth during the process of education and their entry to the labour market. As a member of working groups, we proposed a reform of the scholarship policy, suggested instruments to boost youth employability, and pointed out the problem of the system not ensuring decent wages for youth in precarious employment. 
 
MSS proposes: We need to embrace intergenerational dialogue and cooperation. Youth and elderly are the two generations that are at the highest risk of poverty. Young people struggle to find decent work, work in precarious jobs, and face trouble while trying to buy or rent their own housing. Elderly people often receive rather low pensions but own oversized properties. Slovenia should establish a legislative framework that would enable easier exchange of housing properties, low-tax transfer of real estate ownership and encourage youth and the elderly to cooperate. 
 
 
SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
While enjoying a healthy and prosperous environment in Slovenia, obesity, consumption of alcohol, and smoking represent a serious threat to health and well-being. 6.4% of youth8 in Slovenia are overweight. MSS works closely with its members on a project called \0xEBFor Youth Healthi that formed a network of young promoters of health across Slovenia, who are trained to educate youth and organise well-being programme in their local environments. 
 
MSS proposes: Healthy lifestyle awareness must become an incremental part of the study curricula on all levels of education, and physical education must be introduced on all levels of education, from primary to tertiary. 
 
 
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all Slovenia is among the countries with the highest accessibility of quality education for children and youth. Nearly everyone is enabled with an appropriate education, which is based on inclusivity and equal opportunities for women and men. To establish a functioning and inclusive educational architecture, Slovenia developed systems of student stipends, subsidised accommodation, food and transportation and a unique system of student jobs. MSS strives for the increase of scholarship funds to further increase the inclusivity of education and overcome the barriers of the social status of young people. At the core of our efforts is also the promotion and recognition of non-formal education. Among the latest achievements of the youth sector in Slovenia is the recognition of the national professional qualification (NPQ) for youth workers. Our member organisations are among the most active providers of non-formal education in the non-governmental sector. 
 
MSS proposes: The systems of formal and non-formal education need to become more integrated and connected. Youth organisations should be enabled to offer their knowledge and non-formal education topics in the process of formal education. An open and accessible education system will also contribute to life-long learning processes. 
 
Free and accessible education  
Education in Slovenia is free and equitable, whereas the proportion of girls and boys enrolled in secondary education institutions reaches 96% (research made among 17-years old people), which is among the highest proportions in Europe.9 While in 1961 only 1% of women and 3% of men held a tertiary education degree, in 
2015 the proportion rose to 25% among women and 18% among men.10 Access to technical, vocational and tertiary education, including university, is free. Among youth between the age of 20 and 24, more than 50% are students,11 which places Slovenia among the countries with the highest proportion of youth in tertiary education. 
 
Youth in vulnerable situations 
Special attention is devoted to the inclusion of people in vulnerable situations, Slovenia developed one of the best programmes for the inclusion of Roma people in the region through the National Roma Integration Strategy, aiming to eliminate poverty and social exclusion, in particular in the areas of education, employment, healthcare, and housing. Since Slovenia promotes projects and programmes that include people in vulnerable situations through special chapters in public tenders, the youth sector receives an additional incentive to develop inclusive and comprehensible programmes. Different youth organisations with various mandates are spread around Slovenia geographically and are, therefore, able to cover a myriad of specialised youth-oriented agendas.   
 
Skills and competencies for employability 
The current focus of Slovenia is to boost relevant skills for employment, decent jobs, and entrepreneurship. The youth sector in Slovenia plays a vital role in this process. As young people face the challenge of a lack of practical individual skills and competencies that employers seek (such as communication, teamwork, management, and planning), the youth sector serves as an indispensable provider of non-formal education through civic projects, learning programmes, and volunteering opportunities. Slovenia is the only OECD member in which the proportion of young volunteers is higher than the proportion in other age groups: as many as 40% of youth are volunteers.12  
 
Education for global citizenship 
Youth in Slovenia are among the most environmentally aware in Europe, as they see rubbish sorting (72%), water saving (54%), and reduction of the use of plastic (49%) as their responsibility towards the earth and use of renewable energy sources (61%), innovation of new energy sources (39%), and reduction of the use of energy (32%) as Europeis priority. 13 While there is space for improvement in the formal education curricula with regards to global citizenship education and education for sustainable development, numerous extracurricular programmes exist in the field. MSS is a strong proponent for the introduction of a permanent and integral school subject on civic education. 
 
 
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
Slovenian governmentis top priority is to reduce unemployment, especially among young people. The goal is addressed through various employment schemes, supported by the European funds, the promotion of entrepreneurship among youth and reforms of educational framework. MSS is in permanent dialogue with the government and responsible offices to substantially reduce such statistics. We strongly advocate for the reform of the educational programmes that would provide a stronger emphasis on the skills and competencies that employers are seeking. As an integral part of such a system, career orientation and consulting, life-long learning, and a link between education and the private sector would be strengthened. MSS is a member of the working group on Youth Guarantees at the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities. 
 
MSS proposes: Slovenia should actively prevent precarious jobs that by their nature do not provide social security and decent wage for workers. Any work that is indicated with the elements of working relationship should be established on the basis of a permanent work contract, instead of temporary or contract work. 
 
Structural unemployment 
Because of structural unemployment, 9.5% of young people between the age of 15 and 29 were not in employment, education, or training.14 Although decreasing recently, structural unemployment is among the biggest challenges of Slovenian youth. There is a mismatch between the skills of the young people with typically tertiary levels of education and the skills demanded by the employers. As many as 74% of youth in Slovenia work in an unstable form of employment (fixed-term contract, self-employed, contract for a copyrighted work),16 which leads to a weaker economic security, delayed transition to adulthood (at the age of 29, every second young male (55%) and every third young female (36%) lived with their parents)15 and decline in family formation (average age of mothers when their first child is born is 28.5 years). 
 
Sustainable tourism as an employment opportunity 
Slovenia, recently selected as one of the top green destinations, is renowned for its sustainable tourism. Not only in the private sector, but also in the youth sector. Youth centres across Slovenia are developing youth tourism through sustainable and environment-friendly solutions, cooperation with local product and service providers, the use of natural materials, and the introduction of self-sustainable practices. Such practices, supported with public funds, create jobs for young people and promote local culture and products. 
 
 
SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries 
Slovenia has a long tradition of regionalism and local self-government. The municipality is the basic self-governing local community with at least 5,000 inhabitants. MSS coordinates the work of 43 local community youth councils, offers expert support and trains them for youth advocacy in their local environments. As a result, our network ensures representation and advocacy for youth both in urban and rural areas and enables youth in more remote areas to actively participate in society. 
 
MSS proposes: Slovenia should initiate the development of youth policies on the level of self-governing local communities as their mandatory task. That would ensure equal opportunities for youth in all local communities.  
 
 
SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels 
As previously pointed out, the Slovenian youth sector is highly engaged and active. One of the programmes of MSS is a Structured Dialogue programme in which young people have the opportunity to sit at the same table with the decision-makers and present their views, solutions, and suggestions. Our task is to encourage both sides to engage in responsive and open result-oriented discussions that lead to concrete policy reforms and projects on all levels of governance. 
 
MSS proposes: Youth representatives should become part of all decision-making processes and bodies to truly follow the youth mainstreaming approach. Recently, we presented our proposal for the inclusion of youth representatives into the Institute of Pension and Invalidity Insurance of Slovenia (pension system), the Assembly of the Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia (healthcare system), and the National Council of the Republic of Slovenia (upper house of the parliament with the representatives of social, economic, professional and local interest groups in Slovenia). Furthermore, we propose youth quotas in the electoral system. 
 
 
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development 
By involving the youth sector in the process of preparation of the national review, Slovenia shows its strong commitment to inclusive multi-stakeholder partnership both internally and externally. Building a strong public and civil society partnership is the decisive step towards effective educational and awareness-raising approach. The youth sector in Slovenia is organised through a comprehensive legislation package. 
 
The unique form of cooperation between Slovenia and Slovenian youth is a sign of recognition and respect for the fact that we can only follow the 2030 Agenda by bringing young people on board in a collective endeavour towards achieving the SDGs. This can serve as an example for other countries.  
 
Youth has been encouraged to join the multi-stakeholder partnership and contribute with the ideas, visions, and proposals. Such initiative paves the way for the process of education, implementation, and evaluation of the SDGs by youth and for youth. 
 	 
 
4. 	MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND NEXT STEPS 
 
        Slovenia is highly cognizant of the importance of well-managed and horizontally diversified policies for achieving sustainable development. None of the three pillars of sustainable development should prevail over the other two, which means that, for example, environmental policy measures cannot be formulated and implemented independently, separately, or unrelated to economic and social policies. Such inclusive and balanced action in the development of policies is the foundation and framework for the country's operation towards sustainable development. 
 
Slovenia will implement this approach domestically as well as at the global level, where we will continue to devote our attention to the strengthening of peaceful and inclusive societies, with focus on good governance, equal opportunities, and quality education, as well as addressing climate change, with focus on the sustainable management of natural and energy resources. The empowerment of women is a cross-cutting priority, in line with our dedication to the respect of human rights. Slovenia will continue to advocate more interconnected cooperation of organisations within the framework of the UN system, as well as better cooperation between international organisations and countries on the bilateral as well as at the multilateral level. As each country needs to strive to establish a comprehensive management approach, international organisations should also do so. This is the only way to truly address the challenges of sustainable development in a comprehensive way. Within the European Union, Slovenia will strive to integrate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda into discussions on the future of the EU, as well as in the forthcoming multiannual financial framework following 2021. Slovenia will implement the 2030 Agenda at the national level, through the implementation of Slovenia's Development Strategy 2030, which represents the umbrella development plan of the country, and abroad through international development cooperation and humanitarian assistance on the basis of a new resolution regarding it, and the revised International Development Cooperation Act. 
 
Due to the decision that Slovenia will localise the SDGs through the newly emerging Development Strategy of Slovenia, which is directly linked and intertwined with the goals of sustainable development (on a goal as well as on a target level), this national document is vital for achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda in Slovenia. Specifically, because by pursuing its own national goals, Slovenia will simultaneously also achieve the goals of sustainable development of the 2030 Agenda. On the basis of expert analyses, strategic foresight tools and several rounds of coordination between ministerial departments, the draft strategy with five strategic orientations and twelve goals and national priority indicators, is planned to enter public coordination with all stakeholders at the end of July 2017. 
 
The new national development strategy is also significant for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda due to clearly defined ways of achieving national development goals and hence the objectives of sustainable development: 
\0x7F 
Policy coherence for sustainable development will be checked at the policy-making stage. 
\0x7F 
The implementation of sustainable development objectives at the national level will be systematically monitored on an annual basis together with national development objectives. 
\0x7F 
The development of capacities in the horizontal understanding of the national and international development context, together with strategic assumptions, will help to better adapt the implementation of individual development goals. 
 
With the aim of maximally linking and gathering existing capacities in the area of sustainable development in one place, inclusive, horizontally integrated, and interdepartmental cooperation between ministries and key government agencies, will continue through enhanced activities within the newly established Interdepartmental Working Group for Development Policies. 
 
We are all responsible for the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda and all its goals. Governments cannot and should not act alone. Slovenia is aware of the importance of establishing partnerships and cooperation with external stakeholders. Thus, we will strengthen cooperation with many stakeholders in the society in the field of sustainable development on two levels: 
 
\0x7F 
Through the introduction of the Slovenian Development Strategy context and a regular dialogue (horizontal aspect) in the Economic and Social Council, the Expert Council for International Development Cooperation the 
Slovenian network of UN Global Compact, the Government Council for Youth, working bodies of the National Assembly, the National Council, the Government Council for Cooperation with Non-Governmental Organisations, associations of local communities and other stakeholder platforms; 
 
\0x7F 
Finding a systematic way through which all these stakeholders would be involved as equally as possible in the implementation of the 2030 
Agenda, while simultaneously avoiding creating 
new institutional forms and more administrative procedures. 
 
The VNR preparation process was an important first step in monitoring the achievements of the implementation of the SDGs. For Slovenia, the VNR 2017 was an overview and an insight of the situation in the area of monitoring the indicators as well as existing measures in a coherent way. The conducted gap analysis has pointed out some of the remaining distances. Slovenia will strive to increase the share of available Agenda indicators. Likewise, the preparation of the VNR has revealed a lack of collecting all the data in one place, since the 2030 Agenda greatly exceeds the content typically collected by the statistical offices. Therefore, the future efforts of Slovenia will be focused primarily on the construction of a mechanism for the systematic collection of data by all institutions that, in addition to the Statistical Office, have relevant databases. This will allow Slovenia a good overview of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda throughout the period, not only for the needs of the VNR. Slovenia plans to report on the achievement of the goals of the 2030 Agenda as a regular part of the annual reporting on the implementation of Slovenia's Development Strategy, while a more detailed analysis of each of the future VNRs is planned. 

 
5. 	CONCLUSION 
 
        Slovenia has a good starting position and more than a decade-long tradition of policy making and establishing of more sustainable oriented development. As the review shows, we are not yet achieving all the targets and despite some of the good examples of Slovenian measures, activities, and good practices there are still significant gaps to be overcome to reach all the targets by 2030. Although the remaining distances to achieving the targets are small in several areas, challenges remain, according to the OECD Pilot Study.  
 
For Slovenia, the current preparation of the new Slovenian Development Strategy is of great importance. Preparation of the VNR parallel with the drafting of the National Development Strategy gave additional impetus to deliver an overview of existing actions that domestically and externally contribute towards the achievement of the SDGs. The gap analysis that gave us this overview has also proven that a comprehensive approach will be very much needed in our next steps towards implementing the new Slovenian Development Strategy. SDG targets for which Slovenia is a slightly poorer performance are areas where we could previously witness a lack of comprehensive policy approach.  
 
The most important lesson that we learned during the VNR process is the need for the integrated approach. None of the three pillars of the sustainable development should prevail over the other two and, in this regard, before making policy proposals considering inter-linkages between economic, social, and environmental policy areas, as well as ensuring consistency with the international engagements, is of great importance for the successful implementation of the SDG.  
 
To participate at the HLPF and prepare the national review on implementing the SDGs in the second year since the 2030 Agenda became active was perceived to be a significant opportunity for Slovenia to establish the correct and functional mechanisms and to consolidate the processes that will address the remaining challenges towards more sustainable development. The VNR was a kick off for establishing a whole-of-government approach, which is an ongoing process. Important fundamentals have been set with the coordination mechanism involving all the ministries, the Office of the Prime Minister, and the core agencies (Statistical Office and the IMAD), as well as the regular briefings of the Government.  
 
To guide whole-of-government action and translate the commitment to SDGs into concrete and coherent measures at the local, national and international levels, a clear political commitment is necessary. It is an essential foundation to enhance policy coherence for SDG implementation. In Slovenia, preparing a new Development Strategy that will localise the SDGs has been clearly supported at the prime ministerial and ministerial levels and backed by governmental priority. The new strategy will set a strategic framework, which will be complemented by action plans in order to enable the whole government to pursue a national SDG agenda coherently. Strong political leadership enabled the national debate on the future of Slovenia that led to the Vision Slovenia 2050 and a clear commitment, that sustainable development is the only way forward.  
 
In contrast, the VNR helped to identify some of the remaining challenges. There is still a need to share the knowledge that the 2030 Agenda goes beyond the MDGs: it continues with development priorities, such as eradicating poverty, establishing universal education, health, and food security, but it also sets out a wide range of economic, social and environmental objectives. Solid fundamentals have been set with the coordination structure of the focal points at all the ministries and core governmental agencies (Statistical Office and the IMAD). Next, the most important step will be to bring the SDGs to every office in every ministry, meaning that not only the focal points at the ministries will be aware of the cross-cutting nature of the 2030 Agenda, but also everyone responsible for the policy development, implementation, and evaluation. More should also be done to attract the interest of the private sector.    
 
 
Despite the recognition of the critical need for collaboration, there are still many silos to break on every level n among the ministries, between the private and public sector, among the NGOs and the government and among the NGOs and the private sector. Implementing the SDGs could only be successful if it is seen as a win-win game. In that regard, there is no need for competition. Rather, we must build on our collective achievements and collaborate across boundaries, sectors, and jurisdictions.  
 
The VNR process showed that ministries are used to working on their own issues alone. Integrating approaches, working together and developing policies too often is not \0xEBbusiness as usuali. Ministries too often look only through one prism and forget that, for example, environmental policies have spill over effects and also affect social, foreign, economic and other policies. To fully implement the 2030 Agenda a change in the \0xEBbusiness as usuali culture and a truly integrated manner to lift political, financial, technological, and behavioural barriers will be necessary. 
 
Our objective and critical next step is to establish an integrated and coherent policy framework for sustainable development. This will ensure synergies among sectoral, domestic, and foreign policies. 
 
To bring the 2030 Agenda to life, which for Slovenia means to bring to life also our own Vision 2050 and the National Development Strategy 2030, the Government is not acting alone. The localisation of the Sustainable Development Goals requires strong inter-departmental coordination as well as robust dialogue with multiple stakeholders. Each stakeholder has to act responsibly in partnership with other to achieve these ambitious common goals 

together for ourselves and for future generations.  
