1. CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
	1.1 	Introduction
Agenda 2030 on Sustainable Development has 17 inter-connected goals that are aimed at eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable development by year 2030 worldwide, ensuring that no one is left behind. The 2030 Agenda has four sections: (i) A Political Declaration, (ii) A set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), (iii) Means of Implementation, and (iv) A Framework for followup and review of the Agenda. Collectively, SDGs address three dimensions of development which are: economic development, social inclusion, and environmental sustainability. Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) are part of the formal intergovernmental follow-up and review process on Agenda 2030 and is presented at the United Nations High-Level Political Forum (HLPF). VNR presents a country’s progress to peers and other stakeholders at a global level on the implementation of Agenda 2030. 
The theme for VNR 2019 is ‘Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality’. This year’s report covers the following goals: Goal 4: Ensuring Inclusive and Quality Education for All and Promoting Lifelong Learning; Goal 8: Decent work and Economic Growth; Goal 10: Reduced Inequalities; Goal 13: Taking Urgent Action to Combat Climate Change and its Impact; Goal 16: Access to Justice for All; Build Effective Accountable Inclusive Institutions at All Levels; and Goal 17: Strengthening the Means of Implementation and Revitalizing Partnerships for Sustainable Development.
The United Republic of Tanzania is presenting its VNR for the first time to share its experience in the implementation of the SDGs. The specific objectives of this report are; to review progress and the status of the SDG indicators; highlight experiences in implementation and showcase best practices that can be emulated by other countries. The report also identifies areas where international support is called for, to complement national efforts in the implementation of the SDGs.
1.2 	Brief Country Profile19
The United Republic of Tanzania (URT) was formed on 26th April 1964 as a union between two sovereign states, the then Tanganyika (now Mainland Tanzania) and the Peoples Republic of Zanzibar. The country is situated in the eastern part of Africa; occupying a total area of 945,087 square kilometres (364,900 square miles). It has a population of 55.5 million (2018 estimates). Kiswahili is the national language; with English as a second language. The average life expectancy is estimated at 65 years (males, 63 years and females 67 years). The Tanzanian Shilling is the official currency (United States Dollar exchange rate is at around 1: 2,300). Per capita income is estimated at USD 1,021 (nominal). 
Mainland Tanzania is predominantly an agricultural economy with agriculture being the source of livelihoods for over 70 percent of the population. For both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar, the economy has been growing at an impressive rate of 7 per cent per annum on average over the last 10 years. In Zanzibar, the services sector is the largest contributor to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) largely driven by tourism, whereby in 2018 this sector made up 51 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the country is home to a number of renowned tourist attractions including, Africa’s and the world’s highest free-standing snow-capped mountain, Mount Kilimanjaro, astride the Equator; and world-famous wildlife riches of the Serengeti National Park and Ngorongoro Crater; and Zanzibar Stone Town, which is an UNESCO World Heritage Site.
1.3 	United Republic of Tanzania and SDGs
The United Republic of Tanzania as a member of the United Nations participated in the consultation process for the Post 2015 development agenda launched in September 2012 by the United Nations (UN). The consultations were guided by the principle of a bottom-up and inclusive approach defined by national and local priorities; informed by the perspectives of people from all parts of the country, including the poor and vulnerable. The process involved three layers of consultations. The first layer involved consultations at the grassroots level in seven zones covering all regions in the Mainland, with vulnerable groups such as women, elderly and youth especially focused. The second layer included consultations with the private sector, higher learning and research institutions, and public sector officials. Similar layers of consultations were conducted in Zanzibar covering the two main Isles of Unguja and Pemba. The final layer of consultations happened at the national level for validation, prioritization and approval of the consultation report. 
Formulation and adoption of the SDGs in September 2015 benefited from the outcome of consultations held in Tanzania. Since the adoption of Agenda 2030, the United Republic of Tanzania, in partnership with non-state actors and development partners, is committed to the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs.
Agenda 2030 was adopted when Mainland Tanzania was already implementing its Development Vision, Tanzania Development Vision (TDV) 2025 which aims at accelerating the transformation of the country into a semi- industrialized middle-income nation by the year 2025 (see Chapter two). In particular, the timing of the formulation of the SDGs coincided with that of formulating the second medium term framework for implementing the Vision, -the National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17 - 2020/21 (FYDP) II. This afforded the country a great opportunity to integrate the priorities of 2030 Agenda in the medium-term plan. 
Likewise, Zanzibar Development Vision 2020 spells out the transformation agenda and transition to middle-income country status by 2020. The Vision for the Isles is being implemented through medium-term strategies. Zanzibar’s current medium-term strategy, the Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty 20162020, popularly referred to as “MKUZA III” has embraced Agenda 2030 (see Chapter two).
 
1.3.1 Implementation of SDGs
In the United Republic of Tanzania, SDGs are, therefore, being implemented through the two medium term frameworks FYDP II and MKUZA III. Taking advantage of the opportune timing of the SDGs and the national medium-term development plans’ formulation, efforts were made to mainstream the SDGs into these plans, with further action being taken during the formulation of 	21
subsequent sector plans and strategies. The implementation of the national development strategies is therefore aimed at achieving both the national development goals and SDGs with milestones set to be achieved at a given point in time.
1.3.2 Engagement of Stakeholders
The United Republic of Tanzania has adopted a “Whole of Society” approach for implementation and attainment of the SDGs. The Government engages various categories of stakeholders in order to build awareness and to sensitize them on the roles they are expected to play in implementing the SDGs. Among other things, this entails seminars and presentations/talks to different stakeholders in various fora. Among those engaged are Members of Parliament (MPs) in the Mainland and the House of Representatives in Zanzibar, who are instrumental in sending the core messages of the SDGs to local level; and ensuring government budgets include the SDGs as priority spending areas and are integrated into local development plans and projects. A Parliamentary Group on Sustainable Development (PGSD) monitors the implementation of the SDGs at local level and provides regular feedback and guidance. 
In Mainland Tanzania, at the onset of adopting SDGs, presentations were also made at a National Planners’ Conference, which is a forum attended by Directors of Policy and Planning (DPPs) from Government Ministries, Independent Departments and Agencies (MDAs); Planning Officers from Regional Secretariats (RSs) and Local Government Authorities (LGAs), representatives from the Central Bank, National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), representatives of selected research and academic institutions; and other invited guests from Government departments and agencies, as well as the private sector and development partners. The Government also conducted awareness and sensitization workshops on SDGs for RSs and LGAs in order to empower and capacitate them to mainstream and incorporate national plans and SDGs into their plans and budgets. These Seminars, as well, targeted Community Development Officers (CDOs), District Planning Officers (DPOs) and Assistant Administrative Secretaries (AASs) responsible for LGAs’ coordination. 
The Zanzibar Planning Commission (ZPC) coordinated the preparation of the VNR 2019 version for Zanzibar. The engagement of Stakeholders in the implementation of MKUZA III /SDGs is crucial in achieving both the SDGs and objectives of MKUZA III. The Zanzibar Planning Commission uses its Monitoring &Evaluation (M&E) arrangement of MKUZA III to ensure that all key Stakeholders are informed on the whole process. The M&E Framework has three levels of main implementors: Level 1: Sector Ministries, Association of Non-Governmental Organizations in Zanzibar (ANGOZA), Zanzibar National Chamber of Commerce Industry and Agriculture (ZNCCIA), LGAs and Communities. Level 2: Coordination: Technical Committee, ZPC Secretariat and M&E Secretariat. Level 3: Decision making level – which mostly consists of the Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee (IMTC), Zanzibar Planning Commission, Cabinet and House of Representatives. Knowledge sharing in relation to the VNR process was conducted at all three levels. The members were drawn from the Government, the Private sector, Higher learning Institutions, the Communication Department, the President’s Office, ANGOZA, etc. With regard to the level of engagement towards Zanzibar’s VNR production, the first level of stakeholders’ consultations was done in the form of awareness creation on the importance of implementing MKUZA III/SDGs and preparing VNR 2019. 
Several stakeholders’ consultations on the SDGs implementation were conducted country-wide and involved representatives from the private sector/businesses, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), CSOs, Development Partners, ethnic groups, academia, professional groups, labour associations, women networks and youth networks as well as the media. 
As part of the preparatory process towards HLPF, the Global Compact Network Tanzania (GCNT), a multi stakeholder platform for private sector, CSOs, UN agencies, development partners and government; undertook a series of engagements and consultations with businesses and CSOs. The consultations aimed at engaging the Tanzania private sector in the SDGs, as well as reporting on the implementation of the SDGs. 
The consultation series were organized in collaboration with 23
the Tanzania Private Sector Foundation (TPSF), the Association of Tanzania Employers (ATE), the Confederation of Tanzania Industries (CTI), Tanzania Horticulture Association (TAHA), Tanzania Association of Tour Operators (TATO), and various CSOs and support of the United Nations Development Programme. Strategic dialogue between the government and private sector is consolidated into the Tanzania National Business Council (TNBC) for the Mainland and Zanzibar Business Council (ZBC) for the Isles and draws on an apex of private sector organizations. With more awareness being created about SDGs and opportunities that emerge in the implementation, the private sector is expected to take the lead role in the SDGs’ implementation. 
CSOs have formed The Tanzania Sustainable Development Platform (TSDP) for coordinating involvement and contribution towards the implementation and follow-up, and the review of the SDGs. TSDP also offers a platform for engagement with the Government, UN system and other stakeholders on the Goals. 
United Republic of Tanzania has a rich history of engaging Development Partners in the development process. At the moment, the Development Cooperation Framework (DCF) has stipulated modality of engagement between the Government and Development Partners who are part in reviewing implementation progress of the country development agenda. 
The media, among other things, has been instrumental in raising awareness and propagating the implementation of the country development agenda, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Further, the media has participated in informing the general public on the VNR consultation process.
1.4 Methodology and Process for Preparing the National Voluntary Review
This Review has been prepared following guidelines provided by the UN HLPF handbook, version 2019, for preparation of the country-specific Voluntary National Review. The preparations involved the following steps:
(i) Step 1: Organization of a kick-off workshop to discuss the process, raise awareness and involve all stakeholders in the formulation process.
(ii) Step 2: Establishment of an Inter-Sectoral and MultiStakeholder Working Group on the SDGs composed of representatives from key Ministries, Departments, Agencies, private sector organizations; Higher learning Institutions, Research Institutions and CSOs).
(iii) Step 3: Preparation of a data collection questionnaire/tool.
(iv) Step 4: Reporting by Ministries and agencies on targets they are responsible for.
(v) Step 5: Mobilizing resources - working with development partners, MAPS Mission, UN agencies in Tanzania, as well as domestic and international NGOs, socio-political and socioprofessional organizations and research institutions for the 
VNR.
(vi) Step 6: Drafting of the VNR.
(vii) Step 7: Preparation of key messages
(viii) Step 8: Conducting consultations through workshops. This involved sharing the report with Government (MDAs, RSs); LGAs and non-state stakeholders (private sector, CSOs, NGOs, development partners, academia and media) to ensure that the report is an inclusive national document. 
(ix) Step 9: Finalising the VNR report taking into account inputs from Step 8.
(x) Step 10: Preparing the VNR presentation (content and format, video, translation and printing the VNR).
	1.5 	Limitations 
It should be noted that in assessing the progress on the implementation of the SDGs, it has not been possible to get data for all SDG indicators. Absence of baseline data and/or limited data for some of the indicators has impacted on the monitoring of their progress (e.g. SDG 8, SDG 13, and SDG 16) and thus poses a challenge in tracking progress. Unavailability of quality routine data and a lack of harmonization of data reporting formats across LGAs for comparability purposes is also another challenge. Some data is aggregated at national and regional levels hence may not reflect the 





2 2. CHAPTER TWO
POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMENT
This Chapter provides an account of the environment for implementation of the SDGs in the United Republic of Tanzania. Six sections form this Chapter: Political Commitment, Ownership, 
Integration of the three dimensions of Sustainable Development, Good Governance, SDGs Coordination and Monitoring Framework and the “Leave No One Behind” approach.
	2.1 	Political Commitment
The United Republic of Tanzania is fully committed to the successful implementation of the SDGs, with political support cascading from the highest political level. The current leadership of His Excellency Dr. John Pombe Joseph Magufuli, President of the United Republic of Tanzania and His Excellency Dr Mohamed Ali Shein President of Zanzibar, are both committed to ensuring that the country achieves the SDGs ahead of the target year 2030. Under their leadership, the country is seeing huge investments in critical areas of de-bottlenecking constraints to inclusive growth and delivery of social services. High and sustainable real growth rates of the economy of around seven per cent per annum have been maintained since 2016 in both the Mainland and Zanzibar. This has resulted in, among other dividends, increased job creation. Fiscal discipline has been strengthened and corruption greatly reduced to ensure value for money in SDGs’ spending. Social services have witnessed expansion in quantity and improvement in quality. Local Governments where the action of “Leaving No One Behind” takes place, are fully committed to and support the implementation of the SDGs.
	2.2 	Creating ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals
Implementation of the national development agenda is both in synchrony with and encompasses the three dimensions of sustainable development. SDGs have been mainstreamed in the national planning frameworks, plans and budgets. The national planning frameworks into which the SDGs were incorporated are 29 elaborated further in the sections that follow.
2.1.1 National Planning Frameworks
Tanzania’s Long -Term Perspective Plan (LTPP) 2011/12 -2022/26 was developed to ensure that resources in Mainland Tanzania are organized and used strategically to guarantee the realisation of the development aspirations of TDV 2025. LTPP is being implemented through three strategic five-year development plans (FYDPs) each with a theme that underpins its priority interventions. The first National Five-Year Development Plan 2011/12-2015/16 (FYDP I) had the theme of “Unleashing Tanzania’s Latent Growth Potential”. This was succeeded by the National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17-2020/21 (FYDP II) is currently under implementation, with the theme “Nurturing Industrialisation to Foster Economic Transformation and Human Development”. This will be succeeded by the third National Five-Year Development Plan 2021/222025/26 (FYDP III) with the theme of “Attaining Export Growth and Competitiveness”. FYDPs are implemented through Annual Development Plans (ADPs). FYDP II was developed at the time when post 2015 consultations were being held. This provided an opportunity for FYDP II interventions to fully embed the SDGs. 
Zanzibar’s Development Vision 2020, is being implemented through its Strategies for Growth and Reduction of Poverty, where it is currently in the third series of these strategies, hence the name MKUZA III, which fully integrates the SDGs. The theme for MKUZA III is “Economic Growth and Social Development for the Wellbeing of All”. 
2.1.2 Incorporation of the Sustainable Development Goals in National Development Frameworks
The United Republic of Tanzania has mainstreamed the three dimensions of sustainable development and the SDGs in national development frameworks, particularly through the medium-term planning frameworks, that is, FYDP II and MKUZA III as indicated in Figures 2.1 and 2.2. 
SDG Dimensions

FYDP II Interventions
Growth focused interventions:
Manufacturing, Mining and metal, Construction, Agriculture, Trade, Natural resources, Tourism, Environment, Climate change
Human development interventions:
Education, Health, Water, Urban planning, Food security and nutrition, Social protection, Good governance
Creating an enabling environment:
Ensuring macroeconomic stability, Providing requisite infrastructure, Improving ease of doing business global ranking
Implementing effectiveness:
Improving project preparation and management, Using government budget to leverage private sector participation, Developing SMART indicators, Timely disbursement of funds, Improving risks management, Improving M&E
 Fig. 2.1: Link between FYDP II and SDGs
Source: Ministry of Finance and Planning
SDGs // FYDP II
Five Year Development Plan II Interventions in relation to SDGs
Interventions outlined in FYDP II are grouped into four priority areas as follows: 
(i) Growth and industrialization: interventions for fostering innovation and technological adaptation; and strategically repositioning the country to maximize on the global and regional economic dynamics.
(ii) Access to quality social services
(iii) Conducive environment for doing business including, among other things, improvement in both quantity and quality of infrastructure services, as well as policy and institutional reforms aimed at facilitating start-ups and sustaining businesses; and, 
(iv) Fostering the implementation of the frameworks.
MKUZA III outlines five Key Results Areas (KRAs) that are targeted by interventions that will be pursued. These are economic growth, human capital, services, environment and governance.
(i) KRA A: Enabling Sustainable and Inclusive Growth with seven outcomes; A1: A conducive business environment; A2: Resilient and growth enabling infrastructure; A3: 

SDGs // MKUZA III
Zanzibar Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty Key Results Areas in relation to SDGs

 Fig. 2.2: Link between MKUZA III KRAs and SDGs
Source: Zanzibar Planning Commissiong
A competitive tourism and hospitality sector; A4: A modernised agricultural sector; A5: A modernised manufacturing sector; A6: A vibrant private sector; and A7: Improved social protection schemes.
(ii) KRA B: Promoting Human Capital Development with two outcomes; B1: Skills development for increased employability; and B2: Enhancing entrepreneurial capacity.
(iii) KRA C: Providing Quality Services for All with six outcomes; C1: Improved access to quality health and sanitation services, safe and clean water, and a mitigated disease burden; C2: Inclusive and equitable access to quality education and skills training; C3: Increased access to decent and affordable housing, improved rational land use, and access to energy; C4: Enhanced prevention of and response to violence against women and children; C5: Enhanced national capacity to prepare and respond to all types of emergencies; and C6: Attainment of national and household food security and nutrition for all.
(iv) KRA D: Attaining Environmental Sustainability 
and Climate Resilience with three outcomes; D1: Improved gender-responsive climate change adaptation and mitigation measures; D2: Marine and terrestrial ecosystems protected and restored, with reduced biodiversity loss; and D3. Environmental degradation is prevented, with reduced environmental and social risks of economic activities.
(v) KRA E: Adhering to Good Governance with five outcomes; E1: Governance systems and structures are gender-responsive, accountable, capable, credible, transparent and corruption-free; E2: Attainment of gender equality and equity; E3: Increased access to justice, respect for the rule of law, adherence to basic human rights, and greater participation in the democratic process; E4: Responsible corporate governance ensured; and E5: Mobilized resources for implementation. 
2.3 	Integration of the Three Dimensions of Sustainable Development
The national plans and strategies are underpinned by a number of sectoral and thematic policies, programmes and strategies. These are intended to guide and stimulate growth and progress in relevant sectors pertaining to those frameworks, in a manner that is in line with national development visions, and also in a way that will steer the country to give due consideration to the three pillars of sustainable development as elaborated in the sub sections that follow.
2.3.1 Integration of the Economic Dimension of Sustainable Development
In Mainland Tanzania, two of the four broad priority areas for intervention correspond directly to the economic dimension of sustainable development, which is, economic development. These are growth focused interventions, and interventions to create a conducive business environment. They are underpinned by a number of policies, strategies, programmes and institutional frameworks, all of which make up the policy environment in which the national and global development strategies are implemented, to facilitate their effective and orderly implementation as indicated. As it can be observed, some of the components of the policy environment were formulated before the adoption of the SDGs and the prevailing medium-term development framework. For the latter, care was taken to ensure the existing policy framework informed the medium-term plans, and where review(s) was/were needed, plans to affect these were also drawn up. 
In Zanzibar, several measures have been taken to ensure all stakeholders, including the private sector and the public at large, participate in the promotion of socio-economic development. The Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar (RGoZ) continues to improve the business environment to leverage and harness the power and innovation of the private sector. In particular, the State promotes industrialization, by creating the necessary conditions, putting in place the right framework and incentives for the private sector to build industrial capabilities, and enhancing economic growth through collaborative action and effective State-business relations. 
The supporting policies associated with the economic dimension of sustainable development are as follows (all are accessible through the Government of Tanzania’s Policies Directory: (https://www.tanzania.go.tz/home/pages/71)
(a) Mainland Tanzania
(1) Investment and Partnerships
(i) National Investment Promotion Policy, 1997
(ii) Tanzania Investment Policy, 2007 (under review)
(iii) The Public Private Partnership Policy 2009
(iv) Public Private Partnership Act, 2010
(v) Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the   	  	Business Environment
(2) Productive Sectors
(i) National Livestock Policy 2006
(ii) Agricultural Marketing Policy 2008
(iii) National Agriculture Policy 2013
(iv) National Fisheries Policy 2015
(v) Agricultural Sector Development Programme II, 2018 – 2023
(vi) Sustainable Industrial Development Policy-SIDP, 1996 – 2020


(b) Zanzibar
(1) Investment and Partnerships
(i) Zanzibar Investment Policy, 2005 
(ii) Zanzibar Public-Private Policy, 2014 
(iii) Zanzibar Public Private Partnership Act 2014 
(2) Employment
Zanzibar Employment Policy of 2009 
(3) Productive Sectors
	(i) 	Zanzibar Agricultural Sector Policy, 2002
(4) Infrastructure and Services
(i) Zanzibar Transport Policy; 2008
(ii) Zanzibar energy policy, 2009
(iii) Zanzibar ICT Policy, 2013
(iv) Oil and Gas (Upstream) Policy, 2016: The Act established the  
	 	Zanzibar Petroleum Regulatory Authority (ZPRA) and Zanzibar  
	 	Petroleum Development Company (ZPDC)
(v) Zanzibar Utility Regulatory Authority (ZURA), 2013
(4) Natural Resources
(i) Zanzibar Tourism Policy, 1992
(ii) Zanzibar Forest Policy, 1995
(iii) Zanzibar Fisheries Act, 2015
(iv) Zanzibar Forest Policy and National Forest Resources  	 
	 	Management Plan 2008 – 2020
(v) National Deep Sea Fishing Authority Act, 1998 (Amended in  
	 	2007)
(vi) Deep Sea Fishing Regulations 2009 (amended in 2016)
(vii) Zanzibar Marine Parks and Reserves Act, 1994
2.3.2 Integration of the Social Dimension of Sustainable Development
The United Republic of Tanzania has increased investment in education and training so as to increase skills and build local capacity in order to improve the contribution of human capital in national development. The investments were mainly in the form of school infrastructure to support free education up to the lower cycle of secondary education, and loans provision to students in higher learning institutions. Substantive investments have also been directed at quality-improving interventions such as training of teachers. Health services have been improved through construction, expansion and renovation of health infrastructure up to village level; improving the provision of essential medicines and medical equipment; and improving the quality of maternal, newborn and child health services. 
Other efforts in the social dimension have included creating decent jobs and promoting good labour relations; the provision of water in both urban and rural areas to support development activities and sanitation purposes; the development of planned and secure urban, as well as rural settlements; ensuring food security and promoting nutrition; and the creation of adequate social safety nets that ensure that no-one is left behind while avoiding the creation of debilitating dependencies. 
The Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar has continued to invest in education and capacity strengthening programmes to increase skills and build local capacity in order to improve the contribution of human capital in Zanzibar social-economic development. The investments involve the financing of free basic education and loans provision to students in higher learning institutions, which has increased access to education and training opportunities in various fields. Total financing for education and vocational training has increased over the 2016-2018 period. Investments in the health sector have also increased over the same period. The interventions have included the construction, expansion and renovation of health facilities, the improvement of the provision of essential drugs and medical equipment and the provision of free services, which has led to improvements in the quality of maternal, new-born and child health services. Other interventions have included decent jobs and promoting good labour relations; the provision of water for livelihoods, development activities and sanitation purposes; ensuring food security and promoting nutrition; and the creation of adequate social safety nets including the establishment of the Universal Pension Scheme for people aged over 70 years to ensure that no one is left behind. 
Several policies, strategies and programmes are in place to support the social dimension as outlined below:
(a) Mainland Tanzania:
(1) Education 
(i) Education and Training Policy (ETP) 2014
(ii) Education Sector Development Programme – ESDP 2016/17 – 
2020/21
(iii) National Skills Development Strategy, 2016-2027
(2) Demography
(i) Tanzania Migration Policy, 2012
(ii) Immigration Act, 1995
(3) Nutrition
(i) Food and Nutrition policy, 1992
(ii) Food and Nutrition Strategic Plan, 2014-2018
(4) Employment
(i) National Employment Policy, 2008 
(ii) Employment and Labour Relations Act No. 6 of 2004
(iii) National Action Plan on the Elimination of Child Labour and Its   	Worst Forms (NAP), 2009
(iv) National Action Plan against Violence to Women and Children
(v) Labour laws
(5) Social Security
(i) Social Security Policy 2003
(6) Safety
(i) National Road safety Policy 2009
(ii) Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2003
(7) Addressing Gender disparities
(i) Gender Development Policy 2000
(ii) Regional and International Agreements, Conventions, Protocols,  
	 	Treaties and Instruments (Convention on the Elimination of all  
 	Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), Beijing   	Platform, Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Treaties   	of Great Lakes, African Union and East African Community)
(8) Water and Sanitation
(i) National Water Policy, 2002
(ii) The National Water Sector Development Strategy (NWSDS 2006- 
	 	2015)
(iii) Water Sector Development Programme, 2006-2025
(9) Settlements
(i) National Land policy 1995
(ii) Human Settlements Policy, 2000
(iii) Land Act, 1999
(b) Zanzibar
(1) Education Policies, Strategies and Programmes
(i) Zanzibar Education Policy, 2006
(ii) Zanzibar Vocational Education and Training Policy, 2005
(iii) Education Sector Development Programme (ESDP) 2016/17 –  
	 	2020/21
(iv) Technical and Vocational Education and Training Development  
	 	Programme (TVETDP) 2013/14 – 2017/18 
(v) Second Zanzibar Education Development Plan 2017/18 –   
	 	2021/22
(2) Health
(i) Zanzibar Health Sector Policy, 2011 
(ii) Zanzibar Health Sector Reform Strategic Plan III (2013/14 –  
	 	2018/19)
(iii) Zanzibar Drugs and Prevention of Illicit Drugs Trafficking Act,  
	 	2011
(3) Demography
(i) Zanzibar Population Policy 2008
(4) Addressing Gender disparities
(i) Zanzibar Gender Policy, 2016
(ii) Zanzibar Action Plan to End Violence against Women and    	Children (2017-2022)
(5) Employment
(i) National Employment Policy, 2008
(ii) Zanzibar Employment Policy, 2009


warning and natural disaster response coordination frameworks. The Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar has addressed environmental 	concerns 	through 	the 	development 	and implementation of a National Carbon Monitoring Centre, and other national legal frameworks, such as the Environmental Management Act, 2004; Wildlife Conservation Act No 5 of 2009; and The Marine Parks and Reserves Act No. 29. 
Other components making up the legal, institutional policy framework to support environmental conservation and addressing climate change, as well as related aspects are listed below.
(a) Mainland Tanzania:
(1) Environmental Conservation
(i) The Marine Parks and Reserves Act, 1994
(ii) National Environment Management Policy, 1997
(iii) Environmental Management Act, 2004
(iv) Guidelines for Management of Hazardous Waste, 2013
(v) National Environmental Plan, 2013-2018
(vi) National Tree Planting Strategy, 2016-2020
(vii) National Environmental Research Agenda, 2017 - 2022
(viii) Wildlife Conservation Act of 2009
(ix) National Park Act Cap. 282 of 2002
(x) Water Resources Management Act, 2009
(2) Climate Change
(i) National Climate Change Strategy 2012
(ii) Climate Change Strategy 2014-2020
(b) Zanzibar
(1) Environmental Conservation
(i) Zanzibar Environmental Policy, 2013
(ii) Zanzibar Environmental Management Act, 2015
(iii) Zanzibar Marine Conservation Units Regulation, 2015
(2) Climate Change
(i) Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy 2014 - 2020 
	2.4 	Good Governance
Achievements in both the national development aspirations and the 2030 Agenda require effective systems and structures of governance that promote democracy, effectiveness, accountability, predictability, transparency, inclusiveness and incorruptibility at all levels in both institutional and individual conducts. These are essential elements in making sure that development pursuits are successful, sustainable and characterised by effective participation of all societal groups, both in terms of their contribution and in sharing the benefits of the development outcomes equitably. The United Republic of Tanzania has continued to accord high priority to good governance principles by upholding the rule of law; promoting and protecting human rights; improving access to justice; shunning away from corruption, sloth-like behaviour and all types of professional misconduct; and promoting and preserving the culture of patriotism, hard work, moral integrity and self-confidence. A number of policies, strategies, programmes, legislations supported by dynamic institutional framework, have been formulated and or reformed to ensure the principles of good governance are entrenched in the country. They include:
(i) Anti-Money Laundering Act, No. 12 of 2006
(ii) Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act, 2007
(iii) The National Prosecution Service Act, No. 27 of 2008
(iv) Anti-trafficking in National Anti-corruption Strategy and 
Action Plan Phase III
(v) Zanzibar Legal Aid Act, 2017
(vi) Zanzibar Criminal Act, 2018
(vii) Zanzibar Kadhis Court, 2017
(viii) Zanzibar Public Leaders Code of Ethics, 2015
	2.5 	National SDGs Coordination and Monitoring Framework
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) require a comprehensive multi-stakeholder coordination and monitoring mechanism that ensures the three dimensions of sustainability (social, economic and environmental) are accorded due priority; appropriate alignment of goals and targets in national plans and sector strategies; adequate mobilization and allocation of resources; availability of appropriate, reliable and disaggregated data to inform stakeholders of progress on a regular basis and one that provides a platform for continuous inter-sectoral and multi-stakeholder (private sector, academia, civil society, research institutions and development partners etc.) policy dialogue, collaboration and partnerships.
For that to be realized, the country’s SDGs coordination and monitoring mechanism in the Mainland is being developed and positioned within the framework of the Five-Year Development Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy (FYDP II - MES)’ which provides mechanisms for tracking the progress of the SDGs’ implementation as an integral part of implementation of FYDP-II. The Prime Minister’s Office provides overall oversight of the framework, while, the responsibility of coordinating the implementation and monitoring of FYDP II is bestowed upon the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP). The coordination Steering Committee, comprising of Permanent Secretaries of key ministries is responsible for providing oversight and the operationalization of FYDP II (and by extension, SDGs coordination). The Steering Committee is under the Prime Minister’s Office. The Committee is supported by the Coordination Secretariat, which is comprised of the Deputy Permanent Secretaries of key ministries. The coordination mechanism for the SDGs, once finalized will be aligned to the national frameworks for policy implementation, monitoring and reporting, including the 2030 Agenda.
For Zanzibar, the SDGs are monitored within MKUZA III. Coordination of the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Zanzibar has been bestowed upon the Zanzibar Planning Commission (ZPC). The MKUZA III Monitoring and Evaluation System has been established and operationalized at all levels, (the same system is being used for monitoring the implementation and reporting of the SDGs). The M&E Institutional Framework has three main levels: Implementation level comprised of MDAs, ANGOZA, ZNCCIA, LGAs and Communities; Coordination level comprising of a Technical Committee, ZPC Secretariat and M&E Secretariat; and the Decision Making level comprised of Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee (Committee of Principal Secretaries), Zanzibar Planning Commission, (Chaired by His Excellency President of Zanzibar and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council); Cabinet and the House of Representatives. The Office of the Chief Government Statistician has the responsibility of providing data for the monitoring and reporting of the SDGs from surveys, censuses and routine data.
The MoFP in the Mainland, and the MoFP in Zanzibar with ZPC as SDG coordinating institutions provide leadership and guidance on relevant issues to other Government structures and other national stakeholders. 
 
	2.6 	Leave No One Behind
The United Republic of Tanzania is implementing affirmative action to address the specific needs of vulnerable groups so that each and every individual enjoys the fruits of sustained inclusive economic growth and social progress. Groups that are at risk of being left behind include rural communities and poor people living in rural and urban areas, farmers, pastoralists, petty traders, children, people living with HIV, the elderly, youth and women. In order to implement the principle of “Leave No One Behind”, there are a number of initiatives which are being implemented. Actions taken include the following:
2.6.1 Providing free education up to lower secondary thus enabling children from poor families to attend school
A large and growing youth population in Tanzania necessitates a greater commitment to education. In February 2015, free compulsory basic education up to the lower cycle was promulgated. This policy replaced the former basic education financing system where Government contributed part of the running costs and the rest was contributed through fees and parental contributions. This action will help a great deal in attaining SDG 4.
 
In Zanzibar, the free education initiative has relieved pupils and students of the burden of paying fees or other contributions that were being provided by parents or guardians from primary to university level. The inclusive education initiative has ensured the enrolment of children with disability at all levels of education. Alternative education for out-of- school children and drop-outs has also been introduced. These initiatives have helped a great deal in making sure that the achievement of SDG 4 is on track. Without these initiatives, children from poor families would have continued being left out of the education system.
2.6.2 Lifting 5.1 Million People out of Poverty through Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN)
This initiative, being implemented in both the Mainland and Zanzibar breaks the intergenerational transmission of poverty and is based on the following integrated interventions: a labour intensive Public Works Programme (PWP); targeted Conditional Cash Transfers (CCTs); Livelihood Enhancements and Targeted Infrastructure. The initiative is implemented by the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) and targets an increase in income and consumption, improvement of the ability to cope with shocks, and enhances and protects the human capital of children among extremely poor populations. 
Conditional Cash Transfers comprises two benefits. The first benefit is a Basic Cash Transfer per household to all eligible registered households; and the second is a Variable Conditional Cash Transfer for households with children to serve as an incentive for households to invest in the human capital of their children. The Variable Conditional Cash Transfer for households with children is subject to participants’ compliance with a set of activities. These activities include Health Conditionality Compliance and Education Conditionality Compliance. The proportion of households below the food poverty line that received cash transfers was 70 percent as of December 2017. A total of 1.1 million households with 5.1 million direct beneficiaries (house-hold members) are enrolled in the Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN) Programme and are receiving cash transfers. In Zanzibar, the PSSN programme supports about 15 percent of the population and CCT coverage has increased reaching almost 20 percent in the poorest regions of Zanzibar.
The Public Works Programme (PWP) is a safety net intervention that provides temporary employment to enrolled poor households to work on labour intensive activities, while providing income support and contributing to the creation of community assets. It enables enrolled households to earn seasonal income. All households enrolled under Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT) are eligible to participate in labour intensive public works and earn an income to meet consumption needs during periods of hunger, and protect their productive assets. In addition to its consumptionsmoothening objective, PWP also creates and improves community assets, and enhances beneficiaries’ life skills.
 
The Livelihoods Enhancement component aims at contributing to building the foundation for graduation out of poverty by enhancing household’s abilities to support themselves through strengthened and diversified livelihoods. It does so by supporting and building the capacity of the targeted beneficiaries to engage in savings and make investments. It focuses on the promotion of savings through a group savings methodology, financial literacy training and group capacity building. Targeted infrastructure development focuses on the construction of primary schools, health facilities and potable water supplies in villages. Without these interventions marginalized children would be less likely to enrol in school; and those who do, likely to have poor attendance. Poor populations would be less likely to make use of health services, and nutritional outcomes would likely be poorer. 
2.6.3 Lifting 2 Million People Out of Poverty through Agricultural Transformation
The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) is an inclusive, multi-stakeholder public-private partnership venture that further develops the agricultural sector through agribusiness investments in the country’s southern corridor. SAGCOT promotes clusters of profitable agricultural farming and services businesses, with major benefits for smallholder farmers and local communities. For example, the Ihemi cluster (across Iringa and Njombe regions) deals with five strategic value chain products that include Irish potatoes, soya, tea, milk and tomatoes. The Mbarali cluster (across Mbeya and Songwe regions) handles six strategic value chain products that include poultry, avocado, rice, sunflower, milk and Irish potatoes.
By catalysing large volumes of responsible private investment, the initiative has been able to deliver rapid and sustainable agricultural growth and thereby tackle food security, reduce rural poverty and ensure environmental sustainability. The SAGCOT venture is positioned by year 2030 to bring 350,000 hectares of land into profitable production, transit 100,000 small-scale farmers into commercial farming, create 420,000 new employment opportunities, lift 2 million people out of poverty, and generate USD 1.2 billion annually in farming revenue.
2.6.4 Bringing on board small-scale entrepreneurs who could have been left behind 
In the Mainland, the Small Industries Development Organization (SIDO) was established with the main aim of promoting the development of small-scale industries. Recently, in direct response to growing demand from clients, SIDO has progressively engaged itself in supporting micro businesses, particularly in the informal sector. 
In Zanzibar, the Small and Medium Industries Development Agency (SMIDA) has been promoting the development of the micro, small and medium industries (MSMEs). SMIDA is specifically involved in designing and implementing development support programmes; advising, coordinating, monitoring and evaluating activities; establishing, operating or facilitating affordable credit schemes and other financial and non-financial services. 
Thus, both SIDO and SMIDA have taken on board small-scale entrepreneurs that could be left behind in the development process.
2.6.5 Lighting Rural Areas and Supporting Small Scale Rural Entrepreneurs Through Renewable Energy
Communities living in rural areas are at risk of not accessing electricity, for lighting and powering small scale ventures. The Rural Energy Board (REB), the Rural Energy Agency (REA), and the Rural Energy Fund (REF) promote, stimulate and facilitate access to modern energy services in rural areas through projects such as the Rural Electrification Expansion Project. The project has succeeded in the following areas: (a) increasing access to electricity in rural areas; and (b) scaling up the supply of renewable energy in rural areas while strengthening the sector institutional capacity. The Rural Electrification Expansion Project is implemented under the National Rural Electrification Programme (NREP) 2013–2022, which includes both on-grid and off-grid solutions. The NREP has achieved the following four priorities: connecting new customers to the grid in already electrified settlements, new connections to the grid, electrification through off-grid investments, and development of renewable technologies. The goal of NREP is to increase the country’s overall electricity connectivity to 50 percent by 2025 and to at least 75 percent by 2033. In Zanzibar, the Rural Electrification Project ensures all villages and small islets are connected to the national grid. In addition to the two main Islands of Unguja and Pemba, eight habitat islets out of ten have already been connected to the national grid, while the remaining two are in the process of being connected.
2.6.6 Saving lives through increasing Access to Social Services
In order to enhance the accessibility of rural and urban areas, the Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Agency (TARURA) has been established as an executive agency vested with the mandate of developing and maintaining the District Roads Network. The main objective of TARURA is to improve road and bridge infrastructures in order to open up and unlock social and economic opportunities in rural and urban areas. The agency is responsible for maintaining, developing and managing all district roads (Collector, Feeder and community) in the Mainland.
TARURA has improved rural and urban road networks, enabling people to transport crops and other items from rural to urban areas thus boosting agricultural productivity and facilitating the transportation of crops to markets, hence transforming the livelihoods of rural people. Furthermore, the agency facilitates the provision of social services especially in rural areas. 
Through TARURA, various dimensions including gender, employment, technology, HIV, and the environment are addressed. One of the main challenges to accessing health services, especially in rural areas has been long distances travelled to reach such services. Maternal mortality has been largely associated with the inability of expectant mothers to reach health centres in time. Through improving the condition of rural roads such deaths have been minimized thus meeting the needs of rural populations.
2.6.7 Ensuring 17.4 million (33 percent of the population) and informal sector operators access quality healthcare services 
The National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF), establishment in July 2001 and together with the Community Health Fund (CHF) commissioned in 2009 have attracted and registered more beneficiaries from the informal sector. 
As of 31st March 2019, the number of NHIF beneficiaries registered stood at 4,217,211, equivalent to eight percent of Tanzania’s population. Since its establishment, the CHF has covered 13,029,636 beneficiaries, equivalent to 25 percent of Tanzania’s population. The number of NHIF and CHF beneficiaries in total amounts to 17,246,847, which is equivalent to 33 percent of Tanzania’s population. Without this facility, operators in the informal sector would have been left behind from accessing quality health care thus likely to meet a premature death. 
2.6.8 Initiatives and Progress areas towards children’s inclusion in Development Programmes
The United Republic of Tanzania, together with development stakeholders, is committed to ensuring that all children benefit from development programmes. However, despite this commitment a section of children are still not being reached. Among the notable initiatives and progress towards ensuring no child is left behind are:
i. Ratification and signing of international human rights treaties like UNCRC and ACRC as well as the formulation and implementation of various laws and regulations such as the Law of the Child Act, which has helped to improve welfare and the protective environment for children in the country. In addition, the draft of the National Female Genital Mutilation Strategy is being finalized. 
ii. Development of the National Plan of Action (NPA- VAWC) phase three (2017/18 – 2021/22): this is a mechanism for coordinating efforts in the fight against all forms of violence against children and women including gender-based violence. MHCDGEC in collaboration with other stakeholders developed a national costed plan of action focusing on the most vulnerable groups of children in Tanzania. The mission of NPA has enhanced the protection, care, and support of the most vulnerable children within the framework of a well-resourced and coordinated national multi-sectoral response.
iii. Implementation of ‘Fee-free’ education policy (ETP, 2014), whereby the government has eliminated school fees and mandatory contributions in public primary and secondary schools. Through this initiative many children, especially those from extreme poor households, have gained access to basic education.
iv. Implementation of Tanzania’s Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN) programme through The Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF): through support to targeted poor households, children from such families are now able to attend school.
v. Establishment of the Registration, Insolvency and Trusteeship Agency (RITA) that registers and generates vital statistics to plan for the improvement of wellbeing across government sectors. The agency has partnered with UNICEF and TIGO, a private mobile phone company, to develop a new decentralised system of birth registration and certification bringing services closer to the community. Innovation on using scanning and mobile phone technology in data capture and transfer on registration records is being utilised across the country to capture information.
vi. Improved services for victims of violence/ increased demand for services. For example, the existence of a National Helpline 112, Gender Desks in Police stations where women, youth and children can report incidents, and primary and secondary schools have helped to promote reporting of violence against children.  In addition, the Police Gender and Children’s Desk manual, SOP, integrates FGM, in line with the Penal Code that criminalized FGM in 1998. Furthermore, administrative data on case management for child protection has been strengthened. A case management tool for initial investigations through mobile phone (Innovation Hub at the University of Dar es Salaam and some CSOs) has been launched.
	2.7 	Data Requirements
The United Republic of Tanzania has localized the SDGs so as to ensure sustainable implementation and thereby bring about the desired economic social environmental outcomes. As part of creating ownership of the SDGs, the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and the Office of Chief Government Statistician (OCGS) has brought together diverse groups of data producers and users from within and outside Tanzania to facilitate domestication of the SDGs. This is intended to ensure that SDGs are integrated in the National Development Agenda and to define early win actions, in the short and medium-term for moving the SDGs’ data agenda forward. A number of quick wins that would need to be implemented by the Government in the short to medium-term have been identified. These include: mapping of the Tanzania data ecosystem, investing in data capacity (production, analysis, dissemination) in MDAs, LGAs and formation of a High-Level Technical Committee on Sustainable Development Data. For monitoring purposes, a data gap analysis for the SDGs was conducted. It was found that data for only 67 indicators in the Mainland are readily available (out of 232 global indicators) in the existing data generating system. Out of the 240 indicators that have been identified to be potentially relevant, 167 have been mapped primarily1or secondarily2 either in the national development framework (FYDP II) or in the sector policies and strategies termed as “Other Identified Indicators” (OII). Furthermore, out of the 167 indicators, 83 indicators are mapped with FYDP II and 84 indicators are mapped with the sector policies and strategies that are already being implemented in the country. The remaining 73 indicators, which are potentially relevant are unmapped2 with the national development frameworks. This calls for more extensive dialogue on how data can be made available before being localized. 

Figure 2.3: Mapping of SDGs Indicators in Mainland Tanzania
For Zanzibar, analysis shows that, there are only 49 indicators that have data and can be monitored. About 144 indicators have no baseline data and need to be worked on for Zanzibar to be in line with the SDGs indicators. The process involves either doing secondary analysis for the existing datasets, conducting new surveys or improving the routine data collection in MDAs and other implementing actors. SDGs will be reported through the implementation of MKUZA III, although there are some gaps especially at disaggregated level.
2.7.1 Availability of disaggregated data to ensure those most marginalized and vulnerable are reached
Availability of disaggregated data is crucial to informing policy development, planning, and tracking progress, to ultimately ensure that the most marginalized and vulnerable populations are reached. The Foundation for Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities (PWD) is implemented by the Department of Disability Affairs, the Office of the Second Vice President of the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar. Through the establishment of this foundation four key result areas have been realized namely:1) Establishment of PWDs Database or Inclusion database (JUMUISH-dbase) and website, 2) Situation Analysis of young people with disabilities on sexual reproductive health rights and family planning, 3) Development of Five-Year Strategic Plan for National Council for PWDs in Zanzibar and 4) Development of Implementation Strategy for Policy of PWDs in Zanzibar. 





GOAL 1: END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE:
3 3. CHAPTER THREE
DEVELOPMENT ACHIEVEMENTS
	3.1 	Introduction
This chapter presents a snapshot of the status of goals and targets of Sustainable Development Goals that the United Republic of Tanzania is implementing. The Chapter provides general progress for each goal.
	3.2 	Key Development Achievements in Tanzania in terms of SDGs
The latest data indicates a declining trend in poverty incidence. In Mainland Tanzania, the proportion of the population below the basic needs’ poverty line (national average) was at 26.4 percent in 2017. The closest reported year for Zanzibar was 2014/15, and showed that about 30.4 percent of the population lived below the basic needs’ poverty line (see statistical annex). A notable intervention to reduce poverty has been an increase in the proportion of the government budget allocated to pro-poor sectors albeit marginal. The incidence of poverty will decrease faster if more investments are channelled to the pro-poor sectors, especially targeted productivity increases in the sector of agriculture. The matching rate of population increase and rate of growth of the economy will as well have a positive impact on the decline on the incidence of poverty.
Despite the decline, a large number of households are clustered around the poverty line making these households susceptible to sliding below the poverty line in the occurrence of adverse conditions such as external shocks3. 

GOAL 2: END HUNGER, ACHIEVE FOOD SE-
CURITY AND IMPROVED NUTRITION, AND 
PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
Measures have been taken by the government to reduce natural and manmade calamities that have a bearing on accelerating poverty. Data indicates that the number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster decreased from 678 per 100,000 people in 2016 to 257 in 2018. However, climate change-related 55 disasters increased from 59 per 100,000 people in 2016 to 179 in 2018.
Measures taken to minimize the impact of disasters include the formulation of the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Programme 2015-2025 and the National Framework for Climate Services 2018-2022. 
The United Republic of Tanzania has achieved marked improvements with its nutrition status in recent years and reversed trends in all forms of malnutrition for children (see statistical annex): Data for tracking this indicator are generated periodically, the most recent being 2015/16. The nutrition situation among children under five years of age has improved with stunting prevalence and wasting prevalence maintained at below five percent in 2016 from double digit scores in previous years. Despite this success, overall, about 2.7 million children suffer from stunting and over 100,000 children suffer from severe wasting every year. The prevalence of anemia among children under five years was at 58 percent during 2015/16.
The nutrition situation among women of reproductive age in Tanzania has deteriorated especially in terms of prevalence of overweight and obese women, reported at 28 percent during 2015/16; a prevalence of anaemia among women of reproductive age at 45 percent and anaemia among adolescent girls aged 15-19 years at 47 percent.
Zanzibar has recorded a decline in the incidence of malnutrition in recent years. Prevalence of wasting (WHO Child Growth Standards) in Zanzibar among children under 5 years of age was 7.1 percent during 2015/16 down from double digit levels. Stunting levels were halved to 24 percent, though with significant regional differences of 17 percent prevalence in urban areas and 34 percent in rural areas. However, micronutrient deficiencies, and exclusive breastfeeding rates, remain a concern. has a 



GOAL 4: ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND EQUITABLE 
QUALITY EDUCATION AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
There has been an increase in enrolment at all levels of education over the past three years. In the Mainland, the total enrolment of pupils in Standards I-VII increased from 8,639,202 (4,265,714 male and 4,373,488 female) pupils in year 2016 to 10,111,671 (5,046,571 male and 5,065,100 female) pupils in year 2018, equivalent to 14.6 percent increase (15.5 percent for males and 13.7 percent for females). The National Enrolment Rate (NER) for Primary education has surpassed the target of 90 percent which was set to be achieved by 2020. The percentage of standard I pupils with at least one year of pre-primary was 95.6 in 2018 which is above the target of 87.5 by 2020. The average dropout rate in primary education is 0.7%, well below the target of 5 percent set for the year 2020. 
Enrolment in Forms 1 - 6 increased by 17.4 percent from 1,774,383 pupils in 2015 to 2,148,466 pupils in 2018. The increase in enrolment was mainly contributed to by the “Fee Free Education Policy” being implementation and the presence of a strong partnership between Government, the private sector, FaithBased Organizations (FBOs) and Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) in the provision of primary education. The national Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) and Pupil Qualified Teacher Ratio (PQTR) for primary education in 2018 was 1:51 and 1:52 respectively. This shows a change from 2017 which was 1:47 and 1:48 respectively. The number of students who benefited from Higher Education Student’ Loans was 122,623 in 2018 compared to 116,205 students during 2016/17. 
For Zanzibar, data from the 2018 Zanzibar Statistical Abstract show that enrolment in pre-primary schools increased by 20.0 percent from 62,720 pupils in 2017 to 72,151 pupils in 2018, where a total of 30,898 pupils were enrolled in government schools and 41,253 pupils in private schools. The enrolment in primary schools increased to 276,858 pupils in 2018 from 256,048 in 2017 (10 percent increase). The total number of children enrolled in 2018 was 403,882 while the number of teachers in the same year was 13,160 bringing a qualified teacher-pupil ratio of 1:31. However, the distribution of teachers between districts and rural/urban is still a challenge. 
The number of students who benefited from the Zanzibar Higher Education Loan Board in 2018 was 1,312 males and 1,354 females, a significant increase from 2016 and 2017 beneficiaries.
GOAL 5: ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND 
EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
Various interventions made by the government and NGOs has led to significant achievements in gender equality. Baseline data for this goal exist in the TDHS-MIS 2015/16. In the Mainland, the percentage of women (age 15-49) who had experienced any physical violence (committed by spouse or anyone else) since age 15 and in the 12 months preceding the survey was about 17 percent; and sexual violence at 9 percent. In Zanzibar, the percentage of women who experienced gender-based violence in the past 12 months was 3.9 percent with marked regional differences (the highest being 5.3 percent in Kusini Unguja and the lowest being 2.3 percent in Kusini Pemba). About 14 per cent of women in Zanzibar had experienced physical violence since the age of 15 and almost 2.3 per cent of women had experienced sexual violence since the age of 15 with variations across regions (TDHS-MIS. 205/16).
Proportion of seats held by women in national Parliament: Baseline data for this target exist and show 137 out of 380 (37 percent) members of Parliament in 2016 to be female in the Mainland. This makes Tanzania one of the 20 countries in the world that have surpassed the 30 percent mark for women’s representation in Parliament. In Zanzibar, the proportion of seats held by women in the national Parliament (House of Representatives) in 2018 was 37 percent. 

GOAL 6: ENSURE AVAILABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL
The supportive environment described in Chapter two has led to fast progress in access to water and sanitation. Data for monitoring this goal is available, (Refer to the SDG Indicators Statistical Annex.) By June 2016, the total number of water points constructed was 50,995 benefiting 11,607,822 people bringing a cumulative achievement of 95,733 water points in 2016, serving 22,792,322 people in rural areas of Mainland Tanzania, equivalent to 72.58 percent of the 31,623,999 rural population. Water is vital and is fundamental to economic growth, food security and poverty reduction.
In Zanzibar, data shows that a total of 230,485,357 cubic meters of water was estimated to be required to fulfil the needs of the population in 2018, but the production was 230,485,357 cubic meters only, which resulted in water stress of about 49.3 per cent. (Zanzibar Statistical Abstract 2018). The results from the latest 2014/15 Household Budget Survey show that 90.5 percent of the households used improved water sources. The majority of households in urban areas (about 96.3 per cent), had access to safe drinking water compared to 86.3 percent for rural households.
Proportion of population with access to piped or protected water as their main source in Regional Centres: according to a water supply status report 2016, about 4,260,820 people had access to a water supply through 375,757 domestic connections and 2,013 kiosks in 23 regional headquarters of Mainland Tanzania; equivalent to 86 percent of the population served with clean and safe water. In supporting the government, World Vision Tanzania (WVT) projects have increased access to clean and safe water to communities, reaching a further 467,269 people with access to clean and safe water.
 

GOAL 7: ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, 
RELIABLE, SUSTAINABLE AND MODERN EN-
ERGY FOR ALL
Fast progress in this goal has resulted mainly from Government implementation of strategic power generation projects and robust rural electrification programmes. The Private Sector has also made significant contributions. The National Energy Policy (2015) provides guidance and directions for sustainable development and the utilization of energy resources towards the transformation of the national economy. 
The country’s priority is to effectively utilize available indigenous fuels for a sustainable energy supply and reach a country installed capacity of 10,000 MW by 2025. The sole utility company (TANESCO) has been enhanced in terms of technical and financial capacity. According to the 2016 Energy Access Situation Survey conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in collaboration with the Rural Energy Agency (REA) and together with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals: the electricity customer base was 1.87 million, about 67.5 percent of the population had access to electricity ( rural areas 49.5 percent; urban areas 97.3 percent); 32.8 percent of the population were connected to electricity ( rural areas 16.9 percent; urban areas 65.3 percent). 
By December 2018, the total electricity installed capacity was 1,601.90 MW (Grid 1,565.72 MW and Off-grid capacity plus imports 36.18 MW). Hydro power contributed 573.70 MW (36.64 percent); Natural gas 892.72 MW (57 percent); Heavy Fuel Oil and Diesel, 88.80 MW (5.60 percent) and Biomass and co-generation contributed 10.5MW (0.76 percent). Power demand growth is estimated at 10 to 15 percent per annum. Peak power demand had reached 1,116.58 MW (recorded on 30th November, 2018); and Electricity consumption per capita is at 137 kWh per annum. Power system loss has been reduced to 15.4 percent through strengthening transmission and distribution systems. The main power transmission network is 400kV, 220kV, 132kV and 66kV. In the long term planning horizon the Government will continue to invest in power generation using hydro, natural gas, coal, renewable energies (Geothermal, Solar, Wind and Biomass); extension of a grid network to reach isolated areas, and the construction of power interconnector projects to enable power trading with neighbouring countries in order to improve power security in the region. 
Rural electrification in Mainland Tanzania (2015/16 - 2020/21): The Government is implementing rural electrification programmes with the aim of electrifying all villages in Mainland Tanzania by June, 2021 through the Rural Energy Agency (REA) and Rural Energy Fund (REF). Since REA become operational, a total of 4,395 villages have been supplied with electricity by 2016 under the REA Turnkey Phase I &II projects. Since 2017, REA has been implementing Turnkey Phase III Projects which include: grid-extension, densification and Off-grid renewable distribution projects to reach 7,873 remaining villages. 
Tanzania is endowed with natural gas which is set to become the fuel of choice to industry and the national economy. 
For Zanzibar, the recorded number of new customers connected to the National Power Grid in 2017 was 12,479, less by 2.3 per cent compared with 12,768 customers in 2016.
The Zanzibar Electricity Company envisages 7,000 new grid-based connections annually. The renewable energy share in electricity generation in 2016 was 1.67 percent. The total installed capacity increased from 1,226.24 MW in 2015 to 1,461.69 MW in 2016. The Renewable Energy Zanzibar Association (REZA) has been launched so as to promote renewable energy use. In 2018, about 987 households were connected to solar electricity in Zanzibar in nine villages. 

GOAL 8: PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUS-
TAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND PRODUC-
TIVE EMPLOYMENT, AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL
In both the Mainland and Zanzibar, high growth rates of around 7 percent have been sustained over the past decade and much more since 2016, The growth rate of real GDP per capita/employed person: the database for this indicator is non-existent for the Mainland. Reporting is therefore on employment status. 
The overall unemployment rate declined to 9.7percent in 2018 
(estimate) from 10.3 percent recorded in the latest Integrated Labour Force Survey 2014. The same decreasing trend is depicted for males and femalßmated at 14.3 percent in 2014 and for youth (15-24) at 27 percent. (Zanzibar Integrated Labour Force Survey, 2014). 
The Zanzibar Quality Apprenticeship Programme in Hotel Operations was launched on 17 August 2017 and the first batch of 52 students graduated on 23 April 2019. More than half (33) of the graduates have already secured jobs at some of Zanzibar’s leading hotels and resorts. This is the first apprenticeship certification to be approved by the National Council for Technical Education (NACTE). This is also the first time the State University of Zanzibar has recognized and issued certification to apprentices and recognized an apprenticeship as an accredited module of learning.
GOAL 9: BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, 
PROMOTE INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE 
INDUSTRIALIZATION, AND FOSTER INNOVATION
Attainment of this goal is likely due to a strong supportive environment and availability of baseline data for monitoring. There are marked unprecedented improvements towards achieving this goal over the past two years due to large public investments (flagship projects) in both infrastructure and manufacturing. Notable achievements have been recorded in all modes of transport: air, marine, rail and road - number of trips (entry/exit) of marine vessels; passengers and cargo tonnage handled at all seaports, as well as international aircraft movements. Terminal III at Julius Nyerere international airport, Dar es Salaam, for handling international flights only, was completed in May 2019. Road transport remains the main mode of transport for Tanzanians and accounts for 80 percent of passenger traffic and over 95 percent of freight traffic (TANROADS, 2018). Construction of a standard gauge railway is in progress and the first phase of 722kms is expected to be completed in 2021. (Details of the transport system are provided in the statistical annex for both the Mainland and Zanzibar.)



GOAL 10: REDUCE INEQUALITY WITHIN AND AMONG COUNTRIES
Strong affirmative action has taken place in the United Republic of Tanzania which has led to reduced inequalities in both income and social services access. Redistributive policies such as increased Government expenditure on social services provision to improve access and quality, as well as increasing social protection coverage, have registered a decline in inequalities. 
In Mainland Tanzania income inequality (as measured by the Gini coefficient) was at 0.38 in 2017. 
This situation can partly be explained by the nature of the recent country’s economic growth occurring mostly in urban-centric and more capital-intensive sectors of the economy (mining, manufacturing, construction, communication and financial services) with growth of rural-oriented and more labour-intensive sectors like agriculture remaining stagnant. Redistribution interventions implemented by the government such as increasing expenditure on the provision of social services and social protections are of importance as they help to offset the impact of income inequality.
The most recent baseline data exists for 2014. Proportion of paid employees whose monthly incomes are less than two-thirds of the median monthly income (15+ years), by sex: ILFS 2014, indicates that, over two-thirds (67.8 percent) of paid employees earned less than TZS 300,000 (130.00 USD) mean monthly income with females (69.5 percent) having a slightly higher proportion than males (67.1 percent). It is also observed that, less than 5 percent of paid employees earned a mean monthly income above TZS 900,000 (390.00 USD). 
In Zanzibar, the mean total household expenditure was at TZS 340,576 in 2014/15 with a median total household expenditure of TZS 295,167. Zanzibar recorded a Gini coefficient of 0.30 in 2014/15.

GOAL 11: MAKE CITIES AND HUMAN SETTLE-
MENTS INCLUSIVE, SAFE, RESILIENT AND SUSTAINABLE
Baseline data for this goal exists. In 2016, the proportion of villages with land use plans was 12 percent and the proportion of households that owned houses was 74.8 percent. Through targeted programmes such as the formalization of property (MKURABITA), there have been significant improvements of housing conditions in unplanned settlements. 
With respect to local disaster risk reduction that affect slums and unplanned settlements the most, the proportion of local governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies increased from 11.17 percent in 2015 to 15.43 percent in 2018 (Mainland Tanzania). The increase is attributed to the willingness of local government councils to develop and implement Disaster Risk Reduction Strategies. 
In 2014/15, Zanzibar recorded a proportion of 77.9 percent of households with modern floors, 77.1 percent of the households with modern walls and 85.4 percent of households with a modern roof. The number of cities and towns with planned land allocation for residential, commercial and social use (spatial development) stands at 1 city and 3 towns. The new strategic and spatial development plan for Zanzibar (ZanPlan) has been developed and intended to expand and improve urban services beyond congested Stone Town. It includes the Michenzani Green Corridors Project, as well as the Stone Town Safe and Sustainable Mobility Management Programme. The plan is to improve public and commercial services to the lower-income communities outside of Stone Town, and transform underutilized public spaces with low-cost interventions to create a vibrant urban area. The scale-up activities will upgrade basic services including lighting, pedestrian pavements, bus shelters, etc.), improve public green space, and develop new market spaces, to spread economic activities beyond Stone Town and help protect historic assets.

GOAL 12: ENSURE SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION PATTERNS
This is one of the goals that the country does not have sufficient data for monitoring. Percentage of Consumption of Ozone-Depleting Substances (ODS) in metric tons: In 2015 the reduction in consumption of ODSs was 21.49 metric tons. Currently, the Vice President’s Office (VPO) monitors the importation of ODS through the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA). There is a significant data challenge in monitoring this goal due to a lack of sufficient data.

GOAL 13: TAKE URGENT ACTION TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE AND ITS IMPACTS
Unlike in the past, data for monitoring this goal are available to facilitate its monitoring. Number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disasters per 100, 000 people: During 2015/16 as a result of disasters that occurred, in Zanzibar there were 7 deaths per 100,000 people and that 326 persons per 100,000 had been affected. Data from the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) indicate that the Number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster decreased in the Mainland from 303 per 100,000 people in 2015 to 257 per 100,000 people. Measures taken include the formulation of the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Programme 2015-2025 and the National Framework for Climate Services 2018-2022. 

GOAL 14: CONSERVE AND SUSTAINABLY USE 
THE OCEANS, SEAS AND MARINE RESOURCES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
There exists a strong legal and monitoring framework for this goal with relatively strong data for tracking progress. Percentage of fish tonnage landed within Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY): 
Currently, the fish tonnage landed for Tanzania is 362,595 tones, which represents about 50 percent of the Maximum Sustainable Yield-MSY (which stands between 730,000 and 750,000 tons per annum). About 18 areas are under protection by the Marine Parks and Reserves Unit (MPRU).
Habitat level results indicate the country has lost around 16 percent of its mangrove cover over almost a decade and a half, with Mtwara and Lindi retaining around 90 percent of their mangrove cover but Tanga and Pwani losing over a quarter of their area, and Dar es Salaam over 30 percent of its mangroves. Five of the seven zones showed declines in coral cover, with Pwani as the most impacted after losing about half its original living coral, whilst Mtwara and Pemba have lost around 40 percent and Unguja and Tanga about 30 percent. There was no variation in the sea grass status score as Ocean Health Index (OHI) global analysis score of 0.855 was applied in all zones due to a lack of data. (Tanzania Ocean Health Index, 2018.)

GOAL 15: PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE SUSTAIN-
ABLE USE OF TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS, SUSTAINABLY MANAGE FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION 
AND HALT AND REVERSE LAND DEGRADATION, AND 
HALT BIODIVERSITY LOSS
Due to heightened campaigns and affirmative action, there is marked progress with respect to this goal. Baseline data does exist for tracking progress. Area of forest under sustainable forest management as a percent of forest area: Tanzania has taken initiatives to establish new plantation forests. About 18 new areas have been established with 554,000 hectares under commercial forest plantation. Currently, forests and woodland comprise of 54.6 percent of the total area in Tanzania with notable variations across the regions. Also, there are 240,000 hectares of natural forest cover under protected areas to encourage mountain biodiversity. 
In Zanzibar, the proportions of terrestrial and marine protected areas in 2015 were 16 percent and 8.1percent respectively. By 2020, Zanzibar has targeted to have 20 percent of terrestrial and 10 percent of marine areas protected. About 640 hectares were planted with trees in 2015. 

GOAL 16: PROMOTE PEACEFUL AND INCLUSIVE SOCIETIES 
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, PROVIDE ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR ALL AND BUILD EFFECTIVE, ACCOUNTABLE AND INCLUSIVE INSTITUTIONS AT ALL LEVELS.
Over the past three years, the United Republic of Tanzania has strengthened policy and legal institutions resulting in deductions in actions that threaten peace and compromise justice. Data for monitoring this goal are produced on an annual basis, which makes tracking progress feasible. The Mainland Tanzania, Demographic and Health Survey 2015/16 (TDHS 2015/16), shows that, 40 percent of women age 15-49 have experienced physical violence, and 17 percent have experienced sexual violence. 
The Five-Year National Plan of Action to End Violence Against Women and Children (NPAVAWC 2017/18 – 2021/22), is a single and comprehensive, National Plan of Action to eradicate violence against women and children in the country that consolidates eight different action plans addressing violence against women and children. The plan addresses issues of norms and values, a safe environment, household economic strengthening, implementation and enforcement of laws, response support services, safe school and life skills with the purpose of ending violence against women and children and realizing their rights. National Monitoring and Evaluation for NPA VAWC 2017/2022 is in place and operational (PMO Report 2019). National Guidelines on Case Management for women survivors of violence including sexual violence, is under development to be finalized by June 2019 (MoHCDGEC -DSW 2019).The government enacted the Legal Aid Act in 2017. The Act makes provisions for legal aid in the country and legal services in different localities. This Act has facilitated free access to legal services by women, especially in rural areas. Multi-sectoral instruments that guide the implementation of anti-Gender Based Violence (GBV) strategies have been developed. 
There is continuous improvement in the criminal justice system. In 2018, about 99 percent of the 176,652 cases registered at primary courts were cleared. The Legal Aid Act 2017 further provides for a person in custody of a police force, to access legal aid. Congestion of inmates in prisons has been reduced through fast tracking of cases and reducing congestion of those on remand. By March 2018, 






4 4. CHAPTER FOUR
“EMPOWERING PEOPLE AND ENSURING INCLUSIVENESS AND EQUALITY”
	4.1 	Introduction
As part of the VNR process for 2019, six SDGs are being reported under the theme “Empowering People and Ensuring Inclusiveness and Equality”. They are: Quality education (4); Decent work and economic growth (8); Reduced inequalities (10); Climate action (13); Peace, justice and strong institutions (16); and Partnerships for the goals (17). This chapter reports on progress of the Goals with exception of Goal 17, which is explored in Chapter 5.
	4.2 	SDG 4: Quality Education
The United Republic of Tanzania is committed to providing quality education to all Tanzanians and is recording notable progress toward that direction. The areas of emphasis are: Promotion of universal access to quality basic education, including pre-primary, primary and secondary education levels; eradication of illiteracy; and expansion of quality tertiary education and training that provides the critical mass of high-quality human resources required to effectively respond to and master development challenges at all levels. Provision of quality education in Tanzania goes hand in hand with expanding access to education and adhering to the SDGs principle of “No One Should Be Left Behind”.
4.2.1 Improving Quality of Education
A number of initiatives aimed at improving quality both at national and sub-national levels are being implemented in the Mainland. These initiatives include:
a) Strengthening systems and management through the implementation of a School Information System (SIS), which helps school leaders and school administrators better manage their schools for improved learning outcomes;
b) Creating a new School Quality Assurance Framework and 73 introducing a school Summary Report Card (SSRC). The new framework will ensure that learning outcomes are prioritised at school level and that all schools in Tanzania receive a Whole School Visit within four years. SSRC ensures that communities determine how schools are performing against a sub-set of quality indicators;
c) Creating an Inclusive Education Strategy which has enabled improved access for the most vulnerable groups in Tanzania and the quality of education received. Initiatives have included prioritising orphans and ensuring that provisions are made for special needs students, particularly those with visual or hearing impairments; and
d) Launching of Primary Record Management (PREM) which enables school administrators to monitor and track performance of pupils and transfers and attendance. 
Other initiatives include increasing leadership, management and planning capacity and awareness of communities, parents, LGAs, and MDAs, to participate and deliver quality basic education for both formal and non-formal education and improving the monitoring and evaluation system through the provision of ICT facilities to enhance data collection and processing and utilization at LGA levels.
The theme for the country’s Education Sector Review in 2018 was “Delivering Quality Education for Industrialized Tanzania.” Under this theme a critical assessment of the sector was undertaken on the contribution of the sector towards the national agenda for industrialization, particularly in terms of supplying quality human resources. The country has, over time, to improve education quality. Nonetheless, there are still some challenges faced, some of which originate from the demand side of education. 
 As part of improving the quality of education, Zanzibar is reviewing its examination system in order to assess learning performance through different methods beyond formal sitting for examinations. The Zanzibar Education Sector Development Plan (2017–2022), includes key strategies related to establishing a safe and enabling school environment; training teachers, supporting teachers to promote positive discipline in schools, improving children’s 
Case study 1: Girls Empowerment Project by the Private Sector 
 
Through SDG target 4.5, the Vodacom Foundation initiated the Girls Empowerment Project in Lindi and Mtwara regions, focusing on where school dropout and truancy rates are most pronounced across the country. The goal of the project was to improve education standards and reduce absenteeism. The project, as well, provides sexual reproductive health education, sanitary products, a mentorship programme and implements advocacy awareness campaigns to break the silence on menstrual hygiene management and related challenges to over 10,000 young girls. About 29,618 indirect and 5,577 direct beneficiaries received access to sanitary products and were reached through mobile phone campaigns. The project has proved a success and poses as a case for replication in other regions of the country in improving school participation among girls.
knowledge and skills about protecting themselves from violence, providing life and social skills training, and conducting adolescent intimate partner violence prevention programmes.
Given the multidimensional nature of education, different stakeholders are involved in ensuring access and quality of education in the country. CSOs and the private sector are among stakeholders working closely with the government towards improving education quality. The Girls Empowerment Project is one of such interventions by the private sector to promote access to education among girls. Case study 1 provides details of the intervention in line with target number five under SDG four: Eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure equal access to all levels of education and vocational training for the vulnerable. 
4.2.2 Current Status
There has been rapid expansion in enrolment at all levels of education delivery in the Mainland. For example, the net enrolment rate for pre-primary education reached 44.6 percent in 2017, which is one the highest in the sub-Saharan Africa region. Primary education net enrolment rate was at 91 percent in 2018, and more than 70 percent of primary school leavers transition to secondary 

education. Total enrolment in Forms 1 - 6 increased by 12.6 percent from 1,908,857 pupils in 2017 to 2,148,324 in 2018. For Zanzibar, similar improvements have been noted. The primary net enrolment rate is around 83 percent. Higher education infrastructure has also expanded rapidly to more than 50 in 2016, with enrolment of more than 200,000 over 2016-2019. The Gender Parity Index (GPI) in net enrolment for primary school aged children is 1.03 and the GPI for gross enrolment is 1.01. CSOs are complementing government efforts as Case study two demonstrates.
Case study 2: CSOs Intervention Support in Increasing Enrolment
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) have continued to make significant contributions in increasing the enrolment of students at various levels of education delivery and ensuring that enrolled children complete the full education cycle. Some of the examples include the following:
• Establishment of community pre-school classrooms and satellite schools to empower local communities (Safina Women’s’ Association (SAWA) in Morogoro region). 
• Training school management committees on how to oversee school activities as a strategy towards improving enrolment, retention and performance (Action Aid Tanzania). 
• Conducting awareness campaigns for communities and parents on the importance of school for children with disabilities (Mwanza Policy Initiative (MPI) in Ukerewe District).
• Addressing dropout rates (Elimu Community Light). 
• Improving girls’ enrolment and retention through distributing sanitary products and training students, teachers and parents in producing reusable sanitary products at home (HakiElimu Girls Retention and Transition Initiative (GRTI)). 
• Tracking and monitoring attendance of girls and identifying those girls who might be at risk of dropping out. Once identified the girls are provided with individual mentorship through gender clubs and home visits to ensure girls are supported to stay in school. Through the One Girl One Bike project, secondary school girls in rural areas are provided with bicycles to assist them in commuting to and from school (Friends of Education; Msichana Initiative; Implementing Partners under the Social Action Trust Fund, SATF). 
The adult literacy rate was at 79 percent in 2018. More men than women are literate in Mainland Tanzania. In Zanzibar, the overall illiteracy rate stands at 16.3 percent (rural 23.9 percent and urban 7.7 percent; 11.7 percent for males and 20.6 percent for females). Further efforts are being made on improving adult literacy. Currently, two programmes are being implemented: The Complementary Basic Education and Training (COBET), which caters for out-of-school children aged 9-18; and the Integrated Community Basic Adult Education (ICBAE), which caters for youth and adults aged 19+ in adult education. 
Furthermore, the School Readiness Programme, a form of nonformal education, is being piloted in selected regions of the country. The project provides an alternative fast-track approach to one or more years of formal pre-school. Initial results are very promising, with rapid expansion of enrolment and with pupils demonstrating primary school readiness competencies as good as or better than those who have attended a year of formal pre-primary. Piloting of a Secondary School Readiness Programme (SSRP) began in 2017, with a particular focus on preparing girls for secondary school education. 
4.2.3 Improved Access
Equity in access to education has improved as well as learning opportunities for youths, adults and marginalized groups. Overall, about 57 percent of pre-primary aged children, 23 percent of primary aged children and 41 percent of lower secondary aged children are estimated to be out of school. A key element of the new National Strategy for Inclusive Education is to raise communities’ awareness of the ages at which children should start Pre-Primary and Primary Standard one. This is a much more effective strategy in the long run than providing re-entry programmes like COBET for those who missed out on the appropriate age for primary schooling. To ensure that the education system accommodates different community set-ups, the government has come up with a number of programmes that are community specific such as satellite schools “Shule Shikizi4”.


Box 4.1: Key Performance Indicators on Education 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in Education for year 2020
• Proportion of children enrolled in Standard 1 with at least one year of pre-primary education 87.5 %
• Gross intake ratio to primary Standard I, 115.5%
• Gross Enrolment Ratio: Pre-Primary, 97.3%; Primary 100.8%; Lower Secondary 47.6%
• Net Enrolment Rate: Pre-Primary, 60.0%; Primary 90.0%; Lower Secondary, 60.0%
• Promotion rate from primary to lower secondary for both boys and girls: 80%
• Survival rate to the last grade of basic education (i.e. from primary entry to Form IV of lower secondary) for both boys and girls: 64%
• Average drop-out rate per grade in primary education: 2.5%
• Percentage of out-of-school children of basic school age: 19%
• Total enrolment in adult education (with greater proportional expansion in underserved regions): 1,130,000.
• Transition rate from Basic Education Form IV to TVET: 27%; transition rate to Form V of Higher Secondary (with gender parity achieved) 18%
• Gross Enrolment Ratio in university education (including tertiary technical education): 6.3%
• Survival Rate across all TVET institutions: 90%
4.2.4 Universal Secondary Education
The United Republic of Tanzania has made lower-level secondary education universal. In the Mainland, this is consistent with the Education Sector Development Plan (ESDP) 2016/17 - 2020/21. The ESDP aims to transform the education sector into an efficient, effective, outcome-based system and ensure equitable access to education and training for all, including the most disadvantaged (SDG10). The priorities include: equitable participation and completion of fee-free basic education for all, with particular attention to marginalized groups, children with disabilities and out-of-school children; completion of twelve years of education increased through universal access up to lower secondary education.  As a result of the interventions, the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) increased from 30.1 in 2016 to 31.0 in 2018; and the Net Enrolment Ratio (NER) from 27.0 in 2016 to 28.0 in 2018. Significant reduction has been achieved in school dropouts and out-of-school children. Outcomes in terms of improvement of schooling of both boys and girls due to the adaptation of universal secondary education are promising. While this progress is observed, challenges have also been experienced. One of the challenges has been a rapid increase in the number of children in schools. This has created pressure in terms of a need for more classrooms, teachers, and expansion in the budget. These challenges are being addressed in a number of ways including increasing budgetary allocation, training more teachers and engaging more with the private sector in education provision.
Enrolment at advanced secondary education is steadily rising and Tanzania is on track with respect to the SDGs targets. Enrolment has increased from 131,362 in 2016 to 157,445 in 2018, a 16 percent increase with female enrolment recording 24 percent growth and males an 11 percent increase. The increase in advanced secondary education enrolment is a result of Government initiatives to implement the Big Results Now (BRN) initiative in the education sector, with a focus on improving the quality of basic education through the creation of performance transparency and accountability, increased motivation, and improved teachers’ working conditions. Through this initiative, pass rates improved from 43 percent in 2012 to 70.4 percent in 2017, enabling more students to enter higher levels of education.
4.2.5 Technical, Vocational and Tertiary Education (TVET)
TVET provides alternative educational and training opportunities after primary, ordinary secondary (O-Level) and advanced secondary (A-Level) education levels, aimed at producing artisans, skilled workers, technicians and professionals to be engaged in fields such as construction, manufacturing agriculture, mining, transport, 


and adults by improving their skills, which would enable them to improve their livelihoods; and skills of the labour force. As a result, the proportion of individuals entering the workforce with tertiary education has steadily increased from 1 percent in 2007 to 3 percent in 2016. However, a highly skilled workforce continues to be low at 3.3 percent compared to the national target of 12 percent. There is a mismatch between output of higher education institutions and labour market needs, related to curricula that lack direct linkages to industry and are inadequate or outdated. The private sector of Tanzania has indicated great interest in partnering with the Government in skills development through the Social Investment Platform. 
The vertical and horizontal mobility of the county’s labour is greatly limited since the majority of the labour force have a low level of skills. There is a concern about a high volume of low skills and low volume of high skills; relative to what is needed for industrialization and sustainable growth. Demand for higher level skills is rising across all economic sectors. In order to address the challenges of skills gaps and a skills mismatch, the government in collaboration with other stakeholders has developed the National Skills Development Programme which provides a broader framework for enhancement of skills development that will lead to human capital development and enhance employability skills for employment creation. Through the implementation of the National Skills Development Programme, on average, 42,407 youths in the labour market are trained in different skills per year through apprenticeships, internships and Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) skills. The programme focuses on the key priority sectors of Manufacturing, Hospitality, Textile, Leather, Agriculture, Construction and ICT. 
In addition, the government continues to offer subsidies through its Trainee Voucher Scheme to 7,000 youth under vocational education; to capacitate institutions which supervise the quality of vocational education training; to ensure teaching and learning materials for internship courses prevail in VETA colleges and other Technical Education colleges; and to develop National Internship Guidelines and National Apprenticeship Guidelines which cuts across Government and the private sector.
4.2.7 Qualified Teachers and Infrastructure
The United Republic of Tanzania has continued to train teachers at various levels; prioritizing the training of teachers with specific skills for teaching at early childhood level. In 2016, 4,029 public school teachers had a Pre-Primary certificate, leaving a gap and schools opting to use teachers not specifically trained in Early Childhood Development (ECD). Emphasis is given to ensuring that each school allocates teachers for teaching Pre-Primary. The Government has completed a plan to train one teacher per school with an estimated total of 16,109 teachers who will be allocated to teach in Pre-Primary classes. 
Overall, the pupil-teacher ratios have been improving at both primary and secondary levels, although secondary teacher qualification requirements have been relaxed to redress a subjectspecialty imbalance. At the primary level, the national pupilteacher ratio (PTR) in government schools was 54:1 in 2018. In addition, training was provided to 16,075 Primary Education teachers: standard I – IV (31,966); special education (2,102); and adult education (937) according to the revised curriculum in order to improve their teaching skills; and teaching practice (BTP) to 20,236 graduates at 35 teachers’ colleges.
Various measures are taken to improve the infrastructure across all education levels including: renovating dilapidated schools; strengthening the teaching and learning infrastructure; renovating colleges offering education courses; strengthening use of ICT in teaching and learning by procuring ICT equipment for institutions which were rehabilitated. This has led, among other outcomes to increased enrolment of students studying mathematics, science and ICT subjects. 
 
4.2.8 Disparities by Socioeconomic Groups
Despite efforts to address disparities in education participation and attainment disparities are still notable in various forms. For example, a gender imbalance is particularly evident in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) subjects, as well as limited participation of learners with disabilities. Of the estimated 400,000 school-age children with disabilities, only 42,783 children are registered in primary and 8,778 in secondary schools. This leaves a large out-of-school population of the most vulnerable children. These children include girls and boys with Albinism, Autism, Down-Syndrome, Deafness, Blindness, DeafBlind, children with physical disabilities and mental impairments. There are only 2,179 primary teachers working in primary schools who are qualified to support learners with special needs. At secondary school level there is an acute shortage of teachers able to communicate in sign language or able to support blind learners. 
Qualified teacher shortages, together with weak community awareness about the possibilities that exist and may be created for children living with disabilities, the long distances to specialized schools, costs and resistance from regular schools to register children with disabilities are the most common barriers to the education of children living with disabilities. The Government has initiated a screening programme to assess children’s hearing and sight. The Government’s strategy is to include as many as possible of the children living with disabilities into the mainstream education system. Only those whose disabilities are too severe for regular schools will be enrolled in special schools. 
4.3 	SDG 8: Decent Work, Productive Employment and Economic Growth
The United Republic of Tanzania recorded impressive economic growth of around 7 percent per annum in real terms during 20162017. This went hand in hand with employment creation. 
4.3.1 Economic Growth
In the Mainland, the on-going industrialization initiative and substantial investment in infrastructure including water, energy, roads, railways and airports, coupled with growth in the output of minerals such as Tanzanite, diamonds and coal have contributed significantly to GDP growth. Sector-wise, the respective contributions were mining and quarrying (5.3 percent); water supply 6.4 percent); transport and storage (6.7 percent); information and communication (6.2 percent); and construction 
15.1 percent. The rate of growth of the agricultural sector which employs 66.3 percent of households in the country and contributes to 20 percent of sales exports, increased by 3.6 percent in 2017 compared to 2.1 percent in 2016. 
Figures on shares of GDP at current prices (after adjustments of taxes on products) indicates that, the sectoral contribution to GDP was as follows: Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry and Fishing (28.8 percent), Industry and Construction (25 percent) and Services (38 percent). In Mainland Tanzania, GDP per capita at current prices increased by 6.2 percent between 2016 and 2017.
Per Capita GDP at current prices, Mainland Tanzania
Year
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Per Capital GDP (TZS)
1,621,445 
1,778,840 
1,968,965 
2,191,190 
2,327,395 
Per Capital GDP (USD)
 1,015 
1,076 
 978 
1,006 
 1,044 

	 Per Capital GDP (TZS)	 Per Capital GDP (USD)
Figure 4.1a: The Trend of Per Capita GDP at current prices, Mainland Tanzania
(Data source: NBS National Accounts Statistics Publication)
Zanzibar recorded GDP real growth rate of 7.5 percent in 2017, largely attributed to the increase in clove production as well as increased number of tourists from 376,242 in 2016 to 433,474 in 2017 which increased the share of accommodation and food services from 9.7 in 2016 to 11.5 per cent in 2017. With regard to major economic activities, the growth of agriculture, forestry and fishing increased by 8.8 per cent, and Industry by 7.9 per cent. Figure 4.1b shows the growth pattern of Zanzibar’s economy between 2014 and 2018.

Figure 4.1b: Trend of GDP Growth Rates at Constant Price,  
Zanzibar, 2014 -2018 (%)
Source: Zanzibar Statistical Abstract, 2018, OCGS
4.3.2 Employment
According to the latest 2014 Integrated Labour Force Survey, unemployment rates in the country was at 10.3 percent with youth unemployment at 11.7 percent. Young women were more unemployed than young men. Projections of the unemployment rate based on 2014 ILFS results, show that unemployment decreased to 9.7 percent in 2018. The labour force participation rate is at 86.7 percent of the total working age population.
 9.7
9.9
10.0
10.1
10.3










2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
	9.4	9.5	9.6	9.7	9.8	9.9	10	10.1	10.2	10.3	10.4
Unemployment rate
Figure 4.2: Unemployment Rate Estimates from 2015 to 2018
Source: 2014 LFS Projections (NBS)
 
In recognition of the scope of the unemployment challenge and its potential impacts, during 2016/2017 – 2018/2019, the Government, in collaboration with stakeholders has implemented employment creation policies, programmes and projects to empower youth for wage employment and self-employment. Also, it has increased funds for youth, women and persons with disabilities to ensure access to capital development projects such as the construction of SGR, road construction, construction of 441 health centres and 67 hospitals; construction of airports; construction of 482 water projects; and the establishment of industries in every region. These initiatives created 1,167,988 new jobs during 2016-2019 as indicated in Table 4.1.
  Table 4.1: Jobs Created from 2016/2017 to 2018/2019 by Main Sectors Source: Administrative Data, PMO-Labour, Youth, Employment and Persons with Disabilities
Main Sectors
Number of Jobs Created
Public
 112,645 
Development Projects
 663,227 
Private
 451,464 
Total
 1,167,988 
  
Public
      112,645
There are gender disparities as well as by source of employment in terms of earnings as shown in Table 4.2 with self-employed females being the most disadvantaged. Some of the reasons for such gender disparities include, but not limited to, patriarchal dominance on access to opportunities, limited education/skills opportunities that would in turn make women more competitive, and traditions that jeopardize women’s position.
Table 4.2: Unemployment Rate Estimates from 2015 to 2018 
Source: 2014 ILFS Projections (NBS)
Year
2006


2014


Type of Employment
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Paid Employees
106,272
79,032
98,454
328,856
265,604
308,075
Self-Employment
94,373
53,163
75,693
279,636
144,300
215,541
In Zanzibar, the labour force participation rate is at 79.4 percent. Government employees as of 2017 are numbered at 249,706 
(males 14,883 and females 16,459); Parastatals employ 69,969 (males 3,839 and 1,708 females) and the private sector has 126,417 (males 12,619 and females 6,632). Employment creation and decent jobs are of high priority in Zanzibar. There are specific initiatives to increase employment. The Zanzibar Technology and Business Incubator (ZTBI) is one of such initiatives with the aim to nurture and nourish Zanzibar youth so that they later turn into relatively mature, independent, healthy and wealth creating sustainable entrepreneurs. ZTBI has accomplished this through conducting effective training programmes focused on developing Mind-Set Change, Business Model and Business Plan writing skills including Marketing, Packaging, Labelling, Branding and Effective Record Keeping. ZTBI runs a scaled incubator programme that supports youth to run businesses that are in the initial idea stage and/or at the growth stage to create sustainable enterprises in Agribusiness, ICT and Tourism and to increase their rate of success and consequently contribute to employment creation.
The ZTBI role is to provide a, “micro environment” for accelerating start-up businesses and unleashing their growth potential by providing Business Development Support services; Assisting startup entrepreneurs to overcome constraints to growth that arise from the macroeconomic environment; Accelerating the rate at which entrepreneurs learn the core element of Business Planning by providing mentoring and coaching to incubated start-ups interns/companies and hence increasing their success rate. Since its inception, the centre has trained over 968 youth (193 males and 775 females) and 32 youth businesses have been formed at the Incubator. ZTBI has also created a revolving fund in association with “The Milele Zanzibar Foundation”; and regularly runs an annual “Business Plan Competition” among Zanzibar Universities.
Despite a number of initiatives in place, reducing unemployment still remains a major policy challenge. 
The unemployment rate for persons aged 15 years and above using the national definition was at 10.3 percent in 2014. The unemployment rate for youth aged 15-35 years was 11.7 percent in 2014. Figure 4.3 shows unemployment distribution by some demographic characteristics.

	 2006		2014
Figure 4. 3: Unemployment Rate by Sex and Age Group
(Data source: ILFS)
In order to address the unemployment challenge and create decent jobs especially among youth and women, other actors including the private sector have taken various initiatives aimed at supporting Government efforts. One such effort is an initiative by the private sector in assisting small-holder farmers to improve rice production. The intervention is in line with target number four of SDG eight – “Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation”. Case study three provides a lesson.
Case study 3: Private Sector: Support to Improve Rice Production
Lake Zone Rice Project is a joint initiative between Anglo-Ashanti Gold, smallholder farming communities and local government to improve and scale up rice production in the region. The project targeted 900 smallholder farmers in 2015 and scaled to over 1,800 farmers in three years, working with agricultural researchers to increase rice yields from 11 metric tonnes per acre to 32 metric tonnes per acre through, smart-climate agriculture mechanisms. The project has improved the livelihoods of smallholder farmers, including providing access to financial loans (financial inclusion) and collateral through access to storage facilities provided within the project.
4.3.3 Child Labour
The United Republic of Tanzania has made significant advancement in efforts to eliminate all forms of child labour, especially in agriculture, mining and construction. According to the 2014 Child Labour Report, about 29 percent of children aged 5 – 17 years were engaged in some form of child labour in these economic sectors, where agriculture, forestry and fishing recorded the largest share (91.8 percent) of total children in child labour with boys having a larger proportion (94.5 percent) than girls (88.9 percent).
4.3.4 Industrialization
In line with the national effort for Industrialization, Tanzania is implementing a number of interventions. One of them is the SMES Industrial Infrastructure Expansion and Capacity Building (“One District One Product”) project, which is aimed at the capitalization of the National Entrepreneurship Development Fund. So far it has provided loans to 2,593 entrepreneurs and created employment for 9,424 people. Similarly, the National Entrepreneurship Development Fund (NEDF- SIDO), issued a total of 1,948 credits worth TZS 3,344 billion to entrepreneurs. These efforts have stimulated development of small and medium scale enterprises in line with the national industrialization agenda. Currently, the manufacturing sector comprises about 18 percent of employment in all economic sectors. Prospects for industrialization shows a promising picture in terms of future employment creation. 
According to the Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP) and Economic Surveys, Manufacturing Value Added (MVA) reached TShs 7,576,681 in 2016 from 5,575,510 in 2015; Manufacturing Value Added per capita reached TShs 148,562 in 2016 from 117,627 in 2015; and Manufacturing Value Added per GDP was at 16.06 percent in 2016 up from 12.64 percent in 2015. Manufacturing employment as a proportion of total employment in all economic sectors remained at 18.1 percent in 2016 like in 2015 (ASIP 2016). 
The focus on industrialization implies a priority on science, technology and innovation to raise productivity, increase economic competitiveness, and make tangible improvements in the quality of life of people. According to the Global Innovation Index report of 2018, Tanzania ranked 92nd globally (moving up 31 points from 123rd position in 2013), 1st amongst Low Income Countries, and 5th in sub-Saharan Africa. The country also scored 0.72 in efficiency levels, and ranked 31st on efficiency levels globally. This was partly contributed by the significant growth in the innovation ecosystem in Tanzania over the past five years.
4.3.5 Access to Financial Services and Financial Inclusion
Access to financial services forms an important component for poverty reduction and enterprise development in the United Republic of Tanzania. The country has a National Financial Inclusion Framework (NFIF) 2014, which underscores the importance of inclusion of the rural population, youth and women. Access to financial services among Tanzanians has improved, mainly contributed by improved access and usage of mobile phones, which facilitates digital financial services. About 65 percent of the population has access to a mobile network coverage. 
Financial inclusion in the country has grown by 14 percent between 2014 and 2017. Furthermore, the uptake of the provision of mobile money services has remarkably improved. Currently, 78 percent of adults in rural Tanzania live within a five-kilometre radius of a formal financial access point, in most cases mobile money agents. This has happened simultaneously with the fall of dependence on informal financial services from 16 percent to seven percent over the same period. Populations in the lower two income quintiles (bottom 40 percent) are not sufficiently covered by financial services with 84 percent of such individuals living in rural areas. The most vulnerable group in terms of financial exclusion are rural individuals without a formal education. There are gender and geographical disparities as well. 
The exclusion rate is 26 percent for males and 30 percent for females. Similarly, while only 15 percent of the urban population is financially excluded, over 35 percent of the rural population is financially excluded. These disparities have been addressed through interventions such as women economic empowerment forums at regional level, to provide opportunity for women to participate in business activities and enhancement of ownership of land and property. A designated Women’s Bank has been set up to support women’s access to financial services. Furthermore, 10 percent of Local Government internal revenue is allocated to the empowerment of women, youth and people with disabilities.
4.3.6 Improvement of Hard and soft Infrastructure
The United Republic of Tanzania recognizes the importance of ICT for supporting its development in both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. A total of 27,912 km of National ICT Broadband Backbone has been constructed. Similarly, several measures have been taken to ensure all stakeholders, including the private sector and the public at large, benefit from access to these public assets so as to promote socio-economic development. In particular, ICT services have been strengthened by laying down a submarine cable. By April2019 mobile communication coverage was 94 percent in terms of population and 66 percent in geographical coverage. These developments have greatly transformed lifestyles among the population especially access to both communication and mobile financial services. Nonetheless, capacity building remains essential to encourage all stakeholders to use ICT at home, at school and in business. Improvement in ICT is also expected to improve learning outcomes, as well as enhancing activities in the agro-business value chain.
In the past four years, Tanzania has made substantial progress in building and maintaining its road network. Cumulatively, more than 35,000 kilometres of national roads with 27 percent paved, have been constructed/ maintained to ensure that different locations of the country are connected with heavy investments in building new roads and bridges. Over 11,000 kilometres of tarmac road are expected to be built in the next few years at an estimated cost of 4 billion US dollars. Significant efforts have also been made to revamp railway transportation in the country. The Government is constructing a $7.6 billion Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) along the central corridor. About USD 938.06 million has been spent to date with the construction of Dar-Morogoro (300Km) and Morogoro-Makutupora (421Km) sections whose progress is at 46 and 6 percent respectively.
It is expected that in the medium to long-term, these investments in roads, railway and other infrastructure will yield benefits by facilitating freight and passengers’ movement within the country and to/from neighbouring land locked countries (The Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Rwanda, the Republic of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo) thus improve trade facilitation with neighbouring countries, stimulating productive and other economic activities in areas where infrastructure is being developed, and also helping to improve access to markets for the country’s agricultural produce and boost other economic and social activities. 
4.3.7 Transportation Facilities
To support the human development and industrialization agenda, the United Republic of Tanzania has taken deliberate measures to ensure that all modes of transport are improved. In the aviation industry, the National Carrier (Air Tanzania) has been revitalized. Six aircrafts were procured and received between 2016 and 2019 with two additional aircrafts expected to be delivered in the near future. 
 
This move has been undertaken in parallel with the rehabilitation and expansion of Tanzania’s regional (domestic) and international airports’ infrastructure. The construction of Terminal III at Julius Nyerere International Airport, is expected to be operational in June 2019. These initiatives have brought efficiency in the transportation sector and through the value chain improved performance of tourism and the agro-processing sectors. These interventions have resulted in an increase in aircraft movements from 164,189 in 2016 to 168, 602 in 2018 bolstered by an increase in flight frequency per week of major airlines in the country: (ATCL; six to 30, Rwanda Air; nine to 14, and Precision Air; 17 to 19). Passenger traffic has also increased, from 4,207,286 passengers in 2016 to 4,268,896 in 2018. Traffic is expected to increase by 48 percent to reach 6.4 million by 2030. 
4.3.8 Tourism
The United Republic of Tanzania is endowed with various natural resources that form a basis for tourist attractions; including wildlife, natural forests, an endless coastline, mountains, rivers, lakes, diverse culture, history and artistic talents. The country ranks first in the world in terms of its allocation of its total area for wildlife and other natural resources including National Parks, Game Reserves, and protected conservation areas etc. These resources are estimated at more than 25 percent of the total land mass. In the Mainland, Wildlife Management Areas (WMAs) cover 24 percent of the total land surface at 4.38percent administered by Tanzania National Parks (TANAPA) with 16 National Parks; 0.88 percent covers the Ngorongoro Conservation Area Authority (NCAA), 12.98 percent covers 33 Game Reserves (GRs) and 5.54 percent covers 43 Game Controlled Areas (GCA). Forest and woodland are estimated to cover about 35.3 million hectares which constitutes 39.9 percent of the total land of the country. Part of this13.5 million hectares are gazetted as National Forest Reserves and 21.8 million hectares are conserved. In addition, there are about 30,000 hectares owned by major private industrial plantations and 120,000 hectares of small and medium size plantations, which also play a great role in the national economy, as well as providing environmental sustainability. Tanzania has rehabilitated 11 airports in the National Parks; 49.3 kilometres of main road in Ngorongoro; and road construction in the parks with 8.5 kilometres and the rehabilitation of 1130.6 kilometres.
The tourism sector is a catalyst and growth driver for the national economy. It is the first foreign exchange earner followed by mining and agriculture; and the country attracts more than a million visitors per year, yielding about USD 500-750million annually. The number of tourists increased from 1,137,182 in year 2015 to 1,505,702 tourists in 2018. Likewise, receipts from the sector increased from USD1.5 billion in 2015 to USD2.6 Billion in 2018. The tourism sector constitutes more than 17 percent of GDP and 25 percent of total export earnings. The sector provides about 1.5 million direct and indirect productive employment jobs.
Tanzania ranks number 11 out of 184 countries on projected tourism growth for 2014–2024 (World Travel and Tourism Council). 
Zanzibar has a competitive advantage in the tourism industry because of its coastal beaches, cultural heritage, history and tradition of hospitality. The sector contributes substantially to reducing poverty and empowering women and youth with new employment opportunities. Tourism is one of the priority sectors for development in Zanzibar and has the potential to be a major contributor to socioeconomic development of the country, given that it provides sustainable and inclusive benefits to Zanzibaris. The Zanzibar Statistical Abstract, 2018 indicates that, a total of 520,809 visitors visited Zanzibar of whom 249,687 (47.9 percent) were male and 271,122 (52.1 percent) were female. The trend of international arrivals in Zanzibar is shown in Figure 4.4 with the lowest arrival in May and highest in August.

Figure 4.4: Monthly International Arrivals, 2014 - 2018
Source: Zanzibar Statistical Abstract 2018, OCGS
Apart from various efforts made to benefit from available opportunities, the sector faces the following challenges: inadequate local community participation in conservation and management of natural and cultural resources; illegal harvesting and unsustainable utilization of natural resources; conflict of interest among stakeholders on the extraction of natural resources; and, inaccessibility of most of the Game Reserves and Antiquities sites due to poor infrastructure (particularly roads, bridges and airstrips). Other challenges include insufficient budgetary allocation for the implementation of research, conservation and promotion activities of natural and cultural resources. Also, poaching incidences particularly elephant poaching for ivory due to increased black market prices of ivory and rhino horns in illegal international markets particularly in South East Asia and the Middle East. To deal with this latter issue, the Government has established a National Anti-Poaching Task Force, which works on combating poaching. As a result, poaching incidences involving elephants has declined by 50 percent.
	4.4 	SDG10: Reduced Inequalities
Reducing inequality in its various forms is one of the policy priorities in the United Republic of Tanzania. Inequalities are manifested across several dimensions, such as employment, earnings and access to social services. High levels of inequality dampen the effect of growth on reducing poverty. Climate variability also exacerbates poverty and inequalities. 
4.4.1 Income Inequality
Mainland Tanzania’s income inequality remains lower relative to most other African countries. In the Mainland, according to the most recent Household Budget Survey (2017/18) it indicates inequality had risen marginally by 0.4 percent (from 0.34 in 2011/12 and 0.38 in 2017/18).

	Tanzania	Dar es Salaam Other Urban	Rural
Mainland
Figure 4. 5: Income Inequality in Mainland Tanzania by area
Source: Tanzania Household Budget Surveys
 
To reduce poverty and inequality a number of interventions are being undertaken. Interventions to boost productivity in the agricultural sector are seen as a crucial measure given that a large share of the population depends on this sector for its livelihood. A key initiative has been to establish community land use plans. By 2019, a total of 1,695 villages out of 12,545 villages in the country had land use plans. A total of 2.535 million hectares have been allocated for breeding in 728 villages. Through appropriate linking to value chains, this move is expected to enhance the commercialization of the livestock sector and promote incomes and nutritional uptake among pastoralist societies. 
The private sector in the country has been supporting government efforts in the reduction of both income and non-income inequalities. A number of interventions have been undertaken by the private sector including conducting programmes for women empowerment as a way to reduce gender-related income inequalities. Interventions have also targeted enhancing entrepreneurship skills for youth and women. Case study four highlights some of these interventions by the private sector. 
Case study 4: Private Sector Efforts in Reducing Inequalities
Empowering Women Farmers’ Networks 
Women farmers in Tanzania produce 30% less of their estimated target yield due to a lack of financial access to purchase modern inputs. Vodacom Foundation Tanzania, in collaboration with an implementing partner, provided access to start-up capital and capacity building for women and marginalized cooperatives’ groups to engage in agriculture. Through capacity building, access to markets and financial inclusion, women have been enabled to engage in economic empowerment activities. The outcomes are promising as the ability of the target group to participate in income generating activities has been significantly enhanced.
Capacitating marginalized Maasai women pastoralists
In an effort to address gender inequality, Zara Charity developed a special window for capacitating marginalized Maasai women by building a Centre for women in Karatu. The centre has operated different projects, including entrepreneurship skills training and financial management training. The otherwise marginalized women groups can access financial services that have enabled them to buy raw materials for making ornaments using beads and selling to tourists. 
Non-income Inequality
As a means to improving livelihoods of the rural populations, the United Republic of Tanzania has been implementing programmes for improving access to electricity in rural areas. A total of 4,970 villages out of 12,268 villages were connected to electricity by 2017 thus increasing access rates in rural areas from a meagre 2 percent in 2016 to 49.5 percent in 2017. A total of 25 district council headquarters, 903 health facilities, 1983 schools, and 1743 business centres were connected to electricity. The target is 


Table 4.3: Summary of key indicators from HBS – Mainland Tanzania 
Source: Household Budget Survey (HBS) 2011/12 and 2017/18.
Indicator
2011/12
2017/18
Percentage of households with electricity
18
29
Percentage of households with a modern roof
68
84
Percentage of households with modern walls
46
79
Percentage of households with modern floors
40
51
Average number of persons per room for sleeping
2.7
2.4
Percentage of adult men with any education
87
87
Percentage of adult women with any education
76
78
Percentage of households owning a mobile phone
57
78
Proportion of households using protected water source in the rainy season
69
88
*Proportion of households using protected water source in the dry season
61
73
Households within a kilometre to a source of drinking water in the rainy season
84
89
Households within a kilometre to a source of drinking water in dry season
71
77
Proportion of households with any toilet facility
88
93
For Zanzibar, significant improvements in wellbeing and equitable access to quality social services, particularly in education, health, water, sanitation and social protection have been achieved. These include an increase in the number of Public Health Care Units (PHCUs); reduction of infant and child mortality, as well as access to maternal and reproductive health services; control of communicable diseases, especially significant reductions in incidences of malaria and HIV/AIDS, resulting in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Zanzibar being the lowest in Africa, currently standing at 1 percent.
4.4.2 Youth and Women Empowerment
Through the National Economic Empowerment Policy, in 2017, 133 Government officials from regions and councils received training. The training aimed at creating awareness of the national economic empowerment strategy; and increasing local participation in investment decisions and access to capital. In addition, through various national empowerment schemes, a total of 478 Tanzanians (357 men and 121 women) were enabled to access concessional loans from banks and financial institutions. Furthermore, the National Economic Empowerment Fund (NEEF) guaranteed loans worth Tanzanian Shillings 373,636,000 to 42 groups of savings and loans groups (VICOBA). Furthermore, the Council conducted exhibitions that focused on empowering Tanzanians to access capital from various empowerment funds and other financial institutions whereby 13 Funds and 115 entrepreneurs participated. The country also has a law where each of the local government authorities is supposed to put aside 10 percent of its revenues specifically for Women (4 percent), Youth (4percent) and people with disabilities (2percent) as empowerment interventions.
The constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania guarantees the right to own property for both men and women. The Land Act of 1999 and the Village Land Act 1999 requires the representation of women in land dispute settlements to ensure gender equality on land matters. Furthermore, efforts are ongoing to formalize ownership of land. By 2018, about 80,000 land documents were registered. Also, the proportion of adults with legally recognized documentation also increased from 50 percent in 2016 to 59 percent in 2018. CSOs contributions on land matters in Tanzania is notable. HakiArdhi has facilitated the conduct of land use plans in eleven villages in Kilolo district and seven villages in Mufindi district. In Kilolo district a total of 1,970 CCROs were provided of which 879 were for women, whereas in Mufindi a total of 1,238 CCROs were issued of which 540 were for women. 
Apart from property ownership interventions, CSOs have been supportive of efforts towards achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls. Support has been in, among other areas, by awareness raising, data collection, collaborative interventions with security organs and legal and policy advocacy. Some of the awareness raising campaigns include the 2018 sixteen days of activism campaign organized by the Women in Law and Development in Africa, Tanzania Chapter, which aimed at raising awareness against gender-based violence. The campaign reached about 1.2 million people through social media.
Community engagements to raise awareness on the dangers of FGM have been the most recurring strategy by CSOs. The Tanzania Gender Networking Programme (TGNP) through the Hakeketwi Mtu campaign has managed to raise awareness and create 1382 change agents in Tarime and Ilala districts. The Association for the Termination of Female Genital Mutilation has been working to provide alternative incomes for female circumcisers so as to reduce their reliance on FGM, and running a community rescue facility for victims of violence, assisting at least 2,569 individuals by 2017. CSOs such as TANLAP, LHRC and the Msichana Initiative have been providing legal assistance to victims of violence, as well as conducting national based policy and legal advocacy. One of the compelling cases is the advocacy done by the Msichana Initiative which called upon the government to amend section 13 and 17 of the Marriage Act,1971, which allows the marriage of girls below 18 years. The High Court of Tanzania accordingly declared sections 13 and 17 unconstitutional. 
4.4.3 Social Protection
The United Republic of Tanzania continues to ensure improved living standards of people living in extreme poverty and protecting the human capital of children living in vulnerable environments. Through the Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN) Programme; as of December-end 2017, a total of TZS 715.9 billion had been paid to PSSN beneficiaries in the form of cash transfers and Public Works Programme (PWP) up from TZS 455.8 billion paid in 2016. Out of that amount, TZS 668.3 billion were paid through cash transfers compared to TZS 435.4 billion paid in 2016, representing an increase of 53.5 percent. With regard to PWD a total of TZS 47.6 billion was paid as wages to poor households that participated in projects that had been identified in their localities compared to TZS 20.4 billion paid in 2016. In addition, as of December 2017, cash transfers covered 70 percent of all households identified in the PSSN programme. For Zanzibar, the share of social protection expenditure in the total government budget has been increasing, reaching 8.99% during 2015/16. The programme currently supports about 15 percent of the population of Zanzibar.
The National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF) as a vehicle of accessing quality health services for all, as of 31st March 2019, had registered 4,217,211 beneficiaries equivalent to eight percent of the Tanzanian population. The Community Health Fund (CHF) had by 2019, covered 13,029,636 beneficiaries, equivalent to 25 percent of the Tanzanian population. Combined coverage of NHIF and CHF between 2015 and 2019, increased from 20 percent to 33 percent. The challenge ahead is to ensure that enrolment in health insurance is expanded as only one third of Tanzania’s population is currently covered by any form of health insurance. Tanzania is now enacting its Insurance Act 2019, which will establish a Single National Health Insurance (SNHI) fund, replacing the current NHIF and CHF systems. SNHI will be mandatory to all citizens, hence is expected to lead to the achievement of Universal Health Coverage (UHC).
CSOs have been instrumental in supporting government efforts toward ensuring social protection. They have been working more on policy and legal advocacy on various social protection instruments, as well as on livelihood enhancement. Following the conversation with pension fund managers and the Trade Union Congress of Tanzania (TUCTA), a Presidential order reverted to the old formula in computing terminal benefits as the public had not been consulted on the proposed new formula which was seen to compromise retirees. Regarding livelihood enhancement, CSOs have been conducting entrepreneurial training amongst small-scale producers. Altogether, apart from advocating for agro-ecology practices, the respective projects capacitated small-scale producers with sales and marketing skills and provided links to producers with traders and markets. This in turn has led to a deepened value chain and livelihood improvements.
4.4.4 Micro Finance
Micro finance is an important tool for ensuring underserved Tanzanians especially the poor, rural population, women and youth are financially included. The Microfinance Policy 2017 guides all the microfinance activities in the Country. Actors operating in the microfinance sub-sector include: banks; specialized microfinance institutions dealing with retail and wholesale lending, respectively; 


Climate Change is coordinated by the Vice President’s Offices in the Mainland and Zanzibar. They are assisted by the National Climate Change Steering and Technical Committees, which provide institutional coordination. The National Environment Management Act, 2004; Zanzibar Environment Management Act, 2015; National Environment Policy, 1997 (currently being reviewed); and Zanzibar Environmental Policy, 2013; provide legal and policy guidelines for both the Mainland and Zanzibar. Both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar have established Carbon Monitoring Centres to measure, report and verify carbon emissions from forests and other sources in an attempt to contribute to global mitigation efforts.
The financing needed to address current climate risks, reduce future impacts and build national resilience has been estimated by the National Climate Change Strategy (2012) to be USD 500 million per year which could rise to USD 1 billion per year from 2030. As such, additional resources may be substantial due to scientific uncertainties and data limitations. 
The FYDP II financing strategy has set a target of mobilizing USD 304 million in additional resources by 2021 and has proposed a number of interventions in order to realize the full potential out of this source as follows: 
i. Establishment of a National Climate Change Financing Mechanism for coordinated and enhanced resources mobilization; 
ii. Mainstreaming of climate change in the development policy and planning process by considering climate change in the economic analysis and budgeting (MAC-MOD and FP); 
iii. Establishing an Environment Unit at the Ministry of Finance and Planning to handle issues related to climate change and the environment; 
iv. Facilitating accreditation of the Ministry of Finance and Planning to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to allow direct access; 
v. Developing proposals to access USD 3 million for GCF readiness and a preparatory support programme; 
vi. Identifying other green financial products and their financing sources; and,
vii. Identifying and monitoring climate change funds mobilized by Non-State Actors (NSAs).
Milestones with regard to climate change issues and financing include: 
(i) Government decisions to accredit the Ministry of Finance and Planning. The process intends to enable the MoFP to be an accredited entity that will be accessing international finances from the GCF, as well as providing technical support to entities that seek funding through the GCF; (ii) Orientation of Ministries technical staff on climate change basics and GCF accreditation; (iii) Technical accreditation training to a small group of MoFP technical staff who will be engaged fully in the process; accreditation of the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) to the Adaptation Fund (AF); and to establish a specific budget code for environment- related spending.
4.5.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries:
The United Republic of Tanzania like many other countries is not immune to natural and technological or man-made hazards, all of which have the potential of disrupting the community, causing casualties, and damaging or destroying public or private property. Examples of potential natural hazards include: floods, drought, cyclones/strong winds, earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, beach erosion, infestations and epidemics. On the other hand, some common technological or man-made disasters are fire outbreaks, road accidents, power failures, environmental degradation and pollution, marine accidents, train accidents, collapse of buildings, oil spills, aircraft accidents, explosions and industrial accidents. 
In addressing these adversities, the country enacted the Disaster Management Act, 2015 that established the Disaster Management Agency and Disaster Management Fund. It also provides legal guidelines for disaster risk management; a coordination mechanism for disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. The Tanzania Government has also conducted a number of initiatives to address hydro-meteorological natural disasters. These include construction and rehabilitation of drainage systems. Also, the government, through TMA and the Ministry of Water and Irrigation, has improved early warning systems that have provided a means to prevent losses from extreme weather and adverse climate change. 
The Government has also conducted a number of climate change adaptation projects to further strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity. Some of the project level interventions include: Developing Core Capacity to Address Climate Change in Productive Coastal Areas project (2012-2018); Implementing Concrete Adaptation Measures to Reduce Vulnerability of Livelihoods and the Economy of Coastal Communities project (2012-2018). 
Adverse climate change has had a devastating effect on the country’s agricultural sector and natural vegetation. There have been reported rainfall variations across national agro-ecological zones with unpredictable trends. The country is watchful of the possible effects of climate change on its food security and agricultural sector development. 
The United Republic of Tanzania facilitates the implementation of the Montreal Protocol (1987) to reduce chemicals that deplete the ozone layer. As part of the commitment, the country has taken various measures including: providing vocational training for refrigerator technicians and appropriate technology for servicing its accessories; monitoring imported chemicals that deplete the ozone layer and the submission of the annual implementation report of the Montreal Protocol; Registration of importers and transporters of chemicals; and providing education on the safe use of gas detectors. As well as training on climate change to 80 officials and 133 representatives of CBOs and NGOs. Table 4.4 shows disaster type and their occurrences during 2015/16 for which data is available.
Table 4.4: Type of Disaster 
Source; National Environment Statistics Report (NESR), 2017. 
Type of Disaster/Year
2015/16
Natural Disasters
457
Technological/ Manmade Disasters
-
Total
457
Zanzibar has established a multi-sectoral coordination mechanism to combat outbreaks of diseases and other emergencies with a special emphasis on the elimination of cholera on the islands. The Second Vice President’s Office (SVPO) chairs the high-level coordination committee and relevant sectors are members. Due to the concerted efforts of various sectors, Zanzibar has managed to control cholera for the last 21 months (the last case was on 24th of July 2017).
4.5.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning:
The United Republic of Tanzania has made deliberate efforts to ensure the integration of climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. A guidelines document for integrating climate change adaptation into national sectoral policies, plans and programmes was developed in 2012. These provide practical guidance on how Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), Local Government Authorities (LGAs), and non-state actors should integrate climate change adaptation into sectoral policies, plans and programmes.
Tanzania, as a signatory to the UNFCCC, has already submitted two national documents providing an initial and updated quantitative assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from some major sectors and activities, and developed plausible climate change scenarios on the potential impacts of projected climate change on some key sectors. Also, the country has submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) in 2015 which is being updated after the ratification of the Paris Agreement in 2018.
Through the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) identification has been made of immediate and urgent climate change adaptation actions that are robust enough to effectively reduce the risks and lead to long-term sustainable development in a changing climate. The document outlined 14 priority projects under agriculture, water, energy, health and forestry sectors. Also, the government is currently preparing a National Adaptation Plan (NAP), a comprehensive approach for addressing the country’s medium and long-term adaptation needs. It will also provide a guide to all government entities and partners interested in supporting the country in adaptation.
4.5.3 Partnerships for improving education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning:
Monitoring environmental outcomes including climate change related ones poses a challenge given the limited capacity the country has in terms of human resources and equipment. One of the ways in which Tanzania strategically deals with this challenge is through forging partnership with the private sector and international partners. One of recent interventions towards that direction is the Weather Station project where Tanzania in collaboration with UNDP is working on strengthening weather, climate and hydrological monitoring capabilities. Case study five provides details of the project.
Case study 5: Weather Stations Project
This project is being implemented at the Dar-es salaam Fire brigade with the support of UNDP. The project focuses on strengthening weather, climate and hydrological monitoring capabilities, early warning systems and availability of information for responding to extreme weather and planning adaptation to climate change. The project is also raising the level of capacity of agencies to monitor, assess and disseminate hydroclimate information for early warning and long-term planning. The project has completed the installation of 36 Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) in different parts of the country. The stations are transmitting weather information on an hourly basis to the Tanzania Meteorological Agency (TMA) server located in Dar es Salaam. The sources of extremes (draughts and floods) are analyzed and communicated to the public, and the target communities are encouraged to undertake appropriate response in line with the early warning information. Under this project, a coordination of emergency responses at national level is also implemented. The project has capitalized on Ruvu and Pangani river basins, where it detects the changes (especially a rise) of water level in those basins and communicates early warning information to communities that are likely to be affected by floods as a result of the increase.
Also, the country has taken on initiatives in integrating climate change in different higher levels of the education curriculum, for instance in undergraduate programmes at the Institute of Rural Development Planning (IRDP) in Dodoma, the Master’s degree programme for Climate Change and Sustainable Development at the University of Dar es Salaam, and the Climate Change programme at the Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology (NM-AIST) in Arusha. Initiatives are underway to integrate climate change issues in primary and secondary schools’ curriculum.
CSOs have been working, through various initiatives, to support government efforts to address climate change challenges. These are further highlighted below in Case study six:
Case study 6: Enhancing Adaptive Capacity
Through FORUM CC and the Climate Action Network (CAN) Tanzania, a number of projects and interventions have been implemented for building adaptive capacity to more than 2,000 small scale farmers, pastoralist and fishermen, LGA officers, youth, women and Faith Based Organizations during 2015 - 2019. Capacity building included training on climate change adaptation and climate finance tracking. Participatory Integrated Climate Services for the Community (PICSCO) has been capacitating small holder farmers, pastoralists and fishermen to make informed decisions in their income generating activities (IGA). FORUM CC also facilitated CSOs engagement in the SDGs and VNR Process, and engaged with Parliamentary Committees on Agriculture, Livestock and Water Management; and Energy and Minerals. HDIECA has been conducting training on climate change issues for women and University students on a continuous basis since 2016.
	4.6 	SDG 16: Peace, Security and Justice
Sustainable development is dependent upon peace, stability, human rights, as well as effective governance and the rule of law. 
The United Republic of Tanzania has a strong institutional framework for delivering on peace, security and justice, spearheaded by Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). Key overseers of this delivery include the Good Governance Unit, Ethics Commission and Prevention and 
Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCB) under the President’s Office. There are also independent government departments such as Tanzania’s Commission for Human Rights established under Article 129 (1) of the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania, as well as designated CSOs championing peace, security and human rights.
In Zanzibar, the President’s Office, Public Service and Good Governance is the overall organ for ensuring the upholding of peace, human rights, good governance and the rule of law. The coordinating organs include the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution, Judiciary, Laws Review Commission, Zanzibar Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes organ, and Department of Good Governance. Zanzibar has also been implementing Legal Sector Reform Programmes and a number of policies and programmes. These include the Legal Aid Policy; Chief Act and its implementation strategy; Leadership Ethics Commission; Anticorruption and Economic Crime and its Strategy; construction of Regional Child Courts; Legal Aid Act, No. 2017; Criminal Act No. 7/2018; Penal Act No. 6/2018; Kadhis Court, No. 9/2017; Evidence Act No.9/2016; Zanzibar Public Leaders Code of Ethics, No 4/2015; the Judiciary Management Act, No. /2018; and the Strengthening Office of the Department of Public Prosecutions. Furthermore, systems that respond to reported violence incidences include the establishment of hospital-based one stop centres (Mkono kwa Mkono Centres), Police Gender and Children’s desks, District Welfare Officers, and District and Shehia-level Protection Committees. This has resulted in a comprehensive, integrated response system for all survivors of violence, as well as the improved identification of, reporting and services delivery.
4.6.1 Promote Peace, Good Governance and Security
The United Republic of Tanzania is committed to ensuring that peace and security is maintained in the country and in the neighbouring countries and beyond. As part of such efforts the country is signatory to the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes region under the auspices of the African Union and the United Nations. The declaration deals with endemic conflicts and persistent insecurity caused by aggravated, illegal trafficking of small arms and light weapons, proliferation of armed groups, organized and transnational crimes, impunity of war crimes, genocides, massive violation of human rights and other policies of exclusion and marginalization, as well as other crimes against humanity. 
The country implements agreements under the Dar es Salaam declaration and is, so far, the most stable country in the region in terms of peace and security. It has at all times been part of the UN/ AU peacekeeping forces in the region and beyond.
The United Republic of Tanzania continues to strengthen its internal security organs by providing training, equipment and exposure. The Police Force has undergone significant reforms, which enabled streamlining of roles. To strengthen the internal security of the practices, known as Community Policing. This has been the focus for response to prevent and counter violent extremism. Community Policing has been instrumental to improving communication with the general public, and the promotion of citizens’ participation in security matters. As a practice, communities are encouraged to form units that can prevent and detect crime. Community Policing arrangements have proved to be a success that has led to crime rates declining by 4.5 percent.
The country has also made significant progress in enhancing governance and democratic institutions. For instance, it has instituted freedom of expression through the enactment of access to the Information Act. It has also licensed a number of private TV and radio stations; newspapers, and other forms of media. About 84 percent are privately owned in the country.
4.6.2 Combating Corruption
The United Republic of Tanzania has been implementing programmes to combat corruption in the country. The reports by local and international private institutions on corruption have shown that the country is faring well in preventing and combating corruption. For example, the Mo Ibrahim good governance reports show the country to have improved good governance by 58.5 percent in 2018 compared to a composite score of 57.5 in 2016. 
The United Republic of Tanzania conducts Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS) on funds allocated for supporting development projects, particularly in the LGAs in order to ensure value for money is achieved. The fight against corruption in Tanzania has started showing very encouraging results. Unwavering political support and commitment by the Fifth Phase Government has taken anti-corruption to greater heights with significant achievements. These are attributed to the country pursuing a policy of Zero Tolerance for Corruption; the implementation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategies and Action Plan (NACSAP III); observance of ratified attendant International Conventions and Declarations, Cooperation with International agencies and authorities for building capacity, exchanging relevant information for completing investigations and support by the public at large. Table 4.5 shows the trend of investigations completed and conviction rates which shows improved efficiency in handling cases in line with good governance practice as well as dispensation of justice. 
Table 4.5: Trend of Investigations Concluded and Conviction Rate 
Source: Household Budget Survey (HBS) 2011/12 and 2017/18.
Item
2015/16
2016/17

Number of investigation files concluded
788
956

Number of files with consent from the Director of Public Prosecution (now the Director of 
the National Office for Prosecution)
229
406
265
Number of convictions
249
159
178
Conviction rate (%)
47.5
40.5
60.1
Public Sector Corruption
The Government of Tanzania has continued to control and combat corruption in the public sector in order to ensure that citizens access appropriate quality basic social services. It has enhanced legal frameworks, and established a specific court under the High Court for handling corruption cases. In 2017, Tanzania scored 36 points in the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) in combating corruption in the public sector compared to 32 points scored in 2016, an improvement by four percentage points (see Figure 4.6). This is the highest score attained for the past decade and is above the average score of 32.02 points for sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, due to intensified efforts by the Government in combating corruption, the country was ranked 103 out of 180 countries in fighting corruption compared to a rank of 116 out of 176 countries in 2016. Furthermore, Tanzania has taken measures to increase transparency, especially in the extractive sector and its public procurement sector. They include a full-fledged e-procurement portal, extractive sector reforms, contract transparency and the establishment of a beneficial ownership register.

Figure 4. 6: Corruption Perception Index (Scores) in the Public Sector 2008 - 2017
CSOs are strongly supporting government efforts in the fight against corruption (Case study seven). 
Case study 7: Civil society interventions on transparency, accountability and representative decision making
Social Accountability Monitoring (SAM) and Public Expenditure Tracking (PETs) systems have been established across various districts of the country, working closely with the local government and communities in ensuring effective implementation of development plans. Through different coalitions and networks, CSOs have been able to identify shortfalls in the budget system and have been providing recommendations to the government which have been taken up for consideration. For example, the Policy Forum, a local CSO produces yearly budgetary position statements, which among other things analyze revenue and allocation trends by the government and provides recommendations for equitable and accountable use of public resources.
CSOs have also been producing reader friendly versions of government documents for public consumption. Wajibu another local CSO develops simplified and user-friendly accountability reports from the country’s oversight institutions, such as the National Audit Office; Prevention and Combating Corruption Bureau (PCCB) and Parliamentary Oversight 
Committee reports. Moreover, CSOs such as Hakirasilimali and the Tanzania Media Foundation have been building capacity for open public contracting in public procurement and the extractive sector through media engagement, multi-stakeholder consultations in collaboration with the Government.
In order to ensure representation of persons with disabilities at the decision-making level, CSOs have been building capacity for young leaders and raising awareness in the community. For example, United Nations Association (UNA) Tanzania through its “Youth Voice” has been working with youth organizations in both the Mainland and Zanzibar to establish and strengthen youth platforms from ward to district level to ensure youth’s active participation in decision making processes. SHIVYAWATA has been working through different organizational partners, the media and direct community engagements on combating harmful practices that deny persons with disabilities rightful opportunities in leadership.

Case study 8: Civil Registration and Vital Statistics System of Zanzibar
A robust and fully-functioning civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) system is fundamental to rights-based inclusive development, good governance and the realization of human rights. It ensures that every citizen is “visible”. 
On April 25, 2016 the first electronic birth certificate was issued and printed in Zanzibar.
In 2019, ZCRSA developed a draft five-year costed plan with the goal of establishing a complete CRVS system and electronically recording all births and vital events in Zanzibar by 2024/25. Since 2016, about 46,623 births have been registered in Zanzibar, with a corresponding number of birth certificates issued.
4.6.3 Legal Identity for All115
Establishing and maintaining appropriate birth and death record systems is part of the broad reforms of institutional functioning in the public sector. Registration of children under five years of age in Mainland Tanzania increased from 12.9 percent in 2012 to 38 percent in 2018. The rate is even higher for Zanzibar where an electronic and modern civil registration system was adopted in 2010 (Case study eight). 
The Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Strategy (CRVS) provides a framework with the main objective of establishing a fully functioning and complete CRVS system over time and in an incremental manner. As a result of the strategy, birth registration has been decentralized in 11 out of 26 regions whereby registration and certification for children aged under five years is done at ward level and in health facilities free of charge. As a result, registration of births has improved significantly contributing to the overall improvement of birth registration for children under five in both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. A review of the Births and Deaths Registration Act is underway; to ensure continued improvement in the rate of birth registration.



5 5. CHAPTER FIVE
MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
	5.1 	Overview
This chapter presents the means of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. It elaborates on how the country is faring in implementing Goal 17 of the SDGs. The chapter also serves to portray the specific needs of the country. Five sections form this section, covering the critical areas of financing, capacity development, data needs, technology and partnerships, which are the key components of Goal 17.
	5.2 	Financing
Reforms in Public Finance Management in recent years has resulted in improved domestic revenue mobilization and tax administration, coupled with streamlined expenditure management to support both the delivery of social services and development projects. However, these efforts are considered insufficient to meet the large financing requirements of implementing the SDGs. Private sector financing will need to be addressed in a comprehensive way in order to capacitate the sector to take a lead in the SDGs implementation. The Government has taken a number of measures to expand scope for current mechanisms of resource mobilization, such as the establishment and strengthening of the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange Market (DSE) and the Unit Trust of Tanzania (UTT), involving credit to the private sector, building a supportive microfinance policy environment and institutional framework; cross-border programmes to enhance trade; trade financing instruments, as well as financial deepening.
In repositioning achieving the SDGs by 2030, the Government has undertaken measures to increase tax and non - tax revenue mobilization and explore innovative means of resource mobilization and financing. These include, but are not limited to, blended finance; corporate bonds; guaranteed local currency bonds; local currency financing, block chain for development; Moon Shots & Puddle Jumps; Agricultural Investment Funds for Development; 
Case study 8: Blended Financing in the Agricultural Value Chain Project
Mwenge Sunflower Oil Company Limited, a privately-owned mediumsized oil mill in Singida region, has been collaborating with Singida District Council, partnering with Government extension officers, to identify and train farmers on proper agronomic activities and the postharvest treatment of sunflower seeds. 
In the financing phase, lasting around seven months, United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) provided financing in the form of a grant and a concessional loan. This unlocked private domestic finance in the form of a commercial loan from a local lender and a loan guarantee from a local financial institution. The project raised a total of $1,165,000 (in addition to a $422,000 equity contribution by the owner).
matching funds; crowd funding; green bonds; blue bonds; diaspora 119
bonds, etc. Proven success stories on innovative financing, such as Norway’s Norfund; Japan’s International Trade Organization (JETRO); Private Agricultural Sector Support (PASS) supported by Denmark; will be scaled up as well.
5.3 	Capacity Development
The SDGs are all about doing things differently. This has an implication on implementation as it creates demand for new thinking. In the critical area of resource mobilization and financing, capacity will need to be created and sustained for accessing innovative sources of financing. Recognizing the importance of project management capacities in conceptualization, planning and the execution of SDGrelated interventions by public bodies, the Government developed a Public Investment Management-Operational Manual (PIM-OM), to serve as guide to Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), Regional Secretariats (RSs) and Local Government Authorities (LGAs) on matters related to Public Investment Management. The manual provides a guide on selecting, implementing and evaluating public investments in a manner that ensures value for money and promotes economic and social wellbeing. In addition to the manual, the Government has been conducting training to central and local government staff on project management in general and on the operationalization of the manual. 
In line with these efforts, the Government, in collaboration with stakeholders, including UNCDF, trained 177 investment committee members from 60 LGAs on public investment management. The Government with support from UNCDF has also provided training on Municipal Investment Finance (MIF) and provided technical guidance to investment committee members and council management teams of four pilot LGAs in the identification of 30 potential revenue-generating infrastructure projects for possible municipal revenue bond issuance. Furthermore, the government has been supporting LGAs with the municipal bond issuance process.
Through its plans to improve the capacity of LGAs to develop and implement investment projects, the Government, in collaboration with stakeholders such as UNCDF, developed manuals for resource mapping and resilience assessments. LGAs and central Government use these manuals as a planning tool in interventions related to climate change and resilience. Also, under LoCAL/Decentralized Climate Finance project (2016–2018), financed by UK Aid investments worth more than $1 million in 35 climate-resilient and adaptation projects have been implemented. These projects involve and engage women and traditional leaders in planning, and will be expanded nationwide to other areas.
	5.4 	Data Needs
Deficiencies in data availability (quantity, quality and real data) has been a major challenge in the production of reports, especially for the SDGs given the greater data requirements compared to its predecessor the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There are now many targets to track and report progress on; for example, SDG 17 has 19 targets and 25 indicators. Monitoring the SDGs calls for a stepped-up capacity in meeting the data requirements and ensuring disaggregation, as well as inclusiveness where all stakeholders can be included in all issues related to data production and data management.
The Government of Tanzania appreciates the importance of quality statistics for informed planning, decision making and tracking national as well as the global agenda such as the SDGs. 


achievement of both national development aspirations and the SDGs that the country will be focusing on in the course of their implementation. Other areas include the diffusion of new technologies; linking generators of innovations and users; and technology-based equipment for reporting on the environment. In this regard, the United Republic of Tanzania seeks to mobilize new partnerships in the areas of international cooperation agreements; international joint programmes; and foreign technology transfer.
	5.6 	Partnerships
The United Republic of Tanzania recognizes the importance of enhancing partnerships with stakeholders such as the private sector, CSOs and the International community, for sustainable development. At policy level, FYDP II for example indicates that over 48 percent of financing required for the implementation of the plan is expected to come from the private sector. Uptake from the private sector on opportunities created by FYDP II, MKUZA III and SDGs is still minimal There is a need thus, to promote a mindset change for the Tanzanian private sector to see SDGs as a business opportunity in themselves. Private sector stakeholders should see themselves as implementing partners, ‘transitioning’ from Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) to Corporate Social Investment (CSI); to invest in development programmes and commit its own resources towards the SDGs.
In order to harness private sector contribution in socio-economic development through investments, the Government has created a conducive environment for private sector involvement in the implementation of development projects through Public Private Partnership (PPP) by putting in place a PPP Policy of 2009, PPP Act, CAP 103, Regulations of 2015 and units responsible for overseeing PPP initiatives. The PPP Act, 2010 was amended by the Public Private Partnership (Amendment) Act, 2014. Furthermore, the Government has trained more than 800 officials from various ministries, independent departments and agencies on PPP concepts and practices. 
The United Republic of Tanzania has several positive attributes that can enable it to attract PPP investments. The attributes include political will, a strong Legal and Institutional framework 123
for PPP arrangement, a peaceful and stable political atmosphere, high economic growth averaging seven percent over the last five years, large endowment of natural resources including wildlife, minerals and forestry, a high demand for investment in the energy sector including oil and gas, electricity generation and distribution projects. Also, agribusiness opportunities embedded with a large and diversified agricultural sector, a well-diversified infrastructural sector which covers the aviation sector, the construction industry including roads, the Standard Gauge Railway line, real estate and the well-developed country-wide ICT backbone infrastructure, which offers wide investment opportunities. A strategic geographical location links the markets of the tripartite EAC, SADC and COMESA, as well as AFCFTA regional economic groupings to the rest of the world, and a growing population which offers a labour force and markets for industrial output.
Zanzibar recognizes that the greater involvement of public sector, non-state actors and private sector participation through PPPs in providing efficient, reliable and affordable socio-economic services is fundamental to achieving broad-based growth, sustainable poverty reduction and the SDGs. The creation and operation of an appropriate enabling environment to guide public and private actors, development partners and other stakeholders will go a long way to contributing towards the achievement of the SDGs. Strengthening partnerships among ZPC, NSAs, OCGS, MDAs, academia, civil societies, private sectors and other stakeholders is also key to delivering the SDGs.
The scope for participation of the private sector in the SDGs implementation has been greatly widened and enhanced. Private sector apex bodies, the Tanzania National Business Council (TNBC) and Zanzibar Business Council (ZBC) have been strengthened to lead strategic dialogue between the government and private sector. Tanzania has also prepared a Blueprint for Regulatory Reforms to Improve the Business Environment. The Blueprint provides Tanzania with a framework for enabling a holistic review of the business enabling environment in order to improve the business climate. Through this and various other implemented reforms on the business environment and investment climate, the private sector is poised to lead efforts in catalysing economic growth, as well as in wealth and employment creation. Even at this stage, the private sector is playing an important role with regard to the SDGs implementation as illustrated in some of the private sector interventions that have been showcased in this document. 



66. CHAPTER SIX
NEXT STEPS
This Chapter provides the way forward. It presents the key actions required and main conclusion.
	6.1 	Key Actions
In order to be on the right trajectory for achieving the SDGs, the United Republic of Tanzania will implement the following:
(i) Heighten awareness creation and capacity building to SDG implementers;
(ii) Continue mainstreaming of the SDGs in the successor of the FYDP III and MKUZA IV;
(iii) Sustaining mainstreaming of the SDG targets and indicators in sectoral performance; 
(iv) Conducting a needs assessment and costing for delivering on the SDGs; and
(v) Preparing and finalizing an engagement framework between Government, and CSOs and the private sector on the SDGs.
	6.2 	Conclusion
The United Republic of Tanzania decided to participate in the VNR, 2019 at the High- Level Political Forum (HLPF) as part of its commitment to engage in the global process of sharing knowledge; experiences, challenges and best practices in the implementation of the SDGs. This first Review for our nation, captures the progress towards the implementation of the SDGs during the past three years. Going forward, the country will continue mobilizing and sustaining society’s awareness and participation; enhancing institutional setups and policy frameworks for sustainable development; foster cooperation between the Government and the private sector, CSOs, and the international community in SDG implementation; as well as strengthening national statistical capacity; and mobilization of resources, especially innovative financing, particularly from the private sector for SDG implementation. 
