


OpeNiNg StAteMeNt
For nearly 10 years, Togo has genuinely embarked on a process of structural and macroeconomic policy reforms in order to achieve virtuous governance and put public finances	back	to	order.	The	move	further	aims	at ensuring inclusive and widespread growth, whilst offering opportunities for all.
This process, which stemmed from our strategic choices we have made, and which seeks to ensure greater consistency of our policies and institutional structures, has made it possible at all levels, both at local and central, to conduct prospective	reflections	on	the	strategic	issues	of sustainable development, with particular reference to economic, social (health, education, decent work, etc.), and environmental challenges facing our country.
This yearis High-Level Forum on Sustainable Development (FPHN), which seeks to: 
\0xB4eradicate poverty and promote prosperity in a changing world\0xAA, offers Togo the opportunity to renew its commitment to the implementation of the SDGs. Togo would seize the opportunity of the forum to share its experiences and, at the same time, learn from other success stories with a view to improving its development framework, all	to	the	benefit	of	its	people.	  
Here	are	some	figures	and	facts	to	clearly	evidence our achievements in Togo:
\0xEF average economic growth rate of 5% per annum;
\0xEF current estimated youth-dominated population of over 7 million, with 60% aged below 25 years,
\0xEF average annual population growth rate of 2.84%,
\0xEF Unemployment rate was 6.5 in 2011 against 3.4 in 2016 (SCAPE 2017 and QUIBB 2017). 
\0xEF poverty incidence dropped from 61.7% in 2006 to 55.1% in 2015.
Significant social progress recorded :
Health
HIV prevalence in Togo stands at 2.5%. Commitment	to	fighting	HIV/AIDS	allowed	the acceleration and stepping up of prevention and screening campaigns on the one hand, and the provision of care and support to PLHIV on the other hand. This resulted in the following achievements, which are worth noting :
\0xEF 65% of PLHIV know their status as against an average of 36% in West and Central Africa ;
\0xEF 51% of people living with HIV have access to antiretroviral therapy compared to an average of 28% in West and Central Africa;
\0xEF Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) national coverage rate is at 92%. (according to National AIDS Program-PNLS).
Furthermore, Togo develops a social coverage and health care provision scheme, which now covers all civil servants and will be gradually extended to other segments of the population (objective n\0x221E3).
Education
Issues of inequality and social exclusion can best be addressed through education and training. Therefore, as far as we are concerned, education is a prerequisite for all the 17 MDGs.  To that end, Togo adopted free schooling since 2008, allowing vulnerable families to enrol their children, especially girls. Primary enrolment rate stands at 125.1% against an average rate of 103.7% in the sub region. Having understood that the school canteen programs contribute in addressing two challenges, namely in improving nutrition rate among schoolchildren and their retention in the school curriculum, the government with the assistance of some partners, such as UNICEF and the World Bank, designs and extends canteens to primary schools. This contributes to the achievement of Goal N\0x221E 2 relating to the elimination of hunger as well as objective n\0x221E5 (Gender equality).
In Togo, human development rate reached 49 in 2016.
Significant economic achievements :
The economy
In recent years, Togo has sustained economic growth through far-reaching public and private investments and this is showing signs of acceleration of around 5% per year. Accelerated growth has increased the real wealth of our compatriots by an average 2% per annum. As a result, life expectancy rose from 56.6 in 2009 to 60.1 in 2015.
Investment in port, airport and road infrastructures and equipment played a pivotal role in supporting economic growth, which picked up steadily. The aim of the ongoing modernization in these sectors is to ensure that Togo becomes more attractive to foreign investors.	Currently,	Togo	is	the	3rd	financial	centre in the sub region after Senegal and C\0xD9te diIvoire and we intend to do much better in the	coming	five	years.	Togo	seeks	to	improve	significantly	its	business	climate	and	make	the	country more competitive.
Yes, major challenges are yet to be addressed. These include the need to successfully identify and	define	key	success	factors	to	implement	the	SDGs in inclusive projects ?
In preparing its National Development Plan (NDP) for 2018-2022, Togo targeted the structural transformation of its economy, as well as a strong, sustainable, resilient, and inclusive growth. Efforts are underway to create decent jobs for all with a view to improving social welfare. The aim being to sustain and enhance the gains accruing from the implementation of the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Job Promotion (SCAPE for 2013-2017) 
The eradication of poverty in all its forms is therefore at the heart of all our policies. The need to eradicate poverty, to address inequality and achieve social exclusion in our country form part of the NDP priority areas. This is why efforts must be pursued in improving existing policies, develop reliable statistical data and strengthen our analytical and monitoring evaluation capacities. These policies contribute in improving livelihoods and access to basic social services for the most vulnerable populations, including young people, women, the disabled, PLHIVs, and the elderly.
The Community Development Emergency Program (PUDC), which is actually the backbone of a number of inclusive projects, remains one of the key components of the NDP. Judging	from	the	countryis	poverty	profile,	rural areas are the most vulnerable. The aim of the PUDC is to intensify socio-collective and economic infrastructures in areas with little or no access to safe drinking water, energy, schools, health centres, rural feeder roads, markets, etc., so as to ensure that no one is left behind.
Improving living conditions requires the creation of wealth which itself requires structural transformation of the economy. In order to sustain this transformation there is need to improve productivity and competitiveness in the growth generating sectors, notably agriculture (41.70% of GDP) with a view to achieving food security, promoting industrialization, through value chains with high added value, to creating jobs for the	youth	and	fostering	the	financial	inclusion	of	women. It is in that connection that changes were introduced in the telecommunications sector so to make sure that ICTs becomes an essential lever of economic growth.
4- Environment and disaster reduction
In order to implement the Agenda 2030, participatory efforts are underway to ensure environmental protection and to promote the green and blue economies (Objective 14) with a view to reducing the prevalence of poverty In Togo.
There is a dynamic synergy in implementing the MDGs in an integrated fashion, the aim being to make sure that no one is left behind. The move helps in consolidating national unity and democracy, whilst promoting the ideals of peace, freedom, justice, social progress, and national solidarity for the sole purpose of bringing everyone on board the train of development.
eXeCUtiVe SUMMARY
Following the adoption in September 2015 of the Development Programme for 2030 incorporating the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the international community, Togo	has	been	firmly	committed	and	taken	ownership of these Goals in the formulation of its National Development Plan (NDP) for the period 2018-2022.
In this respect, the country had voluntarily submitted itself to peer review during the First High-Level Political Forum held, which enabled it to share its experiences in the integration of the SDGs in its national development planning instruments. The Togolese Government would like to seize this opportunity to extend its gratitude to all the partners that supported it in its	fight	against	poverty.
This Togo Country Report, drawn up following the theme adopted by the United Nations for this year 2017, i.e. \0xECeradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world, hinges on: (i) its preparation process and the general framework for the integration of the SDGs into its national planning instruments; (ii) efforts deployed towards the implementation of SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14, 17 selected by the United Nations for the current review and (iii) major challenges and prospects.
Report preparation process 
The report preparation process was participatory and inclusive to the extent that all development stakeholders were consulted and involved in its formulation. The process was carried out in two main steps, namely (i) the preparation and collection of information, and (ii) the drafting and validation of the report.
 
General framework for the integration of the sustainable development goals in the planning instruments 
The general framework for the integration of the SDGs in the national planning instruments comprised	two	essential	aspects.	The	first	relates to the SDG ownership process, while the second concerns their proper integration in the national planning instruments.
The process for the appropriation of the Sustainable Development Goals became effective in Togo thanks to the several awareness and outreach activities dedicated to these goals in order to ensure a shared vision at all levels. These activities involved training and sensitization workshops carried out at the national and regional levels, as well as	in	different	localities,	for	the	benefit	of	development stakeholders to enable them to contribute and take full ownership of the issues at stake in terms of sustainable development and the formulation process for the 2018-2022 National Development Plan, which constitutes the reference framework for development policies	over	the	next	five	years.
In taking into account the sustainable development goals in the 2018-2022 National Development Plan (NDP), Togo proceeded with the integration of these goals based on their associated targets.
At the sectorial level, certain sectorial policies or plans have been updated or are currently being updated	to	reflect	the	sustainable	development	goals based on their associated targets.
Efforts deployed towards the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17 
In Togo, efforts geared towards eradicating poverty in all its forms include improving the living conditions of the poor in general and the vulnerable persons in particular. The poverty rate dropped from 61.7% in 2006 to 58.7% in 2011 and 55.1% in 2015, a decrease of 6.6 points. The national rate of access to potable water increased from 50% in 2015 to 53.9% in 2016. This rate increased in rural areas over the same period from 55.3% to 64.4%.
The rate of access to electricity in 2016 was estimated at 35.63% at the national level and 6% in the rural areas.
With the prospect of ending hunger, achieving food security and promoting sustainable agriculture, the Government has since 2008 been deploying major initiatives in terms of investment and organization of stakeholders. These efforts have helped increase the agricultural sectoris contribution to the national GDP, which rose from 40% in 2015 to 41.9% in 2016. Since 2009, the country has recorded a surplus of grains and tubers thereby allowing it to export said products across the sub-region and thus contribute to improving the incomes of small-scale producers.
Efforts deployed towards ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages have begun to bear fruit. They include the institution of a functional, accessible and equitable healthcare system that acknowledges the right to health for all, especially for the most vulnerable persons. The maternal mortality rate stood at 400 per 100,000 live births in 2015. The percentage of rural villages with a community health worker trained on integrated healthcare treatment for illnesses such as diarrhoea, pneumonia and malaria was estimated at 45.4% in 2015.
Via the implementation of its National Equity and Gender Equality Policy (PNEEG), the Government aims to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. Various actions undertaken have helped improve the educational enrolment of girls, which has increased from 93.5% in 2015 to 94.2% in 2016; the percentage of illiterate women stood at 49% in 2015, while the percentage of female parliamentarians (increased from 11.1% in 2012 to 18.7% in 2017) and that of female ministers (increased from 16.7% in 2016 to 21.7% in 2017).
In order to build a resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization that is	beneficial	to	all	and	foster	innovation,	significant	efforts	have	been	made	in	terms	of investments in road, port and airport infrastructure as well as promotion of the digital economy. Whereby the rehabilitation of the Lom\0xC8- Burkina Faso border corridor and the main cross-throughways. The Gnassingb\0xC8 Eyadema International Airport in Lom\0xC8 was also rehabilitated and upgraded to international standards in 2016 with the construction of a new terminal with the capacity to accommodate more than 1.5 million passengers per year. This	helped	to	increase	traffic	from	589,416	in 2013 to 758,000 passengers in 2016. The construction of a third pier and a dock equipped with the state-of-the-art equipment helped to boost the capacity of the Autonomous Port of Lom\0xC8. The volume of containers handled at the Port of Lom\0xC8 was estimated at 905,700 in 2015. Trade facilitation in Togo has changed significantly	with	the	implementation	of	the	Single Window for Foreign Trade (GUCE). 
The	construction	of	a	250	km	fibre	optic	network (e-government) has helped to connect more	than	560	office	buildings	and	more	than	10,000 civil servants for sake of modernization of	public	administration	and	simplification	of	administrative procedures. The domains for the installation of the industrial sites of Ad\0xC8tikop\0xC8 and Kpom\0xC8 have been secured and their master plans completed.
In order to ensure the conservation and sustainable exploitation of the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, the Government established in 2014 the National Agency for State Action on Maritime Matters	(ONAEM)	which	is	specifically	aimed	at safeguarding maritime interests, effectively combatting insecurity in its maritime spaces and developing a blue economy. In this respect, from 10 to 15 October 2016, Togo hosted the Summit of the African Union (AU) on Maritime Safety, Security and Development in Africa which culminated in the signing of the Pan-African Charter on Maritime Transport. In addition, Togo pledged at the International Conference themed \0xECOur Ocean, Our Future to achieve two main targets towards the elimination, by 2022, of illegal, unreported and unregulated	fishing	activities	(\0xECINN	fishing)	in maritime areas under its jurisdiction; and by 2025, cases of pollution arising from oil dumping	and	effluent	discharges	into	the	sea.	With respect to coastal protection, Togo is in the process of implementing a programme for integrated coastal management and protection against coastal erosion. The encroachment on the lineal seashore protected against coastal erosion has increased from 20,820 m in 2014 to 21,170 in 2015, i.e. an increase of 350 meters.
In a bid to revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development and strengthen the means of implementation of this partnership, Togo has embarked on the implementation of reforms geared at mobilizing both internal and external resources for economic emergence.
These structural reforms have led to the establishment of the Togolese Revenue Office	(OTR),	a	fusion	of	the	customs	and	tax	authorities, which has helped increase State revenues by 24.1% between 2014 and 2016. While external resources and budgetary support have increased by 43% over the same period.
Moreover, Togo is equally striving to attract more public or private foreign partners in the implementation of reforms required to improve the business environment, preserve the gains of sound macroeconomic management under the framework of the three-year programme with the IMF and conclude the threshold programme in negotiation with the Millennium Challenge Corporation. Since 2016, the Government is striving to sustain this momentum notably through sanitized land management, improved supply of information and communications technology (ICT), promotion of investments in the water and energy sectors, fast-track establishment of an appropriate legal framework for public-private partnerships and the promotion of active diplomacy for development purposes.
Major Challenges and the way forward 
In a bid to ensure the successful implementation of	the	SDGs,	Togo	is	firmly	committed	to	meeting some major challenges in terms of statistical development, operationalization of the decentralization process and strengthening of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms with a view to ensuring the establishment of planning, monitoring and evaluation structures within the sectorial ministries.
In perspective, Togo is striving to strengthen its statistical output through the operationalization of the National Institute of Statistics and Economic & Demographic Studies, the development of a national mechanism for evaluating	indicators,	the	finalization	of	the	National Development Plan incorporating the SDGs and the mobilization of resources to finance	its	implementation.
i - inTrODuCTiOn 
In	July	2016,	Togo	presented	its	first	report	in	New York to the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development among 22 volunteer countries. It served as a platform for the sharing and exchange of experiences with other countries present, on the practical arrangements for internalisation of the SDGs.
The 2017 edition  of the High-Level 
Political Forum is focused on the theme \0xECeradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world, and notably on the following SDGs: SDG 1, end poverty in all its forms and everywhere in the world ; SDG 2, end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture; SDG 3, ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages; SDG 5, achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; SDG 9, build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; SDG 14, conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development and, SDG 17, revitalize global partnership for sustainable development and strengthen the means of implementation of this partnership.
This Togo report presented in 2017 builds on best practices for implementation of the sustainable development goals.
As part of the formulation of the National Development Plan (NDP 2018-2022), the challenges remaining to be addressed based on the review of the strategy for accelerated growth and employment promotion (SCAPE 
2013-2017) and the results of the prioritization of SDG targets at the central and regional levels, are the constitutive elements of this diagnosis which is geared at ensuring the integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development and governance in all its forms.

ii - METHODOLOGY anD rEPOrT PrEParaTiOn PrOCESS 
The drafting of the report was carried out in two main steps : (i) the preparation and collection of information ; (Ii) drafting and validation of report. 2.1- preparation and Collection of information
This step helped to identify and mobilize the sustainable development stakeholders, within the framework of the information collection and consultation exercise and in accordance with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Togo. It further enabled the key stakeholders to develop and adopt the relevant concept note, terms	of	reference	and	timetable.	It	finally	facilitated the mobilization of resources for the funding of certain activities related to the production of the report.
The preparation and collection process involved several activities:  
\0xEF A meeting for the exchange and sharing of information with all stakeholders (central and decentralized administration, civil society, private sector, development partners), was held on 7 April, 2017. It served to explain the underlying mechanism behind the High-Level Political Forum and to present the scope of the report and its formulation process. 
\0xEF An information collection questionnaire, developed by the technical team in charge of the drafting of report, was validated by all the stakeholders. 
\0xEF Specific	contributions	were	sought	from	stakeholders	susceptible	of	influencing	the	achievement of the SDGs under review.
\0xEF The collection, compilation, analysis and  synthesis of information provided by stakeholders took place from 11 April to 22 May 2017. The processing of information gathered from the collected questionnaires was used to create a database for drafting of the report.
2.2- Drafting and Validation of the Report 
The general framework proposed by the ECOSOC and the database obtained after the collection phase served as benchmarks for drafting of the report. To this effect, an editorial team proceeded with the preparation of the draft report from 23 to 27 May 2017, which was subject to a national validation workshop held from 8 to 9 June 2017. The workshop enabled the	stakeholders	to	collectively	review	and	finetune the content of the report, as well as to convey their adherence thereon. The observations, amendments and recommendations arising from the workshop were incorporated into the document	to	enrich	its	content.	The	final	version	thus obtained was submitted to the Government for adoption.
iii - GEnEraL FraMEWOrK FOr THE inTEGraTiOn OF SDGS in THE PLanninG inSTruMEnTS
3.1- process for the Ownership of Sustainable Development goals
The process for the appropriation of the sustainable development goals is now effective in Togo, following efforts initiated in 2013 within the framework of the formulation of the 2030 Agenda at global level. Since September 2015, this appropriation process had gained another boost, thanks to the authoritiesi decision to implement a National Development Plan geared at fasttracking the implementation of the SDGs. To this end, several awareness and outreach activities dedicated to these goals have been organized at	all	levels.	Many	of	the	executive	officers	of	the central and regional administrations have benefited	from	these	information	and	awareness	workshops, including stakeholders from the civil society and the private sector, as well as the	technical	and	financial	partners	of	Togo.	In	addition,	awareness	campaigns	specifically	targeting the Togolese youth have been organized throughout the territory.
In order not to leave anyone behind and in a bid to meet the requirement for concerted governance, a study was conducted to analyse and categorise the various stakeholders (individuals or entities that may affect or be affected by the implementation of any policy, strategy, programme or project whatsoever). The purpose of this study was to target the obvious interest of the respective stakeholders vis-\0x2021-vis the themes covered by the sustainable development	goals	and	to	assess	their	influence	on these themes.
The stakeholder analysis was performed through a systematic process involving the collection and processing of data provided by the respective stakeholders, and thus enabling to	identify	and	determine	from	each	profile,	the role they can play in the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development policies and strategies oriented towards the SDGs. This process also helped to identify their expectations, notably in terms of development issues and challenges, and to reflect	on	strategies	and	actions	that	will	meet	these expectations. 
Based on this analysis, four categories were identified	:	(i)	strategic	stakeholders	who	are	required to be properly handled and whose strong involvement in all the processes is required for the successful achievement of the goals	;	(ii)	stakeholders	who	need	to	be	satisfied	and who deserve to be paid special attention as they may be of harmful nature when they feel neglected ; (iii) stakeholders who need to be informed as they are often those who inject the necessary skills and/or dynamism required to boost the process and (iv) stakeholders who need to be controlled and who appear seemingly less important than others because of their cautious stance towards the development process.
On the basis of this categorization, the content of the various information and awareness presentations were prepared focusing on the appropriate key messages adapted to the respective target groups. In this sense, the trainings on systemic sustainability analysis tools, initiated since the adoption of the SDGs, continued to be dispensed at the central and regional	levels,	for	the	benefit	of	the	greatest	number of stakeholders; with emphasis on integration of the SDGs in national and regional planning instruments.
In order to strengthen leadership for the implementation of the SDGs, a government seminar was organized from 16 to 18 May 2017, with the support of UNDESA and UNDP, on the theme :
\0xECTransforming governance and public administration in Togo towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development. 
The objective of this government seminar was to discuss on the basis for transformational governance towards the achievement of the SDGs in Togo, to identify factors impeding such transformational processes and to pave way for greater appropriation of the significance of transformational leadership. The seminar brought together members of the Government, Cabinet Directors and General Secretaries from the ministries and institutions of the Republic, including other Senior State Officials as well as leaders of the civil society and the private sector.
Similarly, in order to enable the parliamentarians to better perform their role within the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and be more effective in controlling Government action, a session on the appropriation of the SDGs and the process for preparation of voluntary reports to be presented to the High-Level Political Forum was held on 24 May 2017, at the headquarters of the National Assembly. The staff of the parliamentary administration also took part in this meeting.
Within the framework of the World Ocean Conference, scheduled to hold at the UN Headquarters in New York from 5 to 9 June 2017, an information awareness meeting was held on 24 May 24 in Lom\0xC8, on partnering for the implementation of the SDG14 targets. This meeting brought together fishermen and communities in the coastal area and served as a platform for the exchange and sharing of knowledge and information on the marine and coastal environment in Togo.
The SDG ownership process also involved consultation platforms, notably the interministerial committee expanded to institutions of the Republic and the civil society organizations, on the National Capacity Building and State Modernization Programme for Sustainable Development (PNRCME-DD) and that of the State Action on Maritime Matters.
Sensitization within the ministries through cabinet meetings and weekly management meetings also served as avenues for transmission of the message conveyed by the 2030 Development Agenda incorporating the SDGs.
The civil society has been active in this process through the dissemination of monthly communal circulars (on one SDG and its associated targets each month), the organization of national publicity caravans on the SDGs, art competitions on the SDGs, consultation frameworks, debates and fora.
3.2- process for the integration of sustainable development goals in national frameworks
In taking into account the sustainable development goals in its National Development Plan (2018-2022 NDP), Togo proceeded with the integration of these goals based on their associated targets.
The SDG target prioritization grid (TPG) developed by the Chair of the Eco-Board at the University of Quebec in Chicoutimi served as tools for this exercise. It helped to adapt the international framework to different national contexts.
The TPG helped to collectively determine, among the 169 targets, which targets should be treated as a priority in a country or region based on the order of importance of the target and its expected performance. This exercise conducted at the national level and within the five regions of the country, enabled to retain 60 urgent priority targets to be taken into account in the NDP.
The analysis of the 60 prioritized targets, in relation to other priorities including those of the social project of the Head of State translated into government policy, the SCAPE challenges remaining to be addressed as highlighted in the assessment conducted, the priorities of the 2063 Agenda of the AU and the 2020 vision of ECOWAS, helped to map out the priorities to be considered in the NDP.
The priorities so-determined were grouped according to the strategic goals and themes they address in view of their alignment with the strategic orientations of the countryis 2030 vision. This grouping helped identify five (5) strategic axes for the NDP : (i) improve the well-being of the people and enable them to fulfil their potential ; (ii) improve the productivity and competitiveness of the growth sectors ; (iii) strengthen infrastructure that supports growth; (iv) ensure sustainable management of the territory, environment and living conditions, and (v) strengthen governance and consolidate peace. 
After the formulation of this strategic framework, an analysis of sectoral contributions was carried out through a participatory approach, to contextualize the urgent targets and identify priority actions to be considered in the NDP.
At the sectorial level, certain sectorial policies or plans have been updated to reflect the sustainable development goals according to their associated targets. The National Health Development Plan (PNDS) has been updated for the period 2017-2021, the Agricultural Policy for the period 20162030 has been adopted and the National Programme for Agricultural Investment and Food & Nutritional Security (PNIASAN) for the period 2017-2025 is currently being updated as well as the National Water and Sanitation Policy (NAEP) for the period 2017-2030 and the National Action Plan for the Water and Sanitation Sector (PANSEA) for the period 2017-2021.
3.3- integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development
The Togolese National Development Plan (2018-2022) aims to structurally transform the economy to ensure a strong, durable, resilient and inclusive growth that is susceptible of generating decent jobs for all and that will induce improved social well-being. To this end, it is relying on a certain number of pillars that will ultimately enable it to achieve this goal.
The	first	pillar	is	improving	the	quality	of	human resources which is a key factor of development. Said improvement shall be translated into practice by access to basic quality social services and redistributive systems to significantly	reduce	poverty	and	inequality.	This pillar is taken into account is Axis 1 of the NDP that addresses themes relating to the social dimension of sustainable development. 
The second pillar is accelerating the structural transformation of the economy by improving the productivity and competitiveness of growth sectors, notably the promotion of agriculture and industrialization to boost growth, create jobs and improve the standard of living of the people.	This	pillar	is	reflected	in	Axis	2	of	the	NDP that deals with prosperity related aspects, notably the economic dimension of sustainable development.
The third pillar is intensifying investments in economic infrastructure which includes goals targeting the preservation of the environment and promotion of a green economy. This pillar capitalizes on all actions that support economic growth and also contribute to the economic dimension of sustainable development.
The fourth pillar is strengthening the sustainable management	of	the	living	environment,	the	fight	against climate change, the establishment of conditions that foster green and blue economies. This	pillar	is	reflected	in	Axis	4	of	the	NDP	which, beyond other aspects taken into account, focuses on the environmental dimension.
The	fifth	pillar	is	strengthening	national	unity	and consolidating democracy by promoting the ideals of peace, freedom, justice, social progress and	national	solidarity.	This	pillar	is	reflected	in	Axis 5 of the NDP that capitalizes all actions relating to governance, which is a cross-cutting dimension.
An analysis of the NDP axes portrays that the Plan addresses the three dimensions of sustainable development: social inclusion, economic	efficiency	and	environmental	sustainability. These three dimensions are built on the bedrock of governance which is a crosscutting dimension.
Consideration of the 17 sustainable development goals is a testimony of the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development in the NDP.
By means of the Sustainable Development Analysis Grid (GADD), which permits to determine gaps in the integration of any of the dimensions of sustainable development, an alignment of the various sectoral policies shall be effected in line with the NDP. 
3.4- institutional mechanisms
As part of the strategy for accelerated growth and employment promotion (SCAPE), Togo has established since 2010 an Institutional mechanism for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of development policies (DIPD) geared at the national coordination of the different levels of monitoring and evaluation of development policies and ensuring accountability vis-\0x2021-vis the population. This institutional	mechanism	shall	reflect	the	effective leadership of the Government and set out the conditions for greater synergy of actions and dynamic partnership with the donor agencies, private sector and civil society taking into account the realities of decentralization and devolution.
The sessions of the National Steering Committee on Development Policies (CNPPD) which is the supreme body of this mechanism and chaired by the Prime Minister, have in the framework of the SCAPE review, initiated a public accountability exercise during which an account of the annual balance sheet of the development process is presented by the Government to its partners, notably the civil society, the private sector, the cooperation partners and the development partners. During these committee sessions, the statements of the four different groups of stakeholders mentioned above constitute one of the highlights of this high-level dialogue on development policies in the country. They influence	the	conduct	of	reforms	and	help	to	strengthen national consensus on key economic, social, environmental and institutional issues.
However, an analysis of the functioning of the various organs of this mechanism reveals that apart from the regional and local committees that are yet to be established, all the other organs, though already established, operate at different paces and therefore need to be reinvigorated. Part of the solution to this problem lies in addressing the general issue of human capacity (staffing	and	inadequate	training),	which	is	the	reason for the establishment of  the National Capacity Building and State Modernization Programme for Sustainable Development, placed under the supervision of the Prime Minister. This programme, which is the reference framework for the coordination of support towards addressing the issue capacity, is aimed at promoting inclusive governance and contributing to the achievement of the SDGs through	actions	hinging	on	the	five	(5)	following	components : (i) economic and environmental governance ; (ii) social governance, employment and grassroots development; (iii) judicial governance, peace, democracy and rule of law ; (iv) administrative and local governance ; (v) modernization of State services and promotion of information and communications technology.
The DIPDis experience at the central level and its pilot experience in the framework of the participatory monitoring at the regional and local levels call for a review of the mechanism in view of a more effective monitoring of the NDP. The latter shall maintain the participatory approach already experimented for the SCAPE and the formulation of the NDP. There would be need however to address challenges relating to (i) rationalization of consultative and monitoring bodies, especially at the regional level, (ii) mobilization	of	financial	resources	to	support	structures in place and (iii) motivation for the facilitation of the activities of these bodies. 
It should be noted that a unit has already been established at the Presidency of the Republic, which is in charge of monitoring sustainable development and international agreements and determining the broad guidelines for matters relating to development.
- FOCuS On THE iMPLEMEnTaTiOn OF SuSTainabLE DEVELOPMEnT GOaLS : 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 anD 17

4.1- SDg1: end poverty in all its forms everywhere
Improvement on the living conditions of the poor and of the vulnerable groups in particular, is at the heart of poverty alleviation and social protection strategies focused on the extension of contributory and non-contributory schemes in	national	solidarity	for	the	benefit	of	the	most	disadvantaged. 
According to QUIBB survey, incidence of poverty has moved from 58.7% in 2011 to 55.1% in 2015, representing a reduction of 3.6 percentage points translating into an increment in taxable revenues for economic development with an annual growth rate of 5% in average between 2011 and 2015. Extreme poverty reached 28.7% in 2015, a slight decrease on the 30.4% recorded in 2011. It is however, worth noting that poverty remains high in rural areas (68.9%) and that extreme poverty has increased in Lom\0xC8; moving from 4.6% in 2011 to 13.7% in 2015. 
Concerning contributory social protection scheme which is one of the essentials in human capital development, the Government has established a health insurance scheme, managed by the National Health Insurance Institute, Institut National diAssurance Maladie, (INAM). The institute offers health insurance services to public sector workers including the central government administration, local authorities, state institutions with autonomous budgets, and public sector pensioners. 
Five percent (5%) of the adult population benefits	from	contributory	social	insurance	scheme and 5% of families with children receives family allowance. Concerning social security for pensioners, 13% of those above 60 receives retirement pay from the Pension Fund of Togo or from the National Social Security Fund. For health insurance, about 6% of the population is covered of which 4% is under the INAM. The social protection noncontributory aspect is essentially composed of social security programmes, targeting the poor and vulnerable groups. the programme covers: (i) monetary transfers, (ii) school feeding programmes, nutritional supplement and food aid, (iii) creation of temporary labour intensive jobs through the Department of Public Works, and (iv) service charge exemptions such as subsidies in health and education service. 
In this perspective, the Government of Togo has put in place several initiatives including the Community and Social Development Programme (PDC Plus), Grassroots Development Support Programmes (PRADEB), National Multifunctional Platforms Development Programmes (PN-PTFM), Interest Groups Economic Activities Support Programmes (PSAEG) and the National Fund for Inclusive Financing (FNFI). All these programmes are aimed at improving the living conditions of the vulnerable groups (women and children) in a sustainable manner by promoting productive opportunity potentials through income generating activities (AGR) and the	enhancement	of	access	to	financing	by	grassroots communities.  
In terms of promoting the productive capacities and revenues for women for instance, the National Fund for Inclusive Financing (FNFI) has	reached	out	to	a	total	of	715,712	beneficiaries	from 2014 to 2016. The Monetary Transfer initiative	recorded	28,846	beneficiaries	over	the same period, in 217 most deprived villages in the Kara and the Savannah regions. The monetary transfer targeted children from 0 to 24 months and from 25 to 59 months with severe malnutrition as well as pregnant women from 3 months onwards. A project impact assessment of the monetary transfer pilot project shows that	there	has	been	a	significant	increase	in	the	number of live birth and postnatal follow-up indicators	among	the	beneficiaries.		
With respect to access to water services, the Government has deployed considerable resources for the construction of water treatment facilities. In rural areas, the rate of access to potable water has increased from 55.3% in 2015 to 64.4% in 2016, representing a gain of 
9.1 percentage points. For semi urban areas, this rate moved from 49.3% to 46.4% over the same period. Urban areas recorded 52% access rate in 2016 as compared to 50% in 2015. Investment in water infrastructure in these three areas has enhanced access to potable water moving from 50% in 2015 to 53% in 2016.
Since 2015, the water sub sector in urban areas has experienced an institutional reform leading to the signing of concession and lease agreements between the Soci\0xC8t\0xC8 de patrimoine Eau (SP-EAU) and the Soci\0xC8t\0xC8 togolaise des eaux (TdE).  As part of this reform, the Government conducted a study on water tariffs in urban centres.	The	findings	of	this	study	would	inform	effective investment strategies in the sector with the participation of the private sector. 
Sanitation was not left unattended to. The number of households using improved latrines nationwide	has	increased.	However,	figures	to	this effect have decreased in rural and semiurban areas moving from 35.1% in 2011 to 29.9% in 2015. Nevertheless, the percentage of households responding to natureis call in the open has decreased from 2011 to 2015 moving from 46.9% to 42.7%, according to QUIBB survey.  Concerning rainwater harvesting and treatment, only the national capital and the 5 regional capitals have in place a plan thereof. It is worth noting that over the last ten years, the country	has	significantly	invested	in	rainwater	harvesting and drainage projects leading to a considerable	reduction	in	flood	incidents	in	Lom\0xC8 and other cities across the country.  
In order to increase climate change resilience among vulnerable groups, the Government has put in place several initiatives leading to the establishment of public policies and concrete measure that enable the people to anticipate and manage climate chocks, and protect lives. 
Specific	interventions	for	the	vulnerable	groups,	through the National Solidarity Agencies (ASN) were mainly: emergency supply of necessities and non-necessities, and medical care to 11,488 disaster victims in the capital, the Maritime, Plateau and Savannah Regions; the supply of school kit to 5,730 most vulnerable pupils out	of	6000	identified	throughout	the	country (130	beneficiaries	on	average	per	district)	
In the quest for improving and coordinating response activities during natural disasters, which were previously done by several stakeholders, a national disaster management and relieve agency  known as the National Civil Protection Agency (Agence nationale de protection civile) (ANPC ) was established in February 2017 to see to national civil protection policies. 
Furthermore, the Government has sustained the implementation of the Community Development Emergency Programme (PUDC) launched in 
2016	in	order	to	significantly	bridge	the	poverty	gap and inequalities through the improvement in the living conditions of the people by enhancing access to basic infrastructure and socio-economic services. (Scope 4)
Despite the considerable efforts, there are still challenges. 
For social protection, universal health coverage remains one of the major challenges. The contributory social protection scheme is facing serious	financing	challenges.	
Although access to potable water has improved during the last two years, the water sector still has some challenges and weaknesses. Notable among them are : (i) the potability level of water, (ii) sustainability of water services and the	insufficiency	of	applied	tariffs	which	do	not cover all the investment and operational charges ; (iii) discrepancies in access to potable water in the various areas, regions and districts and (iv) poor management of facilities in urban and semi-urban areas. 
In addition, it is necessary to invest in the promotion of good practices in hygiene in the area of sanitation. 
In order to change this situation, the Government intends to : (i) expand social services to cover other socio professional services ; (ii) invest more into enhancing the production capacities, improving maintenance, and the management of facilities ; (iii) further strengthen the legal framework by enforcing regulatory instruments in the water sector and carry out reforms in urban water supply systems and (iv) create an enabling environment in order to encourage the private investments into the sector, within the next	five	years.	
4.2-SDg 2 : end hunger achieve food security and improved nutrition,  and promote sustainable agriculture 

Since 2008, following the world food crises which shook economies around the world, reform measures and actions were undertaken in the agricultural sector in Togo, especially the implementation of the National Agricultural Investment Strategy (SRPA-2008-2010), followed by the National Agricultural and Food Security Investment Programme (PNIASA-2010-2015). PNIASA. The PNIASA is aimed at improving farmersi revenues and enhancing the living conditions at the grassroots, most especially the vulnerable. The programme led to the enhancement of production capacities of smallholder farmers and improved the institutional and administrative capacities in the sector. 
It equally promoted access to improved breeder stocks and seeds; production and processing equipment, storage facilities; enhancement of livestock, poultry, and small ruminant vaccination coverage through a successful three years vaccination campaign programme ; support for animal habitat and the construction of	fish	farming	facilities;	training	of	farmers	on	various	access	to	financing	mechanisms	and	on	available	financing	instruments.		
From	food	deficit	of	13%	in	2008,	Togo	has	been recording food surplus (in cereals and roots and tuber crops) since 2009. This enables the country to bridge the gap in its cereal needs and to begin exporting to countries in the sub-region, leading to the improvement in farmersi revenue. 
In 2016, 90,000 tons food surplus was recorded. The prevalence of under nutrition, which was 15.3 % in 2014 decreased to 11.4% in 2016 ; representing a regression of 3.9 percentage points. 
Furthermore, the Government laid emphasis on: nutritional recovery programmes, as a solution to malnutrition problems in communities, where due to many illnesses associated to poor living conditions, people suffer malnutrition and (ii) school canteens in line with the national strategy for improvement in school enrolment, to promote access to education. Consequently, in 2016, more than 88,000 pupils in 304 basic schools	benefited	from	the	school	canteen	programme, and 20,669 pregnant women and nursing mothers of babies from 0 to 24 months as	well	as	malnourished	children	benefited	from	the monetary transfer programme. Since 2015, intensive nutritional recovery and education centres have recorded 1,267 consultations. An overall number of 1,348 severe malnourished children were catered for and 1,177 children bade goodbye to malnutrition.  
Also, the agricultural sector is equipped with institutional mechanisms to improve the sectoris institutional management with modern tools ; Agri-SWAP agenda; the mainstreaming of ICT via the Agri PME project (scope 1) ; country resilience priorities (PRP) in the framework of Global Alliance for Resilience Initiative (AGIR)	in	West	Africa	and	the	Sahel;	fisheries	management plan for sustainable operation of the water plan; consultation frameworks to enhance coordination and accountability. 
Innovative	financing	mechanisms	such	as	competitive funds, credit lines, and guarantee funds are all at the disposal of players in the sector.	These	financing	mechanisms	are	aimed	at promoting: entrepreneurship and value addition to agricultural products, technological innovations and the development of value chains with emphasis on small and medium size enterprises dealing in agricultural services, and processing of farm products at the grassroots. A case in point is an enterprise known as LOGOU CONCEPT which designed a machine called (\0xECFoufou mix). The machine is used for processing roots and tubers into paste with a sounding success in the sub-region. Thanks to the support the company enjoyed, in terms of production capacity and managerial skills strengthening, the inventor successfully designed and produce another machine 
(\0xECPat-mix) for processing cereals into paste and a mini tractor (\0xECLogoutrac). Many other inventors equally brought their talent to bear by manufacturing	machine	tools	for	juice,	flour,	oil, appetizers, etc.). 
Within	the	context	of	the	fight	against	land degradation and the preservation of forestry resources, actions undertaken by the Government through the community projects are essentially : sensitisation for agro-forestry practices, integrated management of soil fertility, improved fallowing and climate change adopted agriculture for sustainable agriculture.	Other	interventions	in	fire	management were undertaken to curtail bushfires	and	the	destruction	of	crops	and	farmlands	as	a	result	of	bushfires.

Scope 1  

Agri-pMe : digital revolution in agriculture in togo : an innovation via electronic purse of farmers in togo (SDg 2 and 9)
This technology is based on farmers using mobile phones as electronic purse enabling them to directly receive government subsidies for the purchase of farm inputs especially fertilizers through mobile money transfer service of the Telcos.  
This technology eliminates intermediaries in securing subsidies to farmers and also ensures that farmersi subsidies are used for the intended purpose. 
The AgriPME started with the 2016/2017 farming season by the identification of beneficiary farmers of the programme by regional stakeholders. 
To this end, 151,143 farmers instead of 150,000 projected were registered; 12 private companies received accreditation for the import and sales of fertilizers nationwide. Once the beneficiaries are identified, the funds are disbursed to the Telcois (Togo cellulaire and Moov) by the government. The Telcois then create an electronic account for the farmers linked to a specific telephone number and the subsidies are paid into the accounts. The subsidies are secured. There is no charges nor loss of the cash. 
The implementation of this strategy led to an efficient management of government subsidies as it guarantees a direct access by the beneficiary farmers. It led to:
- the creation of an enabling environment for public private partnership. The number of private operators granted the accreditation for the importation and distribution moved from 12 in 2016 to 21 in 2017; 
- an increase in fertilizer stock distributed: 44,196,850 tons representing a 45% yearly average increment on the volume supplied between 2008 and 2015; 
- increase in the fertilizer sales points making them closer to the farmers (close to 150 points as against 112 owned by the state) ; 
- the eradication of queues at the sales points and speculations. 
- job creation for at least 200 youth.

The contribution of agriculture to national GDP (in terms of added value) moved from 40% in 2015 to 41.9% in 2016. The agricultural growth rate jumped from -1% in 2015 to 9% in 2016. 
Despite this considerable performance and contribution to the GDP, the rate of extreme poverty of 28.7% in 2015 is an indication that	the	growth	has	not	sufficiently	impacted	poverty.	Micro-nutrients	deficiency	remains	serious challenge. 
With respect to productivity, low farm yields are due to challenges; making it impossible for farmers to increase yields and their revenues. Subsidies in terms of fertilizers, seeds, plant and animal breeding stocks, veterinary and phytosanitary services, did not cut down on the production cost which still remains high. A careful analysis of this situation shows that difficulty	in	accessing	farmland	by	smallholder	farmers; negatively impacts productivity in this sector. 
Due to the high cost of production, price levels of agricultural products remains relatively high as compared to the average price worldwide and this	makes	trading	very	difficult.		Challenges	such	as:	poor	organisation	and	insufficient	operation in the agricultural sector, poor trading mechanisms (poor quality of storage and processing facilities, energy, water, and communication gaps), bad practices on the food commodity market due to inappropriate policies,   non-custom barriers and many more constitute limitations to the competitiveness of agricultural products of Togo. 
Climate change challenges coupled with poverty, customs and traditions, poor structuring of the sector, lack of social coverage for the farmers who are the vulnerable group due to the nature for their activities are equally limitation factors in the sector.  
Based on the outcomes and faced with the difficulties	in	the	sector,	the	Government	of Togo is putting in place mechanisms to comprehensively transform the sector over the period 2016-2030 by adopting new agricultural policies endowed with national agricultural investment, and food and nutrition security plans. This plan is aimed at promoting micro, small and medium size enterprises for agricultural services especially along the agriculture enhanced zones (ZAAP). This complex agro industry is aimed at developing, in an inclusive manner, production and processing of agricultural products for the local, regional and international markets. The community emergency development programme shall be leveraged upon to bring up to speed the sector in the achievement of its mandates namely food security, enhancement of	revenue,	reduction	in	deficit	of	trade	balance,	in a context of climate change adaptation. (Scope 2 and annexes). 

Scope 2   

Agropoles : development of value chains in the agricultural and industrial sectors for poverty reduction (SDg 1, 2, and 9)
The objective of the agropoles is to increase the agricultural sectoris participation in economic growth and in poverty reduction by mainstreaming the secondary and tertiary sectors. In specific terms, the move is to harness comparative advantages of the national economy in order to create jobs in the region for the betterment of the rural population. It is equally aimed at operationalizing the new agricultural policy of the country for a sustainable and inclusive economic growth. The agropoles are to champion:
- The Improvement of productivity in a sustainable manner and seeds to promote the agricultural sector ;   
- The development of agricultural infrastructure for market access and for processing; 
- Structuring of stakeholders in the agricultural sector in order to professionalise them and promote their active participation in the private sector and;
- The promotion of small and medium size enterprises, agri-businesses through mainstreaming of value chain and partners. 
Expected results:
- Creation and development of agro-industries in rural areas;
- Creation of riches especially in rural areas and agricultural and agroindustry chains; 
- Job creation especially for women and the youth ; 
- Promotion for agricultural professionals - rebalance the agricultural trade balance ; - To get a better secured territory. 
Impacts:
- Ensuring food security by increasing production and distribution of agricultural products ;
- Reduction of poverty by increasing revenues from agricultural production;
Economic growth in rural areas and the entire country by increasing national production, consumption and investment. 
The development of three priority agropoles over a period of 5 years would lead to the creation of 10,000 new jobs in terms of the strengthening of capacities in the various identified promising sectors with more than 300,000 direct beneficiaries and an added value of at least 5 billion CFA Francs per year for an initial investment of 100 billion CFA Francs. 
Identified sectors:
The first set of priority would begin with sectors whose profile shall be determined. These would, among other things, include the following: rice, maize, cassava, yam, tomatoes, poultry, cattle, goat, pig, fish, pineapple, pawpaw, cashew, oil palm, plantain, and soya.
4.3-SDg3: ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages

It is the Governmentis vision to ensure a performing, accessible and equitable health system able to give meaning to the right to access health services for all, especially for the vulnerable groups. 
With an average of 50% households caring for themselves, health facilities are hardly patronised due to lack of access. Faced with the challenge of inclusion, the government has, in 2011, initiated a comprehensive reform in health	financing	which	led	to	the	establishment	of a mandatory national health insurance scheme. However, there are more rooms for improvement to guarantee universal access to quality and free health services especially for the poor and the vulnerable. 
The National Health Development Plan (PNDS 2017-2022) has projected the overall cost, for financing	the	health	sector,	between	90	to	100	billion CFA Francs by 2019 and estimates the stateis participation at 47%. 
In order to improve the health condition of the people, interventions are not only limited to the reduction in maternal, neonatal and infant and child mortalities, malaria, the HIV/AIDS and other communicable and non-communicable diseases but also to improve on the health conditions of the aged.  
With	respect	to	the	fight	against	maternal	and	neonatal mortality, the proportion of pregnant women having completed at least 4 antenatal consultations including urine test moved from 54.9% in 2010 to 25.3% in 2015. The proportion of HIV/AIDS positive pregnant women receiving antiretroviral (ARV) for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission has increased moving from 52.2% in 2010 to 90.0% in 2015. 
In order to end maternal mortality, the government has instituted a campaign (CARMMA) to accelerate the process and has taken measures to subsidise caesarean sessions with the kit costing 10,000 CFA Francs (approximately 20 USD). The maternal mortality rate is 400 deaths for every 100,000 live births in 2015.  
There	has	been	some	progress	in	the	fight	against HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate among sexually active population has moved from 2.5% in 2014 to	2.5%	in	2015.	Concerning	the	fight	against	malaria, the number of deaths due to malaria has decreased by 6% in 2015 (1,127 deaths in 2015 as against 1,205 in 2014).  
For	infant	mortality,	analysis	shows	that	the	fight	against infant and child mortality has not yielded much results between 2013 and 2015. As a matter fact, there is a decrease in the number of children between the ages of 12 and 13 months receiving 3	pentavalent	doses.	The	figure	has	moved	from	92% in 2011 to 87.5% in 2015. 
The rate of contraceptive use, the percentage of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) using modern contraceptives has moved from 27.9% in 2010 to 18% in 2015. 
The quest for providing equitable access to quality health services, led to the implementation of several innovative strategies such as the training of community health assistants for proximity care and monitoring. There has been	a	significant	improvement	(40%	in	2011	and 45.4% in 2015) in the number of rural communities having the community health assistants providing health care for diarrhoea, pneumonia, and malaria.
To ensure a universal access to preventive and curative services, 174 trainings sessions were organised from 2013 to 2015. A total number of	1,386	qualified	community	health	assistants	were	recruited,	trained	and	deployed	on	the	field.	Moreover, the capacities of the departments in charge of community health were strengthened in 2016 to include the services of caring for the aged. From 2016 to 2016, budgetary allocation for the health sector has experienced a slight increment moving from 44.96 billion to 51.48 billion.  
However, a lot must to be done in terms of access to essential care of quality and the sustained provision of quality health services. 
The challenges to be met among other things are : (i) decentralisation of health services ; (ii) reduction of inequalities among regions and within regions and social categories in terms of the provision and access to health services ; (iii) inequality in the geographical distribution of human resources ; (iv) limited health trainings sessions,	(v)	insufficiency	of	financing	allocated	to the health sector and (vi) improvement in the management of health facilities. 
The	national	health	policy	defines	strategic	orientations aiming at achieving the following : (i) acceleration in the reduction of maternal neonatal and child mortalities and strengthening of family planning and adolescent health ; (ii)	strengthening	the	fight	against	communicable	and non-communicable diseases and the promotion of good health ; (iii) improvement of health security and response to epidemics and other public health emergencies ; and (iv) beefing	up	the	health	system	for	increased	universal access including community health.

Scope 3  

Enhanced Child Health Day in Togo, significant improvement in terms of health and nutrition (SDG 2 and 3)
The supply of essential micronutrients especially vitamin A supplements is part and parcel of interventions aimed at reducing infant mortality among children less than five years. On the basis of this, the government successfully initiated actions for vitamin A supplement and mass deworming with Albendazole campaign among children from 6 to 59 months which ended in 2014. 
In 2016, the Ministry of Health with the support of FTP (WHO and UNICEF) has successfully conducted an integrated package of high-impact intervention pilot project (vitamin A supplement, deworming and child vaccination) entitled the child health day supported by Canadian financing in the Savannah and Kara regions. The following were achieved : 
- Vitamin A supplement coverage of 87% 
(1,219,446/1,405,862 targeted children) ; 
- A deworming rate of 88% (1,074,686/1,224,200 targeted children)
- More than 12,889 children from 0-11 months (those lost sights or with other challenges) were vaccinated over 4 days activity; 
- Routine capacity building in health centres and hospitals 
- Capacity building at the Ministry of Health at all levels even at the level of stakeholders.
Based on the above outcomes, it is expected to extend the project to other regions in 2017.
The Enhanced Child Day would be a unique opportunity for beefing up actions aimed at preventing chronic malnutrition (retard growth). Studies have shown that this form of malnutrition has irreversible consequences on the developing child, especially in academic performance, productivity in adulthood and to a larger extent on the countryis development. As a matter fact, one dollar invested in nutrition, brings 15-20 dollar return to the country later. Nutrition is therefore not a cost but a long term investment.
Considering the importance of nutrition for the development of the country, the government signed up to the SUN initiative (Scale Up Nutrition) in March 2014 and has reiterated its commitment towards ensuring the progress of global action for nutrition by 2030 and to the achievement of the sustainable development goals.
4.4-SDg 5: Achieve gender equity and empower all women and girls


In order to promote gender equity and the empowerment of women, the Government has adopted the National Gender Equity and Equality Policy (PNEEG). 
The policy has the following actions: (i) enhancement of the social position and the potentials of women in the community; (ii) the improvement of the productive capacities of women and their levels of revenue ; 
(iii) the promotion of equitable access to basic social services for women and men ; (iv) the promotion of equal participation of women and men in power management ; (v) elimination of gender based violence and (vi) institutional capacity building for agencies in charge of the implementation of the PNEEG. 
These actions let to the following achievements :  (i) 1,217 violence cases in 2015 and 769 cases in	2016	benefited	from	legal	assistance	during	hearings in all the 6 centres (Lom\0xC8, Kpalim\0xC8, Bafilo,	Ts\0xC8vi\0xC8,	An\0xC8ho	and	Atakpam\0xC8)	;	(ii)	1500	copies of religious and traditional publications promoting	the	fight	against	gender	based	violence were published and distributed ; (iii) 30	magistrates	and	judicial	police	officers	were trained in gender based violence and on the right of women and girl ; (iv) 10 hearing centres	benefited	from	operational	support	; (v)	200	women	benefited	from	capacity	building workshops on womenis participation in decentralisation and social development between 2013 and 2016 ; (vi) 2,917 community bases agency were trained on gender equity ; (vii) 929 persons were trained in gender and gender equity ; (viii) 303 national actors were trained on gender sensitivity and womenis right (womenis access to land) and national capacity of 700 key stakeholders with special emphasis on women land right; and (ix) African mechanisms on the promotion and protection of women and girlsi rights were disseminated. 
With respect to women empowerment, several training activities were organised on skill development and living techniques, on credit and savings, processing and conservation of agro food products, leadership and the management of micro enterprises. 
518,151 beneficiaries of these training programmes were supported to access credit and equipment such as : 60 multifunctional platforms, agricultural materials and implements, and the establishment of 1,951 community savings and loans schemes in 2016.
In order to support the implementation of the national gender equity and equality, several tools were developed and disseminated : (i) criminal code and the criminal proceedings code on gender ; (ii) family and persons code (iii) reports of organs and of treaties and the universal periodic review. 
Furthermore, actions were taken to reduce the gender inequality index. Some of these actions are: advocacy for more womenis representation during elections at political party levels ; the bearing of medical bills of women suffering from	obstetric	fistula;	the	organisation	of	awareness campaigns on gender and the promotion of women through regional and international womenis days and the establishment of a multiservice centre in Vogan. 
The centres works in the following areas : provision of care to victims of gender based violence ; (ii) family planning ; (iii) literacy programmes and (iv) women entrepreneurship. 
It is also worth mentioning incentive measures taken to encourage women in political participation. As a matter of fact, following the Global Political Agreement of August 2006 which provides for incentive measures, the Government voted low N\0x221E2012-002 of 29 May 2012, amended by low N\0x221E2013-004 of 19 February 2013 and low N\0x221E 2013-008 of 22 March 2013 establishing the electoral code	provides	for	a	50%	reduction	in	filing	fees for women running for any seat during legislative elections. The purpose of this move is to encourage women to be more visible in the political limelight. Despite this, sad is to note that the number of women in parliament now is only 17 out of 91 parliamentarians representing 18.7%. At ministerial level ; only 5 out of 23 ministers are women (21.7%). 
In order to promote women in public administration, gender committees are put in place in all departments at the ministries. 
Despite all these measures taken to promote and empower women, there are still a number of challenges to be met. Some of them are : (i) the adoption of gender approach and its tools as intervention strategies by all development stakeholders involved in all areas of economic, social, cultural, legal and political lives ; (ii) strengthening of institutions responsible for the collection and analysis of segregated gender data ; (iii) capacity building for people working on gender related issues ; (iv) gender mainstreaming in planning and budgeting ; (v) promotion of the girl childis education and sustaining women literacy programmes ; (vi) promotion of women participation in active public and political lives ; (vii) promotion of womenis access to productive resources (land, water, credit facilities\0xD6)  
In order to ensure gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, the following orientations were taken into account : (i) enhancing the social position and the potential of women in the family and the community ; (ii) improving womenis access to productive resources and their levels of revenue ; (iii) promotion of equal access of men and women to social services ; (iv) promotion of equal participation of men and women in power management ; the respect of womenis right and cessation of violence ; (v) institutional  capacity building for the implementation of PNEEG.
4.5-SDg 9 : build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation 

Considerable efforts were deployed in terms of investment in road, port and airport infrastructure, as well as in the development of digital economy. In the same vein, effort were made to promote industrialisation and access to energy. 
With respect to transport infrastructure, actions taken are: the rehabilitation of the 
Lom\0xC8-Ouagadougou CU9 corridor and the major cross-road networks along the corridor, leading to the promotion of trade and the boost of activities at the Lom\0xC8 port. The average driving time between Lom\0xC8 and Cinkass\0xC8 is reduced from 72 hours in 2012 to 48 hours in 2016, a reflection of the excellent service of RN1; (ii) the rehabilitation of the Gnassingb\0xC8 Eyadema International Airport to international standard thereby increasing the airportis reception capacity to more than 1.5 million passengers per year ; moving the number of traffics from 589,416 in 2013 to 758,000 passengers in 2016 and opens the airport for international airlines making the country a business hub in the sub-region ; (iii) the construction of a third dock and an inner harbour with modern container handling equipment thereby increasing the volume of containers handled to 905,700 in 2015 ; (iv) the implementation of a one-stop-shop for the countryis external trades ; and (v) the laying of the first foundation stone in April 2017 for the construction of a new fishing harbour. 
Concerning information communication technology (ICT), the following remarkable achievements are worth noting : (i) ICT is mainstreamed in training and education through the establishment of digital environment in secondary schools. 12,500 students and 1,240 teaching and administrative staff have benefited from that ; (ii) the integration of ICT in the monitoring and control of hydraulic infrastructure to put in place an integrated solution based on mobile telephone in signalling faults on the facilities in real time ; (iii) the construction of a fibre optic network of 250 km (E-Government) to connect more than 560 administrative buildings and more than 10,000 workers as a way of modernising administration and simplifying administrative procedures; (iv) tax exemption on the importation of ICT materials ; (v) the construction of wifi hotspots to extend internet to all by 2030 as in accordance with the new universal service policy according to which every citizen should be 5 km or less away from a high speed internet access point. 
Concerning the energy sector, efforts are made, especially in the area of rural electrification and the improvement of public lightening system. More than 24,000 new customers are connected to the national grid moving from 28.3% access rate in 2014 to 35.47% in 2016. 
(55% in urban areas and 6% in rural areas) With respect to sustainable industrialisation, the Government has taken initiatives for the implementation of the national industrialisation policy.  Key achievements in this regards are : (i) the implementation of the power saving advice programme, for companies and their staff on energy efficiency and equipment ; (ii) the implementation of a transparent and modern legal and institutional framework to attract more national and foreign private investors ; (iii) securing of industrial sites and the establishment of roadmaps; and (iv) the creation of the National Investment Promotion and the Free Zone Council (Agence de promotion des investissements et de la zone franche (API-ZF).
In order to ensure the companies have access to financial services, the government has put in place: (i) specialised institutions dedicated to SME/SMI (small and medium enterprises/ small and medium scale industries) whose mandate	is	to	bridge	the	financing	gap	of	local	enterprises ; (ii) the Youth Economic Initiative Fund (FAIEJ) whose mandate is to mobilise resources for young entrepreneurs ; (iii) the grassroots development support programme (PRADEB) responsible for extending credit and loans to project developers. 
These efforts led to the establishment of 10 new industrial companies formally declared in 2015 adding up to 105 in 2017. 
Despite all these success stories, there are still some challenges to be met ; some of which are : (i) the compliance with standards in the design and construction of facilities ; (ii) the fostering of private public partnership ; (iii) technology transfer ; (iv) the taking into account of environmental dimensions ; (v) mobilisation of external and internal resources ; (vi) the development of quality able to meet the needs of the ever growing industrial and trade sectors ; (vii) the development of an inclusive and sustainable industry mainstreamed with the rest of the economy, especially the primary sector for economic boost.   
With the objective of consolidating actions and accelerating the implementation of the Third Industrial Development Decade for Africa (IDDA III) and in response to industrialisation challenges, the government, in collaboration with UNIDO and other development partners, the Government has rolled out a national programme which is aimed at achieving a structural and sustainable transformation of the economy based on : (i) the net increase of industryis contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) ; (ii) the development of a set of value chains ; (iii) the putting in place of quality infrastructure to enhance and increase the competitive potentials of local products ; (iv) the strengthening of institutions and national development policies ; and (v) development of productive activities aimed at reducing poverty and the creation of jobs, especially among vulnerable groups. Through this approach, the Government of Togo would bring about a structural change into the economy with the aim of enhancing the living conditions for all through an adapted industrial needs and challenges in terms of productive capacities of the public and private sectors. 
Concerning transport infrastructure, the Government intends to : guarantee the competitiveness of the Lom\0xC8-Cinkass\0xC8Ouagadougou and Abidjan-Lagos corridors in terms of road and rail in the framework of sub-regional integration ; (ii) guarantee multimodal integration of the transport system in the country; and (iii) equip the country with a power production of 500 MW by 2030. 
4.6-SDg 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans and seas and marine resources  for sustainable development

Togo has a coastline of about 50 km stretching westward bordering with Ghana and eastward with Benin. Although the coastal distance is short, the country derives economic benefits as a coastal country. As a matter of fact, economic activities relating to the sea are estimated to contribute at least 70% to the GDP and to about 75% of tax revenues to the country in 2015. However, the coast and territorial waters are threatened by human pressure and oceanographic dynamics. 
Moreover, frequent floods has accelerated erosion and degraded the quality of arable lands at the coastal regions. As a result, the coastline is receding on average by 5 m per year due to a deficit in sedimentary composition of the coast making the shores more vulnerable to the effects of rising sea levels.  Consequently, coastal erosion is more evidenced hence affecting the ecosystem, resulting into high levels of lakes and lagoons along the coast leading to salinization of these lagoons. 
Although there is a ban on the use of certain fishing gears and a prohibition of certain destructive fishing techniques, traditional fishing methods endangering fish resources are still being practiced. Players in the smallscale fisheries industry are more impacted as they are less professionalised and less organised. For instance, the after-catch losses are estimated between 10 to 40% due to lack of storage and conservation facilities of fish products. 
Coastal erosion and corresponding loss of economic opportunities represents 33% of the cost for environmental degradation in 20131. 
The high level of marine activitiesi contributions to the economy and to the development of the country moved the authorities to take measures for the better management of its marine environment. Recognising the advantages of a blue economy, the Government seeks, among other things, to increase to 50% revenues accrued from marine resources by 20302. 
In order to preserve marine resources and fight efficiently against marine insecurity, Togo embarked on an institutional, legal and operational reforms since 2014. 
For the institutional view point, Togo is the first West African country to have established a national agency in charge of actions on the seas (ONAEM). The aim of this agency is to strengthen activities of public administration and to coordinate inter-ministerial efforts for the preservation of marine resources in Togo. The ONAEM is made up of three (03) bodies namely: the High Council of the Sea (le Haut conseil pour la mer HCM), chaired by the Head of State ; (ii) the advisory body on the sea ; and (iii) the Pr\0xC8fecture maritime. 
From the legal point, Togo has ratified and signed several international conventions relating to the sea. They are essentially concerned with the fight against illicit activities in safety and navigation at sea, high sea response in the event of pollution by substances other than hydrocarbons or in case of accident causing or capable of causing pollution by hydrocarbon, the elimination of illicit fishing, the establishment of an international compensation fund for victims of hydrocarbon pollution and harmful antifouling system on ships. 
The country has equally adopted legal instruments between 2014 and 2017: a new criminal code that takes into account the new definition of marine piracy which gives Togo the universal jurisdiction to judge any crime committed beyond its territorial seas regardless of the nationality of those involved and where the crime was committed ; (ii) an antipiracy law and other illicit acts on the high sea and the state to exercise its powers in policing the sea ; (iii) a law defining marine spices under the jurisdiction of Togo in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea adopted in 
Montego Bay in 1982 ; (iv) 
A new marine code which takes into account trends in the sector ; (v) a law relating to fisheries, and aquaculture, which takes into account international principles of sustainable management of fisheries as well as administrative sanctions such as withdrawal, suspension of fishing licenses and removal from the registry of fishing vessels ; (vi) a decree establishing the national commission for maritime borders of Togo (CNFMT) whose major mandate is to prepare the grounds for negotiations for the demarcation of maritime borders of Togo and (vii) a decree establishing the maritime cartographic, hydrographic and oceanographic council. 
Togo put in place a national strategy for the sea and the coastline in 2016 (SNPML). This strategy has 05 major pillars namely : (i) the strengthening of maritime governance, (ii) the development of a blue economy (iii) the sustainable protection of the marine and coastal environments (iv) the promotion research and sensitisation in deepening knowledge about the sea and (v) the fostering of a dynamic and diverse international cooperation.  
The country has in place a programme for an integrated management of the coastline and the fight against coastal erosion in the framework of the West Africa Coastal Areas protection (WACA). The protected distance along the coastline has increased from 20,820 m in 2014 to 21,170 m in 2015, representing 350 additional meters.  
Moreover, in the framework of promoting blue economy, Togo hosted the African Union Summit on maritime security and development in Africa held from the 10th to the 15th October 2016 in Lom\0xC8. This summit led to the signing of the African charter on the seas. 
Also, in order to optimise socio-economic potentials of the coastal and maritime environments through a sustainable management, Togo is developing a strategic framework for the enhancement of a blue economy with the support of its partners. 
Form the operation stand point, Togo has an appreciable level of capacity for intervention on maritime security issues on the high seas. However, there are limited resources for monitoring, control and surveillance of industrial and artisanal fishing operations. 
For maritime protection, the Government puts in place watchdog institutions along the coast in the ecological regions, mandated to regulate the discharge of liquid wastes into the sea through environmental evaluation and monitoring missions. A coastal information system was put in place and a system for monitoring indicators on risks and disasters in the coastal environment. 
With respect to research, activities in the strategy and the national action plan for biodiversity are aimed at achieving a sustainable protection of the maritime and coastal environments in order to enhance biological natural resources. Togo is member of the WASCAL (West Africa Science Service Centre on Climate Change and Adopted Land Use) programme hence actively takes part in scientific research. 
Besides the legal, institutional and programmatic arsenal in place, the major challenge facing the country is the availability of specialised human resources, to ensure an adequate functioning of institutions, the enforcement of laws and the operationalization of tools. During Our Ocean, our Future international conference, Togo has affirmed its commitment to achieving two major targets : (i) zero pollution of the sea due to the discharge of harmful substances into the sea by 2025 ; and ii) no illegal fishing in the territorial waters of Togo by 2022.
 

4.7-SDg 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise global partnership  
for sustainable development 


s.E.M. Faure E. Gnassingb\0xC8 Pr\0xC8sident de la r\0xC8publique

M. Antonio Guterres secr\0xC8taire g\0xC8n\0xC8ral de liOnu

The implementation of development strategies such as the poverty reduction strategy (20092011) and the accelerated development and job creation strategy (2013-2017), highlighted the need for Togo to optimise its resource and partners mobilisation strategies for the realisation of its development goals. Lack of enough resources to meet the countryis development agenda leads to budgetary deficit; funding for which has significantly increased the countryis debt level. 
In 	meeting 	its 	debt 	obligations, 	the 
Government has put in place strategic reforms for financing its developmental agenda. 
The	first	of	such	moves	is	the	structural	reform	of the revenue collection institutions with the establishment of National Revenue Authority (Office	togolais	des	recettes	(OTR))	which	is	a	merger of the custom division and the internal revenue service. This unprecedented reform, first	of	its	kind	in	Francophone	West	Africa,	is aimed at optimising internal revenue. The performance of the OTR since its establishment is however hindered by the limited tax base of the country hence there is excessive pressure on formal businesses as a result. In order to resolve this problem, discussions are ongoing to formalise the informal sector and to introduce land property taxation. 
The second strategy is aimed at attracting foreign public and private partners. This strategy, in recent years, is focused on the activities of a state holding \0xECTogo Invest Corporation and reforms are ongoing to improve the business environment in the country. Since 2016, the Government is leading reforms in the land tenure system, enhancement of ICT offers, in the area of investment in the water and energy sectors and the implementation of a legal framework for public-private partnership. 
In the framework of Millennium Challenge Corporation negotiation threshold, the USA and Togo have agreed to lead two important reforms in Togo with respect to ICT and in the land tenure system. This programme is earmarked to start by the end of this year. It is aimed at establishing an independent ICT regulatory authority and the creation and the implementation of a Universal service fund to facilitate the coverage of historical areas of use, improve the competitiveness on the ICT market, and to support ICT policies. With regard to land, the programme shall support the development of and the implementation of the new land code and the establishment of pilot sites in every region, in order to facilitate access and rural land right. 
In other words, the country intends to showcase good macroeconomic management in order to better mobilise official development assistance and foreign direct investments. To this end, the country is implementing a programme approved in 2017 by the International Monetary Fund as an extended credit facility. The commitment of Togo in this regards allows the country to receive budgetary support, optimise its indebtedness and attract more private financing by reducing the countryis risks. 
Active diplomacy for development and the adoption of the investment code and the new free zone law would enable the country to increase its capacity in mobilising both private and public investments. Discussions are far afoot on how to better channel resources from the diaspora for development projects. 
Moreover, there are plans to organise a campaign for resource mobilisation for financing the countryis national development plan (2018-2022). Modalities for this event are under discussion and experience gained from the roundtable held in 2008 and that of other countries would be leveraged on. In any case, the financing of the national development plan would be based on the implementation of an ambitious strategic plan for mobilising both internal and external resources, with modern and innovative methods and the support of the official development assistance. 
In order to fully benefit from international trade, Togo, a member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) has signed several economic integration agreements. These economic partnership frameworks offers the country opportunity potentials with respect to preferential trade arrangement such as: the everything but arms initiative, the UNCTAD global system for trade preferences, the enhanced integrated framework, economic partnership agreements (EPA) between West Africa and the European Union, the African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA), free trade programmes for the African Union, ECOWAS and	UEMOA.	However,	Togo	does	not	benefit	much from these agreements hence missing out the opportunity of making trade an essential tools	in	the	fight	against	poverty	by	developing	value chains. Considering this challenge, Togo is conducting diagnostic studies to integrate trade (EDIC) and its related actions in the national development plan.
Togo equally has in place regulatory framework notably the framework act of higher education and research which establishes a new	orientation	for	universities	in	scientific	research, technical, technological and cultural innovations, the framework law establishing the harmonisation of standards, accreditation, certification,	licencing,	metrology,	environment	to promote quality in Togo, the new BeninTogo power code, the e-government initiative and the issuance of two additional licences for the provision of internet. 

Scope 4  

the pUDC seeks to accelerate social inclusion and participation at grassroots level  (SgDs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17)
The Togolese government and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) signed an agreement on 22 February 2016 to put a seal on the launchingof the Community Development Emergency Program (PUDC).It is a three-year CFAF 155.18 billion program, which aims atreducingspatial disparities and social inequalities, which wereidentified while seeking to eradicate poverty in Togo. This was achieved through targeted interventions, in addition to those carried out in the country in line with the normal sectorial policies. It represents an important aspect of the social inclusion strategy being implemented in Togo, on the one hand, and of the process for strengthening the viability of local entities on the other hand. It specifically lays emphasis on the building of economic infrastructure and facilities and on access to basic social services by people living in rural, semi-urban and disadvantaged urban areas. It also addresses the issue of institutional capacity building and promotes the development of rural entrepreneurship.
To date, transport infrastructure, health, education, water and sanitation, trade and social mobilization projects are underway. In terms of transport infrastructure, rural roads are being implemented in the five regions of the country in order to open up areas with high agricultural productivity. The newly proposed agricultural development zones (ZAAPs) are being identified. In order to bring the hospital closer to the patients living in the most remote and low-density areas, mobile clinics and other rolling stock are being deployed. The management of sanitary waste has also been addressed with the acquisition of incinerators. Socio-community infrastructures are also being developed. Actions are being taken to bring electric power to the rural populations,using solar energy.
The program deals with sustainable and inclusive development issues in Togo. Indeed, all infrastructure works have been carried out in compliance with environmental standards.
The year 2017 marks a rise in the countryis achievements whose effects are expected to be felt as of 2018.

V - DiFFiCuLTiES in THE iMPLEMEnTaTiOn OF SDGS 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 anD 17
A	number	of	cyclical	and	structural	difficulties	were encountered while implementing these goals.	These	difficulties	are	summarised	as	follows : 
\0xEF Inadequate	financial,	technical,	and	human	resources; 
\0xEF Weak synergy of action by stakeholders;
\0xEF Low capacity of national statistical institutions to address new challenges, leading to poor monitoring and inadequate setting of indicators;
\0xEF Low monitoring and evaluation capacity; 
\0xEF Persistence of social-cultural constraints, which promotes discrimination and stigmatization in dealing with gender issues; 
\0xEF Poor communication on the need for the actors in general and the population at grassroots level in particular to the SDGs. 
Vi- MaJOr CHaLLEnGES 
While seeking to implement the SDGs, Togo faced major challenges in terms of how to develop statistics, to operationalize decentralization, and to instil a monitoring and evaluation culture by adopting planning, monitoring and evaluation systems. Moreover, terrorism, by virtue of its global nature, must henceforth be taken in account while designing development planning strategies.
Vii- THE WaY FOrWarD 
n order to successfully achieve the SDGs, Togo needs to undertake the following actions : 
\0xEF To strengthen statistics production by operationalizing the National Institute of Statistics, Economic and Demographic Studies (INSEED);
\0xEF To develop a national mechanism for the evaluation of indicators;
\0xEF To	finalize	the	2030	Vision	and	the	National	Development Plan, whilst making sure that the SDGs are included; 
\0xEF To organize a partner round table for resource mobilization; 
\0xEF To carry on with the review of sector policies and strategies in order to incorporate the SDGs;
\0xEF To accelerate the decentralization process. 

Viii- COnCLuSiOn
The preparation of the report to be presented at the high-level political forum made it possible for Togo to review, in a participatory and inclusive fashion, progress made in domesticating the SDGs. The review also allowed Togo to highlight bottlenecks and possible solutions to implement its development program by 2030. 
Since this ambitious program has been adopted, efforts are been made to integrate the SDGs into the development planning instruments. 
The review shows that a dynamic process has been in place to allow for the implementation of SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17 to be reviewed by the High-Level Policy Forum on Sustainable Development slated for this year. 
Efforts are being made to implement the SDGs, but there is still need to address a number of challenges, including the production of statistical data, the mobilization of resources, the need to leverage on the countryis cultural potentials, and to accelerate the decentralization process to support local development. 
As a matter of fact, the country relies on the new national strategy to develop the proposed statistics and achieve data revolution. In addition, measures are being taken to further mobilize domestic resources and to seize opportunities for foreign	financing.	Furthermore,	a	roadmap	has	been adopted to accelerate the decentralization process, which forms an essential step towards the achievement of the sustainable development objectives.
