Part two of the wess, discusses various aspects of vulnerability at the level of the country. Vulnerability may be defined as the risk of being negatively affected by shocks. There are shocks that come from nature, such as cyclones, earthquakes, droughts and locust invasions, and economic shocks that are outside a countrys control, such as the rapid decline in the price of a major export, changes in interest rates on international capital markets and reduced access to credit. At the level of the country, vulnerability has been one of the criteria used, within the united_nations system, in determining whether a country should be classified as least developed.Vulnerability is an especially important concept for the poorest countries, as shocks can set back their growth for many years and the effects on the poorest, and therefore most vulnerable, members of the society can be especially severe. Although this aspect of vulnerability within countriesthe fact that the most vulnerable members suffer the most during a downturnwill not be discussed at length in this Survey, which looks at vulnerability at the level of the country as a whole, its importance can hardly be exaggerated.The reactionor lack of reactionof economic actors, including especially Governments, to shocks can themselves provide a further adverse shock to the system on top of that coming from the purely outside sources. It is essential, then, that Governments be prepared through the exercise of appropriate policies at the microand macrolevels to reduce vulnerability and to mitigate the consequences of economic shocks. What the appropriate policies are, on the national and international fronts, in the present globalized economy will be the focus of this part of the Survey. This is necessarily a matter of trade-offs between the advantages of greater globalization, primarily wealth creation and enabling human, physical and social capital to be augmented, and the possible disadvantages of greater vulnerability, primarily fluctuations in income flows. Poor countries and poor groups within countries are vulnerable and suffer disproportionately when change is rapid, especially when there is a downturn brought about by an unexpected shock.It is especially opportune now to examine the appropriate policies to be adopted when confronting vulnerability because of the changing views of policy makers on the appropriate limits of government action, at the national and international levels, to counteract the effects of the free play of market forces, and the recent exposure of many economies to sudden changes in their economic environment. Vulnerability is, to some extent, a fact of life: pricesof shares, computer chips, bauxite ore, and currencies, and of borrowing money itselfalways fluctuate in a market economy. However, a solution proposed less than years ago for the problem of the volatility of commodity prices, namely, an Integrated Programme for Commodities, is one that is not active in current discussions. On the other hand, the wisdom of attempting to fix the price of one currency in terms of another currency or a basket of other currencies is currently very much a live issue. The consequences of the volatility of prices must still be confronted by Governments. The problem has not disappeared, although the feasible or accepted solutions might have changed.As the extent of vulnerability at any one time depends partly on initial conditions and partly on the policies subsequently pursued to reduce vulnerability, the past reactions to real or perceived vulnerability must be examined in order to design the appropriate policies to counter present-day vulnerability. One example is the discussion on diversification. Diversification is often seen as an appropriate policy to be pursued in the face of the type of vulnerability that comes from relying heavily on the production and export of one commodity or industrial sector. Yet, inappropriate diversification, directed at reducing vulnerability but resulting in the creation of industries that are not in line with a countrys true comparative advantage and that therefore cannot survive in an open-market environment, could itself have adverse economic consequences. This, in turn, increases vulnerability. In general, the appropriate strategy for a country to adopt in order to deal with vulnerability entails exploiting its true comparative advantages as much as it can.Chapter IV addresses issues of vulnerability in the financial sector. Rather than assist wealth creation, the financial sector has sometimes contributed to a massive loss in income through the shocks emanating from banking and currency crises. Indeed, such shocks as the Asian financial crisis have given the increasing integration of global financial markets, and the problems that might ensue, a very high profile in the publics eye. Chapter IV examines whether the vulnerability that comes from greater integration in global financial markets can be reduced. The policies that countries should adopt as they liberalize their financial markets are addressed. The development of vibrant and modern banking sector that can allocate savings to their most effective uses should be the aim of all countries. However, this is only one element in a successful market economy. Other elements, such as good bookkeeping, serious analysis of the risks involved in prospective investments and an understanding of the nature of the industry that is seeking funds, are required. These can be built up only over time, particularly in countries that did not operate a regular market economy in the past. Similarly, the capacity to regulate the financial system so that the relevant information is available to interested parties for the purpose of enabling them to make an informed decision on the wisdom of a financial transaction and to gauge whether the overall financial system is not being exposed to excessive risks, is acquired only over time. Thus, an attempt to liberalize the operations of the financial system so as to obtain the benefits of a more efficient use of capital can backfire if the regulatory system is not in place and ready. The Survey thus calls for progress on all frontsnamely, opening up the economy to the interplay of modern market forces, liberalizing the financial sector, and refining the regulatory mechanisms.Another source of shock is through tradespecifically rapid changes in prices and demand for goods and services. Chapter V looks at the interrelationship between trade and vulnerability. This occurs on two fronts. To begin with, trade has a role to play in promoting growth. Countries that grow and become wealthier are better able to cope with the inevitable shocks that occur in an open and increasingly globalized world economy. The chapter examines the evidence of the trade-induced growth relationship. It discusses what measures have been taken to increase market access, especially for the least developed countries, to enable them to participate more fully in the global trading system. Moreover, many poorer developing countries are heavily reliant on the export of a few primary commodities, rendering them vulnerable to sudden price or demand changes. This is the second aspect of the trade-vulnerability relation. Chapter V therefore next examines how countries have tried to lessen the possibility or severity of trade shocks. Past attempts to control the fluctuations in prices through international commodity agreements have, on the whole, failed. Now efforts are concentrated on the mechanisms for hedging the risks involved, though these can be complicated instruments.The above-mentioned two chapters, which cover generalized shocks, are followed by two chapters that focus on the responses to specific shocks. Chapter VI looks at the shocks that hit three countriesArmenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongoliaas they moved from a centrally planned system to a market economy, at the same time as their former trading relationships were severely disrupted. Armenia and Kyrgyzstan had the further shock of being suddenly, and unexpectedly, torn away from a larger State and becoming landlocked countries. What makes these three countries especially worthy of close examination is that they are largely remote or cut off from their main potential markets, unlike some of the other economies in transition, such as the Baltic States, for whom problems of transport links have not been important. They have considerable mineral resources and are encouraging the development of those resources in partnership with private enterprise. However, they do not enjoy mineral rents on the scale of the fuel producers which could, perhaps, have made possible a policy of State-assisted growth. Rather, they are relying on private investment to determine the future direction of their economic growth. As they are otherwise in a disadvantageous geographical position, they have set out to become extremely attractive to foreign investment. They have the most liberal foreign trade regimes in the world, and have actively promoted regional initiatives to improve trade.Chapter VII examines how a country can handle a natural disaster. The example studied is Bangladesh, a densely populated country that suffers from regular flooding. The issue is one not simply of coping with a crisis, but of ensuring that the highest level of economic activity can be maintained over long periods of time in this otherwise hostile environment. In the case of Bangladesh, a huge nationwide scheme to protect the country from flooding by, as it were, keeping the waters out, was impractical on the grounds of capital and maintenance costs. It could also have even deterred some economic activities. The answer was to assign to the local communities the task of arriving at the correct coping mechanisms, in terms of both physically controlling the inflow of water and choosing the economic activities that were best suited to the particular environment in this flood-prone country.In any analysis of vulnerability, especially of the poor countries, the role of international aid and the accompanying policy advice must be addressed. Acountry that is hit by a sudden shock can be expected to seek financial, and sometimes technical, help from the international community. In the case of balance-of-payment shocks, the international institutions have had a variety of compensatory financing schemes. As for natural disasters and humanitarian crises, the united_nations provides a framework for mobilizing assistance. It is essential, however, that the country reduce its long-term dependence on external assistance and build up the capacity to handle future crises. In the case of an earthquake-prone country, for instance, domestic capacity is needed to predict an occurrence, to put in place and enforce codes to ensure that buildings are as safe as reasonably feasible, to evacuate the population at risk and to supply emergency assistance in the event of a disaster. For countries that are particularly vulnerable to economic shocks, domestic capacity is still essential if those countries are to put in place the appropriate microand macroeconomic policies that will enable them not only to ride out the crisis, but also to grow over the long term.In sum, Part two of the Survey highlights the importance of managing vulnerability. In many cases, risks associated with vulnerability can best be borne by the private sector, and appropriate agents for confronting diverse risks involved in economic activities are private sector investors, domestic or foreign, who feel that they will be rewarded by making a profit. In other situations where the impact of vulnerabilities is felt by households or small producers, for example, the role of government is crucial. In all cases, however, there is a need for a public policy that supports activities and institutions that can understand and anticipate risks, provide insurance where possible and a public safety net where necessary.Managing vulnerability has its counterpart at the international level. Thus, the risks that underlie the profits of large corporations have to be borne by the owners of these corporations. But beyond that, international arrangements are necessary to understand and anticipate risks; to provide compensation (in the areas of trade or finance) where the scale of the shock requires them; to make available adjustment assistance when the depth of transformation being undertaken is very substantial; and to secure the commitment to provide a safety net, particularly for natural disasters and humanitarian crises.The challenge of vulnerability lies not in change per se, but in the effectiveness of national and international policies to cope with the uncertainties arising from change.The globalization of financial markets during the s has had profound implications for the world economy. This development creates the prospects for a more efficient worldwide allocation of financial resources than was possible in the past. While such prospects have certainly widened, the several financial/banking crises that erupted during the course of the s have raised the issue about increased vulnerability of financial markets and even countries as a whole. This period also saw stronger linkages among national financial markets through computer-aided communications technologies and the introduction of more sophisticated financial products.One of the essential features of the market economy is a financial system where economic agents can make free decisions as to the allocation of credit: granting and denying credit on the basis of judgements as to profitability and the likelihood of repayment. For instance, a financial system that simply funnels the savings of the population to enterprises without any appraisal of their future profitability is defeating the purposes of the market economyto allocate the limited savings of the population to enterprises likely to thrive, and to restrict credit to those that cannot survive in a competitive environment. Based on these principles, the financial system should ensure that societys savings are put to the most profitable use. Many actors are involved in the allocation of credit according to market principlesprimarily the borrower, according to whose calculations the expected return will be greater than the cost of borrowing, and the lender who must assess whether these calculations are realistic and if, in fact, the lender is likely to be repaid. Both borrowers and lenders will, of course, use the services of many other agents to assess the risks and to spread them if necessary. What the financial system in effect does is to transform short-term funds into longer-term capital. For instance, a person deposits in a bank funds that could have been used today for consumption and the bank lends those funds to, say, an agricultural enterprise whose production and therefore repayment will materialize only after some years.Over time the market economies have been developing or improving institutions, including regulatory institutions, that enabled lenders and borrowers to be brought together while seeking to ensure that the likelihood of shocks, their effects on the overall economy when they occurred and the opportunities for abuse were minimized. This has necessarily involved different levels of Government, as a well-functioning financial system can be considered to be as essential as physical infrastructure for overall economic performance and so a legitimate concern for Government. Governments need not undertake the necessary functions themselves, but could assign them to independent bodies or allow the market participants to set up bodies to regulate their own activities.Several important principles were established. Borrowers were expected to be motivated to provide a full and accurate statement of relevant information to potential lenders and could be penalized for knowingly providing false information or withholding vital information. All those lending funds should be treated equallywith no one group of lenders having privileged information that would enable them to withdraw their credit before others had an equal chance, or to insist on payment before other creditors. The underlying principle of the market-based financial system that people want to ensure that they are paid for the goods and services that they have already delivered, and therefore if there is a likelihood that they will not be paid, that they should be the first in the queue to collect paymentimplies that there will be considerable disturbance when threats of non-payment arise. Those with a claim to payment will rush to be first in the line and to switch their assets to a safer venue (known as herding behaviour). This attempt to switch assets to a safer venue could result in the liquidation of assets in a country or enterprise that appeared to have some of the same characteristics as the suspect country or enterprise (what is known as the contagion effect).The developing countries, in particular, have much to gain from becoming modern, market-based economies with an efficient financial system that can attract domestic and foreign savings and put them to the most productive use. However, a modern financial system cannot operate in a vacuum. It needs a whole array of institutions and talents that govern not just banking but all other aspects of the economy. It requires, for instance, analysts who can assess the feasibility of a business project or who can judge whether prices of one asset, such as housing, have risen to unrealistically high levels and regulators who have an understanding of the nature of the industry to which banks are extending loans. In even the most advanced countries, judgements on these matters that have been based on extensive past experience have frequently been proved wrong and considerable funds have been wasted. Experience and institution-building are vital. It would, then, be impractical to suggest that the financial system of a developing country should replicate that of a developed country which had in place all the talents and institutions, in not just the financial, but also the industrial, marketing and research fields, that helped ensure that funds were wisely invested.In many cases, those wishing to borrow funds, including the Government, could not raise the quantities required from the domestic public. Agents might also want repayment to be not in terms of the domestic currency, but in terms of what they considered a more sound or convenient currency. Thus the rise of the modern industrial economy has been accompanied by a growth in international financial transactions and liberalization of financial transactions between countries. This has not been a smooth or even one-directional process.In more recent times, the difficulties that the financial system, like other sectors of the economy, has encountered in adapting quickly enough to the needs of the market-driven global economy can help explain why globalization has apparently led to greater vulnerability stemming increasingly from financial shocks. The experience of the past two decades demonstrates that international financial markets are subject to unpredictable swings, contagion, and costly financial crises. These crises had a large impact on the real economies and social conditions, especially in developing countries. Accordingly, prevention and mitigation of crises pose a great challenge to both national Governments and international organizations.The causes of the financial crises of the last two decades have occupied academic researchers, market participants and policy makers. While there are still disagreements about the causes, it is clear that the role of financial markets in causing crises has increased; in contrast, macroeconomic policies played a larger role in earlier crises. There could be two reasons for this. First, domestic and external financial liberalization can, in themselves, increase the risk of a financial crisis. Second, a crisis elsewhere is more likely to lead to a domestic crisis as a result of the strengthening of economic and financial linkages between countries, that is to say the risk of contagion has increased.Financial liberalization in developing countries has been given greater attention, as a result of two seminal studies on financial development in the early s. These studies pointed out that government intervention in financial markets, particularly interest rate controls, created distortions in credit allocation, which adversely affected economic development. Policies towards the financial sector therefore focused primarily or even entirely on liberalization, particularly of interest rates, with relatively scant attention being paid to institutional development.The arguments in favour of financial liberalization are based largely on the analogy between those goods for which there is instant settlement (cash in exchange for a standard good) and financial markets which ultimately depend on the goods and services produced in the real economy, but where the connection is not so direct and instant. This analogy, it is further asserted, could be misleading in that it ignores one crucial difference between the two markets: such direct markets for goods are not subject to asymmetric information, adverse selection and external effects to the same extent as financial markets, if at all. Also, because such factors as herding are known to prevent the market from achieving an efficient allocation of resources, it is argued that the recognized benefits of liberalization in goods markets cannot be assumed to apply to the same extent in the case of financial markets.It has been argued that removing controls on interest rates and regulations on credit for particular sectors, freeing entry into the financial sector and allowing private ownership of financial institutions should lead to a better allocation of investment, more savings and financial deepening. Yet, the evidence on these results of liberalization are mixed. For example, one survey concluded that financial liberalization has yielded positive results in terms of greater financial depth and increased efficiency in the allocation of investment but it has not brought the boost in saving that had been predicted. In Africa, the results have been disappointing. The characteristics of financial markets in Africa, such as high administrative and transaction costs compared with loan size, lack of collateral and the difficulties banks have in assessing credit risk, have precluded an increase in bank lending for investment potentially resulting from financial liberalization. Moreover, financial liberalization in Africa did not lead to financial deepening and improved credit allocation where some of the bases for a functioning market-based financial system were absentthat is to say, in cases where non-performing loans took up a large share of the loan portfolio and where insider lending and government interference persisted.At a global level, the argument in favour of free capital movements is based to a large extent on the principle of allocative efficiency, namely, that the worlds efficiency could be maximized by allowing capital to move to places where it can secure the highest return. The evidence, however, suggests that capital flows have not always conformed to the principle of allocative efficiency. The bulk of global financial flows, for example, over the past few decades have flowed to the united_states of America. It is unlikely that these flows are guided solely by the rate of return, even if the return is adjusted for risk. Among the developing countries, private capital flows have mainly concentrated on a small number of middle-income countries.While the evidence on the benefits of financial liberalization is mixed, most observers agree that financial liberalization increases the risk of a domestic financial crisis in cases where the institutional arrangements are weak. For example, a crisis is more probable when capacity for prudential regulation and supervision, accounting and legal systems and risk management systems is not adequate. To summarize, financial liberalization, by giving banks and other financial intermediaries more freedom of action, increases the opportunities to take on risk. This tends to increase financial fragility, but it is not necessarily bad for the economy, as high-risk, high-return investment projects may dominate low-risk, low-return ventures. However, because of limited liability, compounded with other forms of implicit and explicit guarantees, bankers appetite for risk is likely to be greater than what is socially desirable. If prudential regulation and supervision are not effective at controlling bank behaviour and at realigning incentives, liberalization may increase financial fragility well above what is socially desirable. Thus, the danger that liberalization will lead to (a financial) crisis is by far the most important drawback in the process. Indeed, a number of studies have found that, even after controlling for the macroeconomic fundamentals, the probability of a banking crisis increases in liberalized financial environments. This is particularly the case when the capital account is liberalized and if prudential regulation and supervision are weak.Financial liberalization can increase the risk of a financial crisis in several ways. Removing controls on the interest rate for loans might lead banks to engage in riskier ventures in search of higher returns. Deregulation of directed credit can also lead to lending for riskier projects. Thailand, for example, abolished limits on lending to the real estate sector; that led to an increase in loans to the sector, many of which went bad. However, deregulation of directed credit cannot provide all the explanation as it took place in an environment of weak banking supervision and regulations, cross-lending and large capital inflows. In general, financial liberalization often means higher interest rates; this should, in theory, promote efficiency in encouraging capital to go to those projects with the highest expected rate of return. It can, though, lead to riskier lending and exacerbate moral hazard and adverse selection problems. Higher interest rates are particularly a problem if banks have high debt-equity ratios.Financial liberalization often leads to higher volatility of interest rates, asset prices and capital flows. As a result, banks face increased interest rate risk, liquidity risk and credit risk. Liquidity risk is likely to increase because, if asset prices are low, a bank might not be able to sell assets at the expected price when it wishes to raise cash. Credit risk is higher because higher volatility in financial and asset markets affects the creditworthiness of borrowers.Allowing entry of new domestic or foreign firms into the financial sector will enhance competition in the sector. Increased competition, however, can lead to lower profitability and reduce the franchise value of the bank, that is to say, the profits that banks derive from their reputation. This can mean that, searching for higher returns, domestic banks will lend to more risky projects especially if foreign banks cherry-pick the best credits. On the other hand, the arrival of foreign banks as a result of liberalization can be helpful in cases where domestic banks previously enjoyed above-normal rents owing to their monopolistic or oligopolistic position. Moreover, foreign banks can transfer financial management know-how and technology to domestic banks.The possibility of a financial crisis is particularly large after the country is opened up to external financial flows, particularly short-term flows. The result may be excessive surges of potentially reversible capital flows into the recipient countries. Short-term external borrowing was a key source of instability in the Asian financial crisis of -, and the Mexican peso crisis of . Countries are particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of capital inflows if their banking system is unsound because these inflows expose banks to exchange-rate risk on top of their other difficulties. Inflows could also lead to more risky lending by banks.In an era of globalization, the probability of a domestic financial crisis can increase if there is a crisis elsewhere. This contagion can result from several factors. It can be a result of a common shock, such as an increase in international interest rates or a change in the exchange rates between key currencies. Changes in united_states interest rates have been particularly important for latin_america, leading up, for example, to the crisis in Mexico in . Similarly, the appreciation of the united_states dollar against the yen during and was one factor behind the weakening export performance of East Asian countries, which contributed to the financial crises in .Trade linkages can also propagate a crisis. If a country suffers a financial crisis that leads to a drop in its demand for imports, its trading partners will experience a fall in exports. This has historically played a role, particularly within a region where intraregional trade linkages are strong. Bilateral trade links are generally less relevant in explaining contagion across regions, say, from Asia to latin_america, because interregional trade usually accounts for a smaller share of total trade than intraregional trade.A related channel is through competitive devaluations, as occurred during the s. When a country devalues, other countries that compete in the same export markets lose competitiveness and might be forced to devalue as well. Some have argued that the devaluation of the Chinese yuan renminbi in precipitated the currency crises in east_asia in because of competition in third-country markets. Similarly, despite their strong macroeconomic situations, the currencies of Singapore and Taiwan Province of China depreciated after the East Asian crises. One factor was the need to maintain competitiveness in third markets.Yet another case in which a financial crisis in one country can lead to a financial crisis in another is when a creditor bank, typically located in a developed country, has outstanding loans to various developing countries all located in the same region. Because a creditor bank tends to treat assets located in different countries but in the same region as a basket of assets within its overall financial portfolio, it tries to unload the financial basket altogether when a crisis hits even just one of the countries. An example is the Japanese banks involvement in Thailand in the s. As of December , per cent of Thai liabilities had been to Japanese banks and, on the reverse side, per cent of Japanese claims on emerging markets were on Thailand. When the Thai crisis erupted, Japanese banks began to call loans, not only in Thailand, but in other East Asian countries as well.Moreover, a crisis in one country can trigger a crisis in another country if investors perceive macroeconomic or financial situations to be similar. This could also result in the recognition of weaknesses that were not recognized beforea so-called wake-up call. Yet a crisis in one country can also spread to another country through a shift in market sentiment that is not based on economic fundamentals.The portfolio structure and liquidity problems of international investors can also contribute to contagion. Managers of mutual funds often allocate certain proportions of their investments to specific countries and instruments. If the value of one investment declines, the manager might sell assets of other countries to keep the proportions intact. Moreover, fund managers might encounter liquidity constraints if the investments in one country decline in value: this might force the sale of assets of other countries.The possibility of contagion has increased the likelihood that some countries that do not experience a deterioration in their economic fundamentals may nonetheless be affected by a financial crisis somewhere else in the world. These countries could be termed innocent bystanders. For example, during the Russian crisis in August , the yield spreads between the united_states Treasury bills (the international benchmark) and dollar-denominated bonds issued by developing countries increased dramatically. Suddenly, developing countries and their firms had to pay more interest on their newly incurred foreign debt or on their variable rate debt, even though nothing else had changed.The effect of contagion is often detected through the correlation of volatility across countries during a crisis. Asset prices or interest rates in the two countries may not correlate during a tranquil period, but the movements of these variables suddenly become highly correlated as a crisis breaks out in one of them and asset prices experience wide swings. For example, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China and Chile had not jointly experienced any period of high volatility between and late . Yet, in October during the Asian financial crisesboth economies experienced rapid shifts in the same direction in asset prices and in interest rates.This has critical consequences for the financial sector. Financial sector participants determine the size and composition of their portfolios in order to optimize the combination of expected returns and risks that best meets their objectives. Risks are partly minimized by diversification across assets whose returns are not positively correlated: if the price of one asset does fall, the prices of other assets need not; but if during a crisis the correlation of returns suddenly becomes positive, the assumptions underlying the model used in the portfolio break down, with possibly severe results for the solvency of financial sector institutions. This happened during the Russian crisis.The costs of a financial crisis can be staggering to a country. A crisis in the financial system is different from that in any other industry. It necessarily reverberates throughout the economy, affecting every aspect of economic life. When depositors feel that they will not be able to recover their deposits from the institutions to which they entrusted them or sellers fear that the financial system will not be able to remit to them the amount the buyer owes, the whole basis of commercial activity is put in jeopardy. The ultimate breakdown would occur if the economy reverted to only instant cash payments or even barter. The Government, then, has to ensure that it has a functioning financial system, even if this means a considerable commitment of public funds.As one study found: There have been more than developing-country episodes during -, when banking systems capital was completely or nearly exhausted; the public-sector bail-out costs of resolving crises in developing countries during this period have been estimated at around $ billion. In more than a dozen of these banking crises, the public-sector resolution costs amounted to per cent or more of the countrys gross domestic product (GDP). In the latest additions to the list of severe banking crisis, the cost of bank recapitalization for the countries most affected in the ongoing Asian financial crisis is expected to be hugeon the order of per cent of GDP for Indonesia, per cent for Thailand, per cent for the Republic of Korea, and per cent of GDP for Malaysia. The adverse effects of financial crises are also felt in the extent and the duration of actual outputs going below the trend output level: the average cumulative output loss, relative to trend, among developing countries that were effected by financial crises during -is estimated to have been . percentage points. Moreover, GDP growth, even three years after a crisis, had not returned to the average growth rate in the last two years prior to the crisis in a sample of emerging and industrialized countries during -.Indicators such as GDP growth and the fiscal costs of a crisis tell only part of the story. The financial crises of the s have had a huge impact on poverty and unemployment. The large changes in interest rates, exchange rates, output and government expenditures affect all income groups. These changes affect the demand for labour and real wages. The impact on poor people is particularly harsh. Poor people have fewer capital assets (human, financial or physical) with which to cope with a shock and almost no insurance to smooth consumption. Although some evidence shows that poor households do not suffer from higher income volatility than others during an economic crisis, even small income volatility affects poor people much more because they possess limited means to mitigate the effect of volatility. In the crisis countries in EastAsia, the impact was most severely felt among the urban poor. The low-skilled workers in manufacturing and construction suffered particularly from lower real wages or unemployment. In rural areas, farmers have generally been less affected because they have received more for their cash crops as a result of the devaluations. On the other hand, many migrated from urban areas back to the rural areas of origin, putting downward pressure on wages there.In the crisis countries in east_asia, poverty rates and unemployment shot up immediately after the Asian crisis in -. For example, in the Republic of Korea, which publishes nationwide (rather than urban-based) unemployment rates, the rate jumped from . per cent in to . per cent in . In Indonesia, the poverty rate increased from . per cent in August to . per cent at the end of , which amounted to about million people falling into poverty in a short period of time. It subsequently declined to . per cent in August , which was about equal to the level of February . Yet, real manufacturing wages were in March still below the level recorded four years earlier. Similar effects of a financial crisis were recorded in Mexico. Between the end of and July , real wages fell by per cent and they have only very slowly increased subsequently. In latin_america, however, poverty rates have remained higher than they were before the crises.Households employ different kinds of mechanisms to cope with the effects of shocks. These coping mechanisms might have long-term consequences. Poor households might sell some or all of the few assets they have, including productive assets, such as livestock and equipment. Yet, without these assets, households can be stuck in a poverty trap. The fact that when people become unemployed they lose skills and might become stigmatized makes it harder for them to become employed again. Households might also assume debt, which could lead to a debt trap. Moreover, families might take their children out of school during an economic crisis. For example, the dropout rate among the poorest quartile in Indonesia increased from . per cent in to . per cent in among children ages -and from . to . per cent during the same period among children ages -. Most importantly, child mortality might increase and child malnutrition might worsen. Child malnutrition, even if temporary, has long-term consequences. Lack of the proper nutrition at the crucial phases of brain development, for example, affects cognitive ability during the rest of a persons life. A period of malnutrition also has negative effects on the incidence of morbidity and mortality later in life. In fact, this negative cycle can already start in utero. Low-birth weight increases the risk of dying at a young age and has lifelong negative consequences, if the infant goes on to survive childhood.Financial crises can never be completely prevented, but their permanent negative impacts on human beings can be largely mitigated. Governments should have a broad social safety net in place to avoid these impacts, for example, through unemployment insurance, public employment programmes and microfinance (credit and insurance) schemes. Moreover, Governments should make every effort to protect budget expenditures on these programmes and other social areas, such as education and health care, during a crisis, particularly those expenditures that benefit the poor. In order for Governments to be able to do this, they need to save during good times so that it is possible to increase expenditures during bad times.Assessing external vulnerability: early warning systemsAfter the recent financial crises, increased attention has been paid to the identification of vulnerabilities that might lead to a crisis. Different approaches have been developed. One method is based on the fact that the economy behaves differently on the eve of a crisis and sends out signals that can be interpreted as an early warning. For example, a currency crisis is usually preceded by an overvaluation of the exchange rate and/or a high ratio of short-term debt in foreign currency to GDP. A banking crisis is often precipitated by a fall in asset prices, such as house prices. Predicting financial crises with models is not foolproof. Typically the models predict a crisis accurately half the time: in half the cases, a crisis was predicted and actually occurred within the next two years; but this has no value for market participants. Yet, in about per cent of the cases, the typical model predicted a crisis but none occurred in the next two years. This, however, could be a sign that the model had done its work: it had predicted a crisis and the authorities took the proper measures to stave it off. On the other hand, an early warning, especially if it comes from reputable actors, could result in a crisiss occurring through self-fulfilling prophecies. This is a serious concern, given the fact that a change in market sentiment can trigger a financial crisis. It is possible that more transparency and information can lead to a crisis, rather than prevent it. Yet a small crisis early on is probably better than a crisis later on when the imbalances have been allowed to build up.In addition to being poor in determining the time of a crisis, early warning models do poorly in predicting a crisis out of sample, that is to say, for a period or for countries that the model was not designed for. For example, almost nobody predicted the East Asian crises, and in particular their timing, because their causes had not previously been recognized as important. The major financial crises over the past several decades have brought different elements to the fore, with theory running behind, trying to catch up with reality.Over time, and with the improvement of macroeconomic policies, the role of the particularities of financial markets has gained in prominence in the explanation of financial crises. Macroeconomic imbalances, such as budget deficits and exchange-rate overvaluation, and exogenous shocks (terms-of-trade shocks, interest rate increases and economic slowdown in many developed countries) were seen to be the main causes of the debt crisis of the s. Domestic financial sector fragilities received very little attention in the analyses of this crisis. The Mexican crisis of was partly explained by self-fulfilling prophecies, which had been made possible, however, by weak macroeconomic fundamentals, such as an overvalued exchange rate in combination with the accumulation of dollar-denominated short-term debt. Again, financial sector fragilities were hardly emphasized. This changed in the Asian crises. Macroeconomic imbalances were largely absent or minor, except in Thailand where the real exchange rate had appreciated unsustainably. However, the fiscal position was sound and inflation was low in all the crisis countries. After the crisis erupted, weaknesses in the financial sector came to the fore and have been at the core of the explanations of the crises.As the role of the financial sector in causing financial crises has increased, crises have become harder to predict. Self-fulfilling crises are particularly difficult to anticipate and models identify self-fulfilling crises only for a range of values of economic variables. Within this range a crisis may occur but is not inevitable. However, the task of determining that range for each economic variable that might possibly play a role in causing a financial crisis is still enormous. Moreover, there is no uniform set of variables that can predict crises. The most important variables differ from country to country and depend on the specific circumstances. Nevertheless, a number of variables turned up in most models as important leading indicators. They include real exchange-rate appreciation, short-term foreign liabilities (as percentage of reserves) and domestic credit expansion.Macroeconomic policiesMacroeconomic policies play a crucial role in preventing a financial crisis and mitigating its effect if it occurs. They are particularly important for exchange-rate management. Poor macroeconomic policies that lead to external and internal imbalances, such as budget and current-account deficits, can directly cause a currency crisis or can make an attack on the currency more likely. Unfortunately, it is not always clear what good macroeconomic policy is. For example, hyperinflation is clearly a sign of failing macroeconomic policy, but this might not be the case for moderate inflation.Over time, the role of macroeconomic policies in causing a financial crisis has decreased relative to other factors, perhaps partly as a result of improved macroeconomic policies in many parts of the world. For example, double and triple-digit inflation rates became much less frequent in the second half of the s. Macroeconomic policies with regard to inflation, budget deficits and exchange rates were sound in almost all Asian countries that faced a financial crisis in -; they are a necessary condition for the prevention of crises, but are recognized as not being sufficient.While macroeconomic policies as such have become relatively less important, financial markets and the interaction between financial markets and macroeconomic policies have gained prominence in the recent financial crises. Partly because of this interaction, macroeconomic policy, particularly monetary policy and exchange-rate policy, continues to play a crucial role in the prevention and mitigation of financial crises. For example, a depreciating exchange rate increases the local currency liabilities of the private and public sectors if they have debt that is denominated in foreign currency. Higher interest rates have adverse implications for debt servicing, asset prices, balance sheets and economic activity. Moreover, higher interest rates can aggravate adverse selection and moral hazard problems. Such changes in interest and exchange rates can precipitate, cause or contribute to a financial crisis. Stabilizing them through proper macroeconomic measures can prevent and mitigate a financial crisis. On the other hand, it should be recognized that for a country with a well-developed financial system and a sound macroeconomic policy, allowing one variable to adjust to a shock can be the appropriate policyAustralias exchange rate adjusted downward as a result of the Asian shock and the country rose out the crisis rather well.Macroeconomic policy becomes particularly important when foreign capital flows into a country. Capital inflows fuel economic activity and, in this case, foreign direct investment (FDI) could be used to create new and competitive export industries. Yet the inflows are likely to put upward pressure on the exchange rate, endangering the competitiveness of existing exports, and exerting downward pressure on interest rates. Stabilizing interest and exchange rates, or neutralizing the effects of their changes, is a major task of macroeconomic policy in these circumstances. To this end, Governments have often sterilized capital inflows by selling bonds to offset the expansionary effect of capital inflows on the economy. This, however, pushes up the interest rate and the fact that, if it is done aggressively, domestic interest rates will be higher than before the capital inflows started, will encourage more foreign inflows, particularly of the short-term kind. Sterilization tends to become less effective and more expensive in fiscal terms over time. Even if sterilization is abandoned, the boom could continue, as the lower domestic interest rate will lead to higher demand for domestic credit. The boom is also fuelled by an appreciating exchange rate, which increases the returns on investment for foreigners. High returns could lead to expectations of further appreciation and encourage more capital inflows.Fiscal policy can also partly counter the effects of capital inflows. Fiscal revenues are often pro-cyclical as tax revenues increase with the expansion of output. To avoid fuelling the boom, some cuts in government expenditures might be required. Discretionary spending, like public investment, is a possible target for cuts, but is not always politically feasible. As discussed at greater length in chapter V, an alternative is a stabilization fund in which revenues from capital inflows or commodity booms could be set aside to avoid cuts in government expenditures when the good times end. Part of these funds could, for example, be used to finance social safety nets. These funds should, however, not be used for explicit or implicit guarantees for the private sector because this might only fuel the boom.Dampening a boom and avoiding a bust cannot be accomplished by macroeconomic policy alone, but a greater effort to make macroeconomic policies counter-cyclical and flexible is needed. This is also of import in the wake of a crisis. It is now recognized, for example, that, after the onset of the crisis in east_asia, macroeconomic policies were too tight, exacerbating the economic downturn and the negative impact on the vulnerable poor. Restoring confidence might require expansionary policies in the wake of a crisis to offset the negative effect on private consumption and demand.Regulation and supervisionIn respect of preventing financial crises, a great deal of emphasis has been placed on the regulation and supervision of the financial sector, largely because inadequate regulation and supervision have contributed toor even caused financial crises. In east_asia, for example, the capital inflows led to a growth in the number of banks and non-bank institutions and risky lending. Crucially, this growth occurred at a time when the capacity to supervise was inadequate and regulation outdated or not enforced.Developing countries face large obstacles to the establishment of adequate prudential regulation and supervision. In many developing countries, there is a dearth of professionals such as accountants, regulators, supervisors and managers. In some countries, accounting standards, rules for loan classification and loan-loss provisions, and reporting and disclosure requirements do not even exist. Weak supervision and regulation and lack of professionals also had its counterpart at the level of the financial institutions. Banks often suffer from inadequate expertise for screening and monitoring borrowers, and from poor loan documentation and internal controls. In some countries, insider lending is a major contributor to bank failures. Politicians or supervisors who are shareholders or directors often received loans from parastatals or other favours in return for deposits. Political connections are also used to obtain banks licenses or prevent action by regulators, reducing constraints on imprudent lending and worsening moral hazard problems.The creation of the capacity to monitor, supervise and regulate financial institutions is essential before financial liberalization commences. For example, if interest rates are liberalized and rise, moral hazard and adverse selection problems increase, and if the banking system is unsound or prudential regulation inadequate, a financial crisis becomes more likely. Thus, banking crises are more likely when the financial system is liberalized but this effect is weakeralbeit still existentwhen the supervision and regulation are strong. It is quite unlikely that a repressed financial system would have enough human capacity in the areas of prudential supervision and regulation. These skills could be built up only over time. This implies that financial liberalization should take into consideration not only competition and efficiency, but also progress in capacity-building in terms of human capital and institutional infrastructure in the field of financial risk management.The basic arguments for regulation and supervision are consumer protection, reduction in systemic risk and enhancement of the performance of markets. The support for better prudential regulation and supervision is (almost) universal. Nonetheless, the how, the scope, the limits and their success in preventing crisis remain controversial areas.There are limits to what supervision can accomplish. Supervisions and regulation are, indeed, likely to always run behind technological innovation. Moreover, the values of the assets on a banks balance sheet are susceptible to changes and regulators can hardly keep up with them in the rapidly evolving economic world.Also, there are disagreements on the scope of supervision and regulation. They pertain, for example, to whether or to what degree supervision and regulation can be extended to corporations, the international arena, non-bank financial institutions (such as mutual funds), offshore banking centres and highly leveraged institutions such as hedge funds. The accumulation of short-term debt by private corporations was as much a factor in the financial crisis in east_asia as the accumulation of similar debts by banks, both factors being largely unknown to the authorities. This raises the issue of the monetary authorities preventing the overexposure of corporations. Some argue that this could be achieved indirectly through the strict regulation of banks that lend to them, for example, by restricting lending when corporations have accumulated a large share of short-term foreign debt. This, however, might not be sufficient and measures to regulate borrowing by firms might involve restrictions on foreign borrowing, inflow or outflow taxes and limitations on tax deductibility.Non-bank financial institutions, including highly leveraged institutions, have become large players in financial markets, but regulation and supervision are relatively weak. This issue has been taken up in a number of reports. For example, the Financial Stability Forum Working Group on Highly Leveraged Institutions recommended a number of measures that were mainly addressed at financial institutions that were counterparts, for example, banks that provided credit to the highly leveraged institutions. It did not recommend an international credit register or direct regulation of the highly leveraged institutions that were currently unregulated, although it would reconsider these proposals in the future, particularly if the recommendations were not implemented.The regulation and supervision of offshore banking centres and non-bank financial institutions are closely intertwined with the question whether regulation on an international level is adequate. The increased openness of capital markets, with large amounts of capital flowing across borders, has raised the need for international regulation. It is impossible for a national authority to know the exact risk exposure of all financial (and non-financial) institutions within its jurisdiction without information from other authorities. Since the s, international regulation has been conducted through cooperation of national authorities. Some have argued that this leaves large gaps, which should be filled by the establishment of a new international regulatory authority. Others have argued that this is unrealistic and that intensified cooperation among national authorities should be the approach.The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basel, Switzerland, has been the main institution for international cooperation and coordination regarding regulation. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision launched in capital adequacy requirements for banks ( Basel Capital Accord). This Accord made a major contribution to the use of standardized risk-weighted capital-to-asset ratios by supervising authorities to assess banking safety, originally for internationally active banks of the Group of Ten (the original sponsors), but later across the world. Yet, over time deficiencies emerged. In fact, they might have contributed to the financial crises in the s, as short-term lending gets a lower risk weighting and needs less provisioning capital, according to the Accord. Generally, the risk weighting system is rather crude. Moreover, with the advent of new risk-management techniques, the focus only on capital ratios became outdated. In June , the Basel Committee issued a consultative document on a new capital adequacy framework. It is proposed that the new framework be based on three pillars: revised minimum capital requirements, the development of a supervisory review of banks capital adequacy and more effective utilization of market discipline. The details of these proposals are still under consideration and it is hoped that the accord will be finalized during with a view to implementation in .The Basel Committee took another step towards improved international regulation with the publication of the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision in . These principles, which were formulated with the participation of several developing countries and economies in transition, aimed at enhancing the quality of supervision within countries across the globe. The principles emphasized the importance of consolidated statements on exposures, which are critical in the case of transnational banks with subsidiaries all over the world.There is a need to adopt counter-cyclical regulation, as currently regulation does little to dampen a boom. This could include setting predetermined rules that would set higher capital adequacy ratios in times of a boom, caps on the acceptable value for collateral purposes of certain assets that are likely to be inflated during a boom period (such as real estate and stocks), and limits on lending to the real estate sector and construction. Again, the case for countercyclical regulation has been challenged as mixing two separate issues: countercyclical macroeconomic policy with bank regulation.Exchange-rate regimesTo many, the exchange-rate regime was one important cause of the crises in Mexico (-), east_asia (-), the russian_federation () and Brazil (). All the crisis countries had a pegged or managed exchange rate before the crisis. In east_asia, for example, financial market participants perceived the stability of the rate as reducing the risk of devaluation and this fuelled capital inflows. Lending by foreigners and foreign borrowing by domestic banks and firms, made possible by the liberalization of the financial sector and capital account, were considered relatively safe as the exchange-rate risk was minimal. This behaviour might have been further encouraged by implicit or explicit government guarantees. When the current-account deficit grew, partly as a result of the appreciation of the real exchange rate, short-term liabilities became large compared with the international reserves. Investors and lenders fled and the consequence was a currency crisis because the exchangerate adjustment was not managed in a timely enough fashion.These events have led to a questioning of the feasibility of an exchange-rate regime that is between the extremes of a completely freely floating exchange rate and a very hard pegged regime, such as a currency board, dollarization or a monetary union. The argument is that either of the two extremes is less vulnerable to financial crises because each removes the uncertainty with regard to policies. At either extreme, markets no longer have to guess what Governments will do because, in the fixed case, monetary policy is devoted solely to the defence of the parity and, in the floating case, policies to manage the exchange rate are not used at all. This has become the conventional wisdom although the official view of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is now more cautious: The usual approach by the IMF on this matter has been to abide by a member countrys preferred exchange-rate regime and to tailor its overall policy advice accordingly. In practice, the intermediate regimes have shrunk. Between and , the number of countries with an intermediate exchange-rate regime declined from to per cent.The theoretical basis for the vanishing intermediate regime is a corollary of the impossible trinity, which states that one can attain only two of the three following objectives: full capital mobility, fixed exchange rates and monetary autonomy. During the Bretton Woods era of fixed exchange rates that ended in the early s, fixed exchange rates and monetary autonomy prevailed, while capital flows were restricted. Capital mobility and fixed exchange rates had been combinedand monetary autonomy sacrificedduring the gold standard period. The same now applies to countries with currency boards and the euroarea countries. The final option is to combine capital mobility and monetary autonomy, while exchange rates generally float.In a world that is increasingly financially integrated, the choice appears to be between exchange-rate stability and monetary autonomy. According to this thinking, the room between the extremes of irretrievably fixed and completely floating exchange rates, also referred to as the corner solutions, has become smaller; to some, the possibility of an intermediate regime, such as a crawling peg or band, target zone or adjustable peg, has disappeared.Nevertheless, there is some discord about the limited feasibility of intermediate regimes. First of all, the theoretical basis for it is rather weak. It is possible to have some capital mobility, some exchange-rate stability and some monetary autonomy. There is little theoretical justification for choosing for two of the three options in total rather than part of each. Also, the evidence on the disappearing intermediate regimes is based on what countries say they do, rather than what they actually do. Thus, many countries that claim to have a freely floating exchange rate are, in reality, managing the rate.Moreover, the argument that intermediate regimes are more likely to generate financial crises is questionable. Indeed, intermediate regimes have been associated with financial crises, but this does not mean that they are the ultimate cause. The underlying cause might be the behaviour of financial market participants. For example, it seems unreasonable to blame the exchange-rate regime if banks and firms keep accumulating short-term unhedged liabilities because they wrongly assume that a pegged exchange rate is irretrievably fixed.Furthermore, both purely fixed and freely floating exchange-rate regimes are vulnerable to financial crises. Under a fixed regime, such as a currency board, a currency crisis might be less likely, but only at the expense of banking crises as the banking sector is left without a lender of last resort. An appreciating real exchange rate is a relatively good predictor of banking and currency crises. However, this can occur under any exchange-rate regime. Even freely floating and permanently fixed exchange rates can have extended periods of large misalignments and these can lead to financial crises.When choosing an exchange-rate regime, a country has to balance credibility and flexibility. A permanently fixed exchange rate, such as dollarization or a currency board, is the most credible but the least flexible regime; the exchange rate cannot be adjusted after an exogenous shock, such as a fall in the terms of trade. The fixed exchange rate provides a credible nominal anchor for prices and stability for exporters and investors. In contrast, a freely floating exchange rate adjusts itself in case of an exogenous shock and is able to do so more easily than nominal prices and wages. However, flexibility might come at the expense of credibility. Credibility for a freely floating regime is established only if market participants are convinced that the authorities will not intervene, whatever the circumstances. Experience suggests that this can, on occasion, become a difficult policy to sustain.If currency traders and in particular financial markets do not find the current policies of a Government credible and so believe that they will be abandoned, an attack on the currency becomes probable. Some argue that the corner solutions to exchange-rate regimes might be less vulnerable to an attack because they are more transparent and verifiable and their credibility is correspondingly larger. In theory, corner solutions can be more easily verified by market participants as they can determine whether the value of a currency has changed in the case of a fixed parity, and whether the reserves of the central bank have been used to intervene in currency markets, in case of a float. Intermediate regimes are thus supposedly less transparent and therefore less credible. In contrast to the theory, some have argued that Governments prefer the lack of include the exchange-rate regime as a predictor.transparency because it allows them to act without the threat of informed criticism. They surely find life easier when there are no public benchmarks that can indicate failure.Many developing countries, however, find it hard to establish the level of credibility that is needed to reduce the volatility that would accompany a freely floating exchange rate. Floating exchange rates are particularly volatile in developing countries because these countries are more vulnerable to external shocks, as their currency markets are usually thin and capital flows, even if relatively small, have large effects on exchange rates. Developing countries usually prefer some exchange-rate stability for several reasons. First, it reduces uncertainty and encourages long-term investment. Moreover, preventing exchange-rate appreciation as a result of capital inflows maintains the competitiveness of exports and discourages further inflows in anticipation of a further appreciation. The inflows can also cause financial difficulties if a large proportion of private or public debt is denominated in foreign currency. Indeed, exchange-rate stability provides a nominal anchor against inflation. On the other hand, freely floating exchange rates have been advocated because the uncertainty they embody discourages short-term speculative capital flows.In sum, choosing an exchange-rate regime is a balancing act, involving trade-offs between internal and external economic objectives and between credibility and flexibility. No single exchange-rate regime can satisfy all objectives at all times. The particular regime best suited for a country depends on the prevailing economic and political circumstances. For example, a peg regime might be the proper one for countries that have suffered from high and chronic inflation because credibility in domestic policy is low. For most developing countries, intermediate regimes, in combination with some capital controls, have advantages because they provide both some stability and some flexibility while avoiding the rigorous demands on credibility required for corner solutions.Capital controlsIt is generally recommended that domestic financial liberalization should commence only after macroeconomic stability has been established. Moreover, it was commonly accepted that external financial liberalization should be carried out at the end of the economic reform sequence, if it is to be pursued at all. Liberalization of international financial flows did not become a major policy concern until the mid-s when private capital flows to developing countries were surging. IMF started to advocate that it should be given jurisdiction over the convertibility of the capital account of the balance of payments, whichin contrast to current-account convertibilityis not part of IMFs Articles of Agreement. However, the financial crises at the end of the s caused this goal to be put on hold.Capital flows from abroad, especially short-term flows, have been an important contributing factor in the financial crises of the s. Capital controls can play a role in the prevention of a financial crisis, particularly during the transition period when supervisory and regulatory institutions or macroeconomic stability is still inadequate. Controls on short-term capital inflows are particularly important. They can dampen excessive inflows and prevent the overheating of an economy that puts macroeconomic policy to the test. Moreover, if they curtail the inflows, capital controls can reduce the rush to the exit when confidence changes. It has been argued that controls on outflows are harder to implement, especially when the crisis is already unfolding because they can be circumvented more easily. Nevertheless, Malaysia has made rather effective use of them. Capital controls have also had success in several other countries. Chile imposed reserve requirements on foreign loans and foreign-owned deposits of short maturity, which lengthened the maturity of capital inflows. Brazil and Colombia have taxed short-term inflows and Colombia has imposed minimum stay periods for FDI. Chinas capital account is not convertible and India has used capital controls. It is thought that these controls on the capital account contributed to the fact that these countries were relatively insulated from contagion resulting from the East Asian crises.Liquidity, the lender of last resort and the problem of moral hazardProviding liquidity to the economy, or to particular financial institutions, has always been an important step in preventing and mitigating a financial crisis. If a country or a bank develops payment problems, or is perceived to have such problems, an infusion of liquidity can prevent or stop a run-out of the currency or on the deposits of the bank. The fundamental reason for providing a lender of last resort is to reduce systemic risk, that is to say, the risk of a financial crisis to the economy (or society) as a whole, which is larger than the sum of the risks that each individual participant faces as a result of the external effects of a crisis.The crucial questions for a lender of last resort are by whom, when, how much, to whom and at what rate. These questions have been hotly debated for centuries. According to Walter Bagehot, the first editor of The Economist, liquidity should be provided seldom, at a penalty rate on sound collateral to illiquid but solvent institutions and in as great a quantity as the public asks for. The distinction between illiquid and insolvent institutions is not always easy to make but asking for sound collateral is a starting point. The penalty rate should discourage borrowing by healthy institutions and reduce the risk of moral hazard. Overall, therefore, it can be argued that the lender of last resort should provide as much liquidity as is demanded by illiquid but solvent institutions at a penalty rate.This answers the questions only partly. Providing liquidity in case of a (pending) crisis is more an art than a science, particularly with regard to timing. Too little, too late, which will worsen the crisis, and too much, too early, which will exacerbate moral hazard, are both indications of failure. After a crash, one has to find a balance between waiting for some time to let insolvent institutions fail and waiting so long that solvent ones also fail.When transactions and debts are in the local currency, the central bank is usually the lender of last resort, but not necessarily. Private firms (coordinated, for example, by J.P. Morgan in in the united_states) have also supplied liquidity. When some of the liabilities are in a foreign currency, the central bank can play a crucial role in a liquidity crisis because it can disburse foreign reserves for emergencies and should be able to borrow abroad more easily than private firms.Internationally, there is no clear-cut lender of last resort, but IMF comes closest to filling the role. Central banks (often coordinated by BIS), other institutions and groups of (mostly developed) countries have also played that role, or acted in unison. Yet, there are several shortcomings to the current system entailing questions of sufficient resources, biases against (certain) developing countries, transparency and equity.The need for an international lender of last resort has increased in recent years because of the volatility of capital flows and the possibility of contagion of financial crises. An international lender of last resort is also critical for countries where a domestic one is absent or ineffective, either by choice (in the case of a currency board) or in practice (in the case of a small, highly open economy). The adequacy of IMFs resources should be judged in relation to these needs. Compared with the size of the world economy, or even with the potential borrower base, the quotas of IMF have declined since its inception in . As of June , quotas amounted to only some $ billion, including weaker currencies which in practice cannot be lent. IMF has access to additional resources under the General Arrangements to Borrow, created in , and the New Arrangements to Borrow, created in . Moreover, IMF could reinvigorate the special drawing rights (SDRs), which were created in . SDRs can be allocated, after an per cent majority decision, to meet the long-term global need, as and when it arises, to supplement existing reserve assets. This possibility, however, has been rarely used. SDRs are the closest IMF can come to creating money, in parallel to a central bank in a domestic situation of lender of last resort. SDRs, however, cannot be created quickly enough in case of an emergency. Questions remain whether IMF has sufficient resources, whether the existing facilities adequately address the need for emergency funding, and whether they can be disbursed quickly enough to stem a crisis, particularly when conditions are attached.The answers to the questions posed above attempt to moderate the problem of moral hazard. If financial market participants know that liquidity will be forthcoming when they face payments problems, will they act irresponsibly? Moral hazard can never be totally avoided, but with proper incentives it can be reduced. Two strategies are usually employed: risk-sharing and regulation.The involvement of the private sector in the resolution of a financial crisis has gained momentum since the Asian crisis. During the s, large amounts of internationally provided public funds were used to bail out private sector participants, foreign and domestic. This has raised issues of fairness in as much as equity investors incurred greater losses than banks and the rich benefited from these bail-outs more than the poor. Private sector involvement is also critical because of a collective action problem. When a crisis seems likely, each creditor has an incentive to immediately attempt to cash outstanding credits with the threatened party; if all creditors do so, the debtor is unlikely to be able to meet all demands and all creditors will lose. On the other hand, if creditors jointly agree to roll over the loans, while an adjustment programme is implemented, each creditor will recover a much larger share of its loan. An agreement among creditors can be facilitated by international agencies. A similar result can be reached by including a clause about rescheduling and a stay of payments in bonds and other contracts. Other proposals in this area include arrangements that would, to all intents and purposes, declare a country bankrupt to protect it against creditors.The second component of a strategy to minimize moral hazard is prudential regulation and supervision (see above). The creation of a safety net for the financial sector without supervision and prudential regulation is likely to encourage risky behaviour.In the aftermath of the Asian crisis, a broad consensus quickly developed on the need to reduce excessive instability in international economic and financial activity. By the end of the decade, there was agreement on broad policy goals with respect to doing so, including a sound and stable macroeconomic environment and well-functioning and robust financial systems in both capital exporting and capital importing countries. There has also been considerable agreement on many of the elements needed to achieve these goals. Moreover, as argued above, many of the general conclusions reached over the last years are being turned into concrete policies and practices. This means not that there are no disputes, but rather that policy makers around the world are operating largely from a common assessment of what policies to implement in several areas. The major international financial institutions have also been rethinking how best to assist countries in this regard.Despite significant progress in strengthening international economic and financial stability, there is no room for complacency. The recent crisis episodes in Argentina and Turkey are a powerful reminder that much more needs to be done, and that there still remain important gaps and asymmetries in the process of international financial reform. These asymmetries include (but are not limited to) the limited participation of developing countries in the decision-making for a new financial architecture, inadequate international regulation of private capital flows, and slow progress in exploring more effective ways of achieving international provision of official liquidity to control crises within countries and to prevent their spreading to other countries. Also, in the discussions on the design of a new international financial architecture, the highly important issues of appropriate external financing for low-income countries have been largely neglected.Correction of these and other asymmetries requires complementary and enhanced exchanges among all the parties concerned. Here one of the outstanding issues is how to better integrate the views and needs of all countries into the process for further elaboration of a new international financial system that is responsive to the priorities of growth and development and to the promotion of economic and social equity. The united_nations should be among those actors that bring their own perspective to identifying emerging issues and policy gaps. It is playing a major role in convening and facilitating policy dialogue and consensus-building on global economic, financial and development problems among the relevant stakeholders. The International Conference on Financing for Development to be held in Monterrey, Mexico, in March will furnish one opportunity for the Organization to fulfil that role.In recent years, it has frequently been maintained that the increasing globalization of the world economy has had a negative impact on its less well off members, especially the poorer developing countries and the economies in transition. It is pointed out that many of these countries have simply been excluded from the various benefits of globalization. Moreover, it is argued that poorer economies are rendered more vulnerable owing to their increased exposure to the fluctuations and vacillations of an increasingly open global economy.The present chapter will discuss the question of vulnerability from the perspective of trade. There are two dimensions to this issue. First, trade is critical to development via its potential impact on growth, which is fundamental in overcoming vulnerability and poverty. Most, if not all, studies show a high positive impact of trade on economic growth. Trade is thus well positioned to be part of the solution, providing a mechanism whereby countries may grow and flourish, thereby reducing vulnerability.Indeed, trade is one of the means whereby countries can link themselves to the world economy as part of the ongoing process of globalization. Critics of globalization contend, however, that, far from being part of the solution, trade may be part of the problem. Such detractors argue that the exogenous trade shocks to which small, open economies are exposed are inherently destabilizing, rendering countries more vulnerable than they otherwise would be. They further maintain that volatile world prices for primary commodities constitute a significant source of uncertainty and risk for many countries, especially the low-income economies, with a less diversified export base, that depend on such products for export revenue. These arguments embody the second dimension of the issue of trade and vulnerability.That countriesand even population groups within countrieshave not shared equally in the fruits of globalization is beyond a doubt. More contentious, however, is the extent to which international trade helps poorer countries to overcome their poverty and whether increasing trade is reducing or exacerbating their vulnerability.This chapter will begin by addressing the role of trade as a response to vulnerability via its impact on economic growth. To this end, it briefly examines the recent growth of world trade and the universality of participation in this expansion. The chapter then assesses one aspect of the current backlash against globalization. This has taken place under the guise of attempts to discredit the trade-to-growth paradigm. The second part of the chapter then turns to the shocks countries experience by virtue of their participation in the global trading system. The frequently maintained hypothesis in this regard is that poorer countries increase their vulnerability when they trade owing to their increased exposure to events beyond their control. Included here would be commodity price uncertainty and instability, currency devaluations by significant partners or competitors, and sudden shifts in capital inflows, as well as export market fluctuations and vacillations. The real issue, however, is not so much whether there is greater exposure since there are no real alternatives to being a fully participating member of the global economy. As the Director-General of the world_trade_organization recently pointed out, globalization is a process, not a policy. The concern, therefore, has to be what measures can be devised to minimize any problems that might ensue and to maximize potential benefits. The chapter concludes by looking at some such instruments and discussing policy considerations.Most trade issues pertain to all developing countries. However, it is the poorest of the developing countriesthe least developedthat warrant particular concern. Most of these countries have fared poorly as regards growth. Most have been marginalized as regards trade. The obstacles that they face in trying to integrate themselves into the world economy are of particular concern, therefore, as are the measures that could be taken to assist them in this endeavour. However, trade liberalization, though critical, is unlikely to be enough since these economies now face growing competition from freer markets and more successful developing countries. Thus, liberalized trade may be a necessary condition, but it is a far from sufficient one, for setting the least developed on the sustained growth paths that will enable them to integrate themselves into the global economy. In the presence of appropriate trade conditions and provisions, the decisive element will be their own policies in the coming decades.Trade underwent a global boom during the entire second half of the twentieth century. The volume of world trade increased at an annual average rate of . per cent per annum between and . Thus, it almost consistently outpaced the growth of world output, which grew about . per cent per year. Moreover, this trend actually escalated as of the s. At least two questions present themselves here. First, why has this happened and, second, is this a global phenomenon or are only certain countries involved?The phenomenon of expanding world tradeone of the linchpins of globalizationcan be accounted for in a variety of ways, though no one explanation alone suffices to explain the vast expansion in international trade flows. Nevertheless, two factors that have played a huge role in motivating global trade are increasing liberalization and the great reductions in the costs of transport and communications.Much as liberalization has driven trade, the eight rounds of multilateral trade negotiations, which took place post-Second World War and whose culmination was the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, have driven liberalization. Though this has proceeded at differing speeds in different economies, the commitment to increased liberalization is now almost universal. The fact that the average tariff level declined from about per cent in the late s when the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was established to under per cent in the s has played a role in increasing trade. This trend towards greater openness will be discussed below.The other key element in increasing trade stems from the declining costs of transport and communications. In recent years, average revenue per mile in air transport has fallen dramatically, as has the cost of a three-minute telephone call or electronic message between London and New York. Meanwhile, the unit cost of sea freight fell some per cent in real terms between the beginning of the s and , making it far easier and cheaper to ship goods worldwide. This sharp decline in the cost of shipping has been driven by at least three trends. First, a number of technological innovations, broadly referred to as containerization, have prompted rapid improvements in productivity with respect to the handling of cargo. Second, the transport industry has undergone a considerable amount of deregulation commencing in the mid-s. The upshot, and third development, has been a trend towards greater competition, which, in turn, induced greater productivity and lower costs. Not only have the boundaries between different modes of transport been broken down, but capacity has also grown dramatically. For example, in , world containership fleets had a capacity of half a million -foot containers. By , the equivalent figure was over million.Granted that trade has been booming in the post-Second World War period, a second issue is the universality of this trend. One approach to this question is to look at growth in the value of world merchandise trade by region (see table V.).Over the past half-century, the shares of North America and latin_america in world merchandise exports have declined, as has the share of Africa. Western Europe and Asiamost particularly China, Japan and the so-called Asian tigersexemplify the countervailing trend, with shares that have risen dramatically. The fact remains, however, that Africas share has declined most drastically. Indeed, in the past years, only two regions have registered significantTable V..SHARE OF WORLD MERCHANDISE EXPORTS BY REGION, , AND PercentageWorldNorth Americalatin_america Western Europe Transition economies AfricaMiddle east_asiaChina Japan. . .. . .declines in their trade shares: the transition economies (which are still recovering from the changes of the early s) and Africa. Indeed, Africas share has declined steadily since .It is thus clear why so much attention is now focused on Africa as regards trade marginalization. Over the past decade, Africa has lagged well behind the world average on the export front, with annual percentage change of only . per cent between and , compared with a global average of per cent. As a result, outside of the oil-exporters, there was not a single African country among the set of the leading exporters in world merchandise trade in , this despite the fact that there were several other developing countries belonging to the setincluding, for example, China in seventh place, as well as the Republic of Korea, Taiwan Province of China, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Brazil.The benefits of liberalization, in terms of growth, have long been established. An open trade regime has the capacity to increase welfare and income in a variety of ways. As accepted as these tenets are, a number of concerns have emerged with regard to them. One empirical source of doubt is that attempts to estimate the impact on gross domestic product (GDP) have traditionally come up with very small numbers. From a theoretical perspective, another source of doubt is that the welfare effect of improved resource allocation is a one-time event. It thus may lead to a higher level of income, but not to sustained long-term growth (though there will be short-run growth as an economy moves to a higher income level).Because of such concerns, extensive efforts have been undertaken to document the trade-growth relationship. By now, extensive empirical research exists showing that growth prospects, over very long periods of time, are greatly enhanced by trade openness, a finding that fits in neatly with the current focus on fully participatory globalization. For instance, one estimate of the tariff changes that five developing countries had been undertaking as part of their Uruguay Round commitments, found that a significant welfare gain could be realized. An oft-cited cross-country study, which analysed how openness related to economic performance, found that open economies had grown at an annual average rate of . per cent over the s and s, while the closed economies in the sample grew at an average annual rate of only . per cent. Regressions in this cross-country study further showed that open economies had adjusted more rapidly than closed economies to making the shift from being primary-intensive to being manufactures-intensive exporters. They also showed that closed economies had been more vulnerable to financial or inflation crises than were open economies. Of economies that had been open throughout the s, only succumbed to such a crisis, while of developing countries that had been closed throughout the same period experienced crises.However, such cross-country regression research has, of late, encountered criticism of sorts, bringing into question the conclusions of such analyses. This has, in turn, provided some ammunition for the current backlash against the process of globalization. One such criticism is that there is a lack of conclusive evidence as to the direction of causality between openness and growth. Afurther shortcoming is said to be the fact that many of the openness measures, or proxies, used to test the openness-growth relationship do not solely reflect trade phenomena, but other policy variables that are actually more macroeconomic in nature as well. Also, the point is made that the results of studies assessing the effects of openness on economic growth are extremely sensitive to the choice of time period and/or sample countries. While these arguments have been resuscitated in the past few years, they are, in fact, not at all new. The shortcomings of such cross-country analyses were recognized more than a decade ago.Irrespective of the merits of cross-national analysis of this sort (and there appears to be general agreement that it is a clumsy tool at best), there remains the more important issue of the channels through which openness affects growth. Several such conduits are customarily highlighted. First, by bringing incentives closer to international opportunity costs, liberalization promotes an optimum allocation of resources in production, reorienting resources to areas of comparative advantage. Second, optimality in consumption is also encouraged. Third, the incentive to engage in income-generating, but unproductive, activities associated with protectionsuch as smuggling, lobbying and tariff evasionis minimized. In addition, openness can affect both the level and the efficiency of investment. For example, an open regime can increase market size, thereby leading to investment in industries with increasing returns that would not have been viable if constrained by a smaller market. Openness also allows access to capital goods that might otherwise have been unavailable or too expensive, hence removing some structural constraints on investment and production. Moreover, openness may increase the efficiency of investment, minimizing the probability of an immiserizing outcome in the recipient. Empirical research, looking at countries between -and decomposing the effects of trade openness on growth, has suggested that increased investment may be the most important. Finally, there may be a number of socalled grey area dynamic effects, which are intrinsically difficult to measure. Greater openness may encourage more innovation, for example, and greater Xefficiency, which is the production of output at the lowest possible cost.A ROUTE OUT OF POVERTY: IMPROVING MARKET ACCESS FOR THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIESThe advantages of opennessas well as the success of many export-oriented economiesexplain why the policy has so many proponents. The need to encourage the pursuit of such a policy in turn necessitates ensuring easy market access. This is especially essential for the poorest economies.Developed-country tariffs and preferencesOrganisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) markets serve as a major outlet for exports of least developed countries. In , those markets accounted for per cent of the latters total exports. The highest rates of duty levied by developed countries on exports of least developed countries apply to manufactures. For example, these can be as high as per cent (excluding preferences) and . per cent (including preferences) forBangladesh and . per cent (excluding preferences) and . per cent (including preferences) for Maldives. Such relatively high rates are explained by the fact that the majority of least developed countries in the sample of those that export manufactures have recorded a concentration of manufactured exports in the Multi-Fibre Arrangement-dominated textiles and clothing sectors. This does not hold for countries such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, whose exports of manufactures consist of processed forms of copper and other inputs into industrial production, rather than textiles and clothing. Consequently, these countries face far lower tariffs on their manufactured exports. Overall, nearly all exports of the fuels, forestry, minerals and mining sectors from least developed countries to developed markets enter duty-free or virtually so.Exports of least developed countries into developed markets are also aided by a variety of preference schemes, although a number of studies that have measured statistically the trade effects of such European Union (EU) schemes as the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) suggest that they have had only limited success in generating significant export growth or improving the trade shares of beneficiaries. Nevertheless, least developed country beneficiaries of preferences under such arrangements as GSP, the Lome Convention and the Caribbean Basin Initiative have expressed concerns that multilateral liberalization might harm them via preference erosion. A considerable loss in preference margins will have occurred in Quad (Canada, EU, Japan and the united_states of America) markets once all of the Uruguay Round agreements have been fully implemented. Much empirical work, however, suggests that the losses due to preference erosion are in many cases more than outweighed by multilateral liberalization, though there may still be problems of adjustment. It is apparent, for example, that as preferences are rolled back, and as liberalization increasingly takes hold, countries will face more vigorous international competition. Whether they can develop or maintain viable export sectors will be contingent on their achieving reforms aimed, for example, at cost competitiveness.EU took a further step to provide special trade treatment for the poorest developing countries when, on February , it rescinded quotas and duties on all products except military weapons from least developed countriestermed the Everything but Arms initiative. However, full liberalization of sugar, rice and bananas is subject to a transition period. To compensate for the delay in full liberalization, EU has offered immediate market access to the least developed countries through duty-free quotas for sugar and rice, based initially on previous shipments from these countries during the s, plus per cent. EU intends to monitor imports of these three commodities and apply safeguard measures, if necessary, to prevent surges. There will also be strict monitoring to verify rules of origin as well as potential circumvention. According to one estimate, these EU measures, once fully phased in, would increase exports by the poorest nations to EU by from to per cent.The impact of this initiative, according to other recent estimates, however, will be only a small increase in exports from least developed countries. The benefits to least developed countries would be far greater if Canada, Japan and the united_states followed the lead of EU.Developing-country marketsSince almost one third of exports of least developed countries are directed to developing-country markets, the latters market access conditionsas measured by tariff rates that apply to products of export interest to least developed countriesare of particular concern. Overall applied rates on the current exports of least developed countries continue to be higher in developing countries and transition economies than in developed countries. This is true in all sectors: agriculture, as well as fisheries, fuels, forestry, minerals and mining, and manufactures. Cameroon, for example, faces developed market tariffs on agriculture of between . and . per cent (excluding and including preferences, respectively), compared with comparable developing market tariffs of between . and . per cent. As regards exports of manufactures, developing-country rates are often substantially higher. For example, Bangladesh faces rates of between . and . per cent in developed countries as compared with a rate of . per cent in other developing countries.The possibility of creating preferential trading schemes among least developed countries has been put forward as a means of expanding their markets and introducing economies of scale in production. The logic here is that as such countries expand their imports, and given their generally higher trade barriers, they may offer each other a promising avenue for least developed countries export growth. The issue is whether such groupings of least developed countries, with similar comparatives advantages, would be a viable propositionat least from the perspective of the traditional costs and benefits of trade integration.Overall, however, barriers to export growth currently hinge to a very great extent on the policies and supply capabilities of the least developed countries and not just on market access problems. For example, it has been maintained that, in the sub-Saharan African countries, too high a proportion of foreign exchange earningsearnings that should be invested in building productive capacity and transportation infrastructurepays for Africas high export transport costs. Such high costs, especially for processed products, often place African exporters at a competitive disadvantage. Not only do African countries use a far larger share of their foreign exchange earnings to pay for international transport services compared with other developing countries, but the relative importance of these payments has been increasing. In , for example, net freight payments to foreign nationals absorbed per cent of Africas export earnings. By , that ratio had increased to per cent, compared with about per cent for developing countries as a whole. For landlocked African countries (Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mali, the Niger, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe), the figure averaged per cent. These high transport costs are at least partially attributable to ill-advised Government polices. Evidence suggests that anticompetitive cargo reservation policies adopted by most African Governments have had an important adverse influence on freight costs, producing high rents for lines that have been shielded from the effects of competition. Similarly, the failure to maintain or improve transport infrastructure has also played a role. It has been argued that these policy concerns far outweigh the role of OECD tariff and non-tariff barriers in accounting for Africas poor trade performance.THE DILEMMA OF EXPORT INSTABILITY, UNCERTAINTY AND SHOCKSAll countries that trade internationally are subject to trade shocks. Trade shocks may be defined as sudden, large and unexpected shifts, or fluctuations, in the value or volume of an economys exports or imports. The quadrupling of oil prices in has perhaps embedded the notion of price variability in the public consciousness forever. Shocks in the international marketplace, however, can also occur in volume terms. The latter situation occurs either when an importers supply of a product is suddenly cut off or, conversely, when a country is cut off from an established export market. An example of such a sudden shock was the imposition by the united_states of a temporary ban, in midMarch , on imports of all animals and animal products from EU because of indications of highly contagious foot-and-mouth disease in the region. Many trade shocks are thus country-specific and all trading economiesdeveloped and developing, as well as those in transitioncan be hit by a trade shock. Moreover, while a great deal of the literature on trade shocks has focused on primary commodities, the reality is that all exportsmanufactures, as well as oil and non-oil primary commoditiesare subject to sudden, unexpected fluctuations. Such oscillations, in short, are inevitable and normal, though they have come to be regarded, for a variety of reasons, as highly undesirable. The difficulty lies in determining an appropriate policy response.Tariff and non-tariff barriersAs noted, declines in tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade, the mainstays of commercial policy, go a long way towards explaining recent trade growth. Thus, tariff averages have fallen in a substantial number of developed and developing economies, as well as in a number of economies in transition, in the wake of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations. Bound tariff rates have been reduced in all country groups. Two caveats are in order, however. The first qualification is that rates in developing countries continue to be almost and times the averages for the developed and the transition economies, respectivelyand, as agreed in the Uruguay Round, they have fallen relatively less than tariff rates in the latter two groups (see table V.). The significance of this lies in the fact that some per cent of developing-country exports are directed to other developing countries. The second qualification is that tariff levels may not be where the vulnerability story lies. To the contrary, lower tariff levels have enabled countries to expand their trade, with all the advantages this brings in terms of increased growth and income. Moreover, tariffs seldom change abruptly. Therefore, while existing tariffs may constitute an obstacle to further increases in trade, they seldom create trade shocks.Rather, from the perspective of shocks and vulnerability, the bigger issue at the present time may be non-tariff barriers to trade (NTBs). Such instruments, which include import quotas and voluntary export constraints, generally impede competition, sometimes at substantial costs in terms of economic efficiency and welfare. Moreover, they generate considerable trade tensions because of their ability to cut exporters off, often abruptly, from existing markets.The success that has been achieved in reducing tariff barriers has raised theTable V..TRADE-WEIGHTED TARIFF AVERAGES, PREAND POST-URUGUAY ROUNDPercentageGroupingPre-UruguayPost-UruguayDeveloped economies Developing economies Transition economies. . .. . .Note: This table refers to trade-weighted bound most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariff rates in percentage terms. These are often higher than actually levied tariffs. Moreover, the Uruguay Round converted some non-tariff barriers to trade (NTBs) to tariff equivalents (for the sake of greater transparency) and this, in some instances, raised the apparent levels of average bound tariff rates. The so-called bound MFN tariff rate, which is the highest rate of duty levied on a product permissible under the GATT/world_trade_organization, differs from the applied MFN rate, which is the nominal tariff rate excluding preferential rates and exemptions.The MFN principle requires that every privilege or concession granted by one contracting party to GATT/ world_trade_organization to a product of another contracting party be unconditionally granted to the like product of all other contracting parties. There are three important exceptions to the MFN principle that can be exploited by contracting parties namely, customs unions, free trade areas and preferences to developing countries. Many OECD countries have introduced special preferences to developing countries. The Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) provides one mechanism for granting such preferences. Under the GSP, a developed country can grant non-reciprocal duty concessions to imports from developing countries. Each importer determines its own system, including product coverage and the volume of imports affected. For further details, see OECD, Indicators of Tariff and Non-Tariff Trade Barriers (Paris, ).relative profile of NTBs. There are a large variety of such measures and these can essentially be separated into two broad categories. First, there are those NTBs that have a direct effect on importers costs and prices. Customs surcharges, additional taxes and fees that discriminate against imports are included in this category, as are anti-dumping and countervailing actions and export price restraints.The second broad group of NTBs, quantitative restrictions (QRs), include measures that involve quantity controls and thus have an indirect impact on import prices. QRs are designed to restrain the volume or value of imports of a particular commodity. The resulting scarcity tends, then, to raise the domestic price of this import, allowing domestic producers of import substitutes to charge higher prices than would have been possible in the absence of such restrictions. Among the most frequently used QRs are import quotas, licensing schemes, prohibitions and voluntary export restraints (VERs). In the last case, an exporter agrees to curtail exports of a particular commodity to a specified level, either in value or in volume terms. Such arrangements may be formal agreements negotiated among Governments, or they may be unofficial. By the early s, VERs, including those maintained under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement, had become a significant instrument of trade policy, particularly in EU and the united_states. In , for instance, OECD VERs encompassed almost per cent of imports from developing countries. In particular cases, the trade coverage ratio was far higher, covering some , and per cent of textile yarn and fabric, clothing and footwear imports, respectively.Despite some recent example of VERs, resort to quantitative restrictions has generally declined of late, thanks to the Uruguay Round negotiations. However, while the use of QRs has declined, interventions of other sorts have proliferated. Included here are anti-dumping (AD) and countervailing (CV) measures.Moreover, developing countries have started to make greater use of trade remedies, such as anti-dumping actions. In part, this is explained by the fact that many young developing countries have patterned their trade regime laws on those of the united_states. As of mid-, , measures were in force, with latin_america accounting for about of the total. As of the first half of , developing countries accounted for roughly per cent of the anti-dumping actions reported to the world_trade_organization. Argentina, for example, had such measures in force, Brazil had and Mexico had . However, Latin American economies were not the only ones using these measures. India, as of mid-, had ADs in force, compared with at the end of . There are no existing estimates of the costs such measures impose on targeted countries. However, extrapolation from work carried out as regards the MultiFibre Arrangement suggests that such instruments may generate substantial welfare losses for the targeted countries.Despite their drawbacks, ADs, CVs and even quotas are fairly transparent forms of NTBs. Thus, although it is not always easy to measure their impact on welfarevia their effects on prices, outputs and trade flowsit is not hard to detect their purpose. However, other forms of intervention, which are far less transparent, are gathering momentum. Included here would be many regulations pertaining to health, labour, safety and environmental standards. In many instances, these may constitute a subtle means whereby a Government can restrict trade. For example, inspection of imported fruits and vegetables is often perceived by the exporter as a means of keeping out imports, rather than as being part of an overall effort to boost food safety. Another example of such intervention is provided by a complaint filed under a relatively new trade law banning imports into the united_states of goods produced by abusive child labour. The complaint called for an investigation into hand-knotted carpets from India, Pakistan and Nepal. In early , a united_states House of Representatives Committee on International Relations subcommittee approved legislation that would impose sanctionsincluding bans on Export-Import Bank of the united_states financing as well as on Overseas Private Investment Corporation insuranceon countries and firms that did not prohibit child labour or ignored their own laws in this regard. Yet another illustration is the complaint filed in by Australia and the united_states against the Republic of Korea with regard to the latters imports of fresh, chilled and frozen beef. The objection was to the fact that, in , the Republic of Korea had established a dual retail system which required imported and domestic beef to be sold in separate stores or, in the case of large stores or supermarkets, in separate display areas. Thus, many such regulations fall into a grey area, there being a fine line between imposing safety and health standards or ensuring consumer protection and simply resorting to this mechanism to restrict imports.There was a marked rise in the number of trade disputes over standards brought to the world_trade_organization between and . The majority centred on trade in agricultural products and obligations under the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS). Claims that countries have violated provisions of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) have also increased since . Included here are disputes over domestic regulations affecting process and production methods. As of the end of January , the world_trade_organization Dispute Settlement Body had considered a number of disputes that referred either to the SPS or to the TBT Agreement. Though the majority of the complaints were from developed countries, a number of cases were brought by developing countries.In short, as is the case in many developed economies, the reduction in traditional trade barriers in many developing countries has coincided with pressures to resort to alternative measures to protect the affected import-competing producers. This has led to increased resort to anti-dumping or countervailing duty actions in many instances.However, not all market shocks are due to the sudden imposition of formal trade barriers. Natural calamitiessuch as droughts, floods, crop blights, insects and diseasesall too frequently have sudden and unexpected consequences for a countrys exports, as do changes in consumers preferences. For example, a outbreak of hepatitis A in the united_states, traced to Mexican strawberries, led united_states authorities to temporarily ban imports, causing strawberry sales to the united_states to plummet by between and per cent. In , potato farmers on Prince Edward Island in Canada, which accounts for one third of the countrys potato production, found their entire potato crop in jeopardy when potato wart was found in a single field and their customary market, the united_states, was abruptly cut off.Commodity price fluctuations and shocksSudden and unanticipated changes do not always occur in quantity terms, as in the cases of Mexican strawberries and Canadian potatoes mentioned above. Shocks may also occur via prices. Similarly, it is not only agricultural commodities that can be shocked. One of the most spectacular examples was the dramatic fall, commencing in , in the prices of some electronic and information equipment, particularly semiconductors. This drop in prices had dire consequences for several countries in Asia since electronic products account for large shares of the exports of Malaysia, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China. For example, in the Republic of Korea, the unit value index for semiconductor exports, which had stood at in , dropped to in and registered in . Such a shift has had a huge impact and entailed significant adjustment problems given the fact that semiconductor exports accounted for some per cent of Koreas total exports in .However, issues of adjustment are that much more significant and difficult for a poorer developing country. Because many of these countries tend to be heavily dependent on the export of one or two primary commodities, a major share of the academic and policy discussion on price shocks has focused on primary commodity prices.The Prebisch-Singer hypothesis, which postulates a secular negative trend in the prices of internationally traded primary commodities vis-a-vis those of manufactured products, is one of the most intensively examined propositions in development economics. Recent estimates, for example, suggest that pre terms-of-trade deterioration had a negative, albeit small, impact on the growth of developing-country exporters. The issue continues to be a crucial one because many developing countriesand, in particular, least developed countriesrely heavily on exports of primary commodities for income and export revenues. One estimate, for example, is that commodity-exporting countries lose some billion dollars a year because of commodity price trends. More recently, it has been approximated that commodity-dependent countries lost per cent of their total trade value between and owing to changes in prices.The real price of non-fuel commodities, as a group, in terms of manufactures, appears to have declined over -, after peaking sharply around (figure V.). However, while looking at primary commodities, as a group, appears to reveal a downward bias, disaggregation tells another story (figure V.). Disaggregating and examining individual commodities, there is a distinct lack of any trend in some instancesas, for example, in the cases of vegetable oilseeds and oils or minerals (figure V.). Moreover, in the case of agricultural commodities, there is, if anything, a slight upward trend (figure V.). A second point to be noted is that commodity price movements are positively autocorrelated. If nudged downward or upward, the trend tends to feed on itself. However, such shocks as do occur do not appear to have long-run effects. Real primary commodity prices revert to trend or, in most cases, to a long-run unchanging average. Indeed, recent research on wheat, rice and maize suggests that world real cereal prices do not exhibit behaviour that would imply the perFigure V..REAL PRICE OF NON-FUEL COMMODITIES IN TERMS OF MANUFACTURES, -Index =Figure V..INTERNATIONAL MARKET PRICES OF NON-FUEL COMMODITIES, -Index =Agricultural raw materialsIndex =Tropical beveragesIndex =Vegetable oilseeds and oilsIndex =Minerals petuation of shocks. Third, prices of different commodities tend to move together, though the correlations are much closer for some pairs, such as coffee and cocoa (figure V.), than for others, such as copper and gold. As will be noted below, this tendency for prices of different primary commodities to move together has contributed to the lack of success of such price stabilization schemes as the Common Fund for Commodities.A final point to be made with regard to commodity price movements is that it is critical to differentiate between volatility and trend. Long-run price declines (or increases, for that matter), which are regarded as fairly permanent, should raise quite different policy concerns than do short-run price gyrations.The quandary for these countries, therefore, is not just the long-run price declines engendered by relatively low-income elasticities of demand for their products. An equally difficult situation is brought about by price uncertaintythat is to say, price instability around the longer-run trend. Such instabilities make it difficult for these countries, already operating at extremely low resource levels, to count on regular export earnings and income streams, to plan their development strategies into the future, and to attract foreign investment. For example, one approximation is that more than per cent of the fluctuation in aggregate output in African economies is explained by trade shocks.Indeed, there is evidence that even favourable commodity price shocks have the potential to exert negative effectsthe Dutch disease phenomenon being a case in point. In addition, commodity booms may exert harmful effects because they are misdiagnosed as permanent when, in reality, they turn out to be temporary. Painful adjustments are the concomitant.Among the issues open to debate are the best means of tackling the problems associated with reliance on commodity exports, the true nature of the disturbances and the appropriate role of government in the policy interventions intended to stem the tide. One concern, for example, is the duration of the shock. There is evidence that terms-of-trade shocks are short-lived in about half the countries experiencing such a phenomenon. In such cases, it typically takes less than four years for half of the effect of the shock to dissipate. However, for another third, these events are long-lived (so that the shocks are permanent). The policy response clearly has to be different in these two cases. For example, the shorter the expected period of the shock, the higher should be the windfall savings rate. The problem is the virtual impossibility of knowing, a priori, how long-lived a shock will be.The commodity price issue for the most vulnerablePrimary commodity exports are generally recognized to be of particular importance to many least developed countries, though exact figures are hard to come by owing to poor statistics. While the non-least developed countries world average for the number of commodities exported was in , Kiribati exported only that same year, Samoa and Vanuatu . In , over per cent of Benins and Burkina Fasos exports were cotton, per cent of Burundis exports were coffee and tea, almost per cent of Mozambiques were shellfish and fruit and nuts, and over per cent of Togos were crude fertilizers and cotton. At the same time, however, over the past years or so, primary commodity prices have made little sustained headway. Compared with a base of , the combined index of non-fuel primary commodity prices registered in , in and in . Not only have commodity prices failed to make any consistent advances, according to this index, but also year-to-year jumps have been tremendous on occasion. For example, between and , the index jumped by per cent, only to decline by per cent the following year, -.Dependency on only a few commodities, coupled with uncertain commodity prices, exposes both the Governments of the least developed countries and their private sectors to uncertain revenues and expenditures, making planning difficult. Private exporters and traders, who operate under tight margins, may also run into serious difficulties when commodity prices gyrate. Thus, an exporter or trader who has purchased a commodity from a producer, but has not yet sold it, faces huge losses if prices collapse in the interim. Lacking other means to counter uncertainty, traders require large margins to avoid negative consequences. Commodity price uncertainty also has negative implications for commodity financing. Banks and other lending institutions will be reluctant to finance commodity trade or commodity-related projects because repayment usually hinges on future commodity prices. Not surprising, therefore, is the finding that negative price shocks have had significant and negative effects on growth.Commodity agreements and the role of governmentThe most common approach used by developing countries to manage commodity price risk includes domestic and international commodity price stabilization schemes. The former most often involve the creation of a buffer stock that purchases commodities when prices fall below a certain threshold and sells when prices recover. Empirical work on commodity prices has found that they do revert eventually to their meanthis being a requirement for the viability of a stabilization fund or buffer stockbut only very slowly, over a period of years, not months. Hence, a commodity stabilization fund has to be very large to be effective or access to foreign borrowing needs to be ensured. It is argued that the former is unlikely because of spending pressures and the latter not feasible because of risk concerns. An additional problem with such schemes is that they tie up scarce resources that could be more fruitfully employed elsewhere in the economy. Finally, they merely redistribute the risks within the countryfrom producers to the Governmentrather than diversify them outside the country among entities better able to bear such risk. It also appears that a significant part of the cost of price stabilization in agricultural commodities ends up being borne by the farmers themselves. Farmers in commodity stabilization systems usually receive a lower percentage of the free-onboard (f.o.b.) price than do farmers in free market systems. For instance, in the second half of the s, cocoa farmers in Cote dIvoire and Ghana received less than per cent of the f.o.b. price, compared with farmers in Indonesia, Malaysia and Nigeria, who received over per cent.For all these reasons, a number of countries that once relied on such instruments have abandoned them. For example, Nigeria eliminated stabilization in the cocoa sector in . Madagascar, Burundi and Uganda did likewise in the coffee sector in , and , respectively. Cameroon did the same for both coffee and cocoa in . Alternatively, there have been some stabilization funds that have been successful. Included here are the coffee fund in Columbia, Chiles Copper Stabilization Fund and the Mineral Resources Stabilization Fund in Papua New Guinea. The latter two, however, were designed to stabilize commodity-related revenues, rather than the prices of the internationally traded commodities.International measuresInternational commodity stabilization schemes aim at raising and/or stabilizing commodity prices via stocks and export quotas. The first two such schemes were established, under united_nations auspices, in namely, the International Sugar Agreement and the International Tin Agreement. The International Coffee Agreement, the International Cocoa Agreement and the International Natural Rubber Agreement followed. All lapsed, collapsed or were suspended.A variety of problems with such schemes have been identified. It has, for example, been demonstrated that the benefits to producers are not equally distributed among member countries. Producers may even benefit by not joining a commodity agreement. Brazil, for instance, did not join the International Tin Agreement. Its production expanded and it captured a larger share of the world market. Similarly, Viet Nam has become a major coffee exporter despite, or because of, not having joined the International Coffee Agreement. Furthermore, research has demonstrated that, when buffer stock operations are used to influence world prices, even random commodity price movements will eventually bankrupt such schemes. One such example was the dramatic failure of the International Tin Agreement in , sending the price of tin down by per cent in a short space of time and almost bringing down the London Metals Exchange in the process. In the same vein, it has been maintained that even moderate inflation or deflation of world commodity prices will render an agreement ineffective after a time, necessitating periodicthough often cumbersomerenegotiations of the agreements price range. An additional problem is that such schemes are designed based on existing market conditions and tend not to be sufficiently flexible in a changing world economy. Then, too, when such a Government-negotiated agreement actually does succeed in raising prices, it may be undermined by farmers decisions to produce more, thereby swamping the resources of the operation. In addition, the fact that commodity prices often move together (coffee and cocoa prices in figure V., for example) makes such schemes difficult and expensive to operate. Finally, there is the difficult question whether the inefficiencies introduced by tampering with the market-driven play of supply and demand on price are compensated by a benefit in risk-sharing between producers and consumers. Recent research suggests that there is scope for a net improvement in world welfare. However, in order to receive this benefit, it may be necessary to allow a buffer stock scheme to incur heavy lossesthus necessitating substantial, but unpalatable, injections of public funds.Alternative solutions: compensatory financing and hedgingThere are three sorts of instruments to deal with commodity price uncertainty. First, there are devices to reduce the variability of commodity prices. Second, there exist tools to increase the predictability of commodity prices and perhaps even commodity-related revenues. Third, there are instruments designed to keep expenditures in line with income flows. Government price support programmes and commodity agreements, as noted above, are examples of instruments used to reduce price variability. Commodity derivative markets such as futures, options, swaps, and commodity-linked notesare tools for hedging, designed to make revenues more predictable. Lastly, compensatory financing schemes, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility (CCFF) and the EU Stabex scheme (stabilization of export earnings for agricultural commodities), tend to smooth consumption expenditures.The Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF) of IMF was established in to help countries cope with temporary exogenous shocks affecting their export earnings, without resorting to undue and unnecessary adjustments. Coverage was expanded in to include shortfalls in receipts from tourism and workers remittances, and again, in , to include excess cereal import costs.Since , IMF members (about per cent of the Funds average membership) have made purchases under the CFF, amounting to SDR . billion. About three quarters of the countries that made purchases were middle-income. There was only one least developed country in this set, though a number were low-income (Azerbaijan, Cote dIvoire, Ghana, Honduras, India and Pakistan).The case for low-conditionality or relatively low conditionality financing of temporary exogenous balance-of-payments shocks through the CFF rests on three premises. First, it is assumed that the appropriate response to the temporary shock consists of timely financing rather than adjustment. Second, members must have little or no access to alternative sources of financing. Third, other Fund facilities must be deemed unsuitable for the purpose at hand. However, several doubts about these premises have been raised.To begin with, there are several reasons why the appropriate response to a shock may not consist entirely of financing. In practice, it is difficult to distinguish between temporary and permanent shocks. While fluctuations in the prices of primary commodities were a major concern in the s and ensuing decades, at least since the s secular trends in these prices appear to have become more important and evidence has accumulated that commodity price shocks typically do not reverse quickly. If true, this suggests that the proper response to a commodity price shock should involve adjustment as well as financing. A second concern emanates from the fact that few countries have ideal policies. Even in cases where good policies are being implemented, some policy response might still be required in the presence of exogenous shocks that are identifiable and transitory. Third, there may be issues of adverse selection. Availability of relatively unconditional disbursements may bias use of such a facility towards countries unprepared to pursue necessary adjustment policies. Another doubt about the CFF emerges from the fact that a growing number of middleand upper-income developing countries have access to international capital markets during normal times. It is the low-income members with limited access to such funds that have the greatest potential need for compensatory financing. Not only may the terms that apply to the CFF not be appropriate for them, but it may be for this very reason that mostly middleincome countries have been using this facility. Moreover, since the creation of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) in , many of the lowincome countries that have suffered droughts or commodity price shocks, leading to export shortfalls or cereal import excesses, have had ESAF arrangements either in place or close to approval. The question therefore arises whether the financing for shocks could not more suitably be provided through the ESAF.The Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility (CCFF) was created in with the integration of the CFF and the new External Contingency Mechanism (ECM). The latter is an instrument attached to a Fund arrangement that provides additional resources in the event that certain critical external variables (such as export prices) depart from the assumptions of the programme. Whereas the CFF had been designed to address deviations in specific current-account variables from past trends, the ECM was designed to deal with departures of a broader number of current-account variables from programme assumptions. The ECM has been used infrequently and not at all since . ECMs have been attached to only Fund-supported arrangements, of which were approved in -. In only one case has a drawing actually been made (Bulgaria in ). The Fund itself acknowledges that the complexity and rigidity of the conditions governing the CCFF have made it difficult for countries to avail themselves of this instrument. To begin with, it is extremely difficultequally so for academics, private agents and international organizations to establish a baseline forecast from which deviations can be determined.The Buffer Stock Financing Facility (BSFF) was established in to provide financial assistance to members with temporary balance-of-payments needs arising from their contributions to buffer stocks established under approved international commodity agreements. No IMF member has used the BSFF since , and all commodity agreements for which BSFF eligibility was approved have expired. The BSFF was eliminated in , after having been dormant for years. Eighteen countries have made purchases, during its -odd-year existence, for total drawings of SDR million. These purchases were made under the three International Tin Agreements, under the International Sugar Agreement and under the International Natural Rubber Agreement. The last eight purchases were made by Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Cote dIvoire, Thailand and Zimbabwe, mostly to cover contributions made under the now lapsed International Sugar Agreement.A serious drawback to all such schemes is that, by their very design, compensatory financing provides ex post financial assistance for adjustment to commodity price or volume shocks. Such arrangement do not therefore enable ex ante risk management. Thus, the limited success of both stabilization and compensatory financing schemes in limiting price uncertainty has led to the evolution of alternative instruments, such as commodity derivatives.Hence, there has been a shift in emphasis towards using futures markets for risk management. There are active futures markets for each of the commodities once subject to international commodity agreements. Furthermore, a vast array of instruments of this sort exist. For example, a forward contract is an agreement to purchase or sell a given commodity at a future date at a predetermined and fixed price. Futures contracts differ significantly from forward contracts. First, contract terms are generally standardized. Second, transactions are handled only by organized exchanges through a clearing house. Third, profits and losses are settled daily. Fourth, futures contracts require depositing money as collateral. Fifth, while forward contracts involve physical delivery at maturity, futures are usually closed before or at maturity. Therefore, futures separate the physical sale or purchase of commodities from hedging.An option on a futures contract is the rightnot the obligationto purchase or sell a specified quantity of an underlying futures contract, at a predetermined price, on or before a given date. Exchange-traded options are standardized. Over-the-counter options are offered by banks and commodity brokers and can be customized. The purchase of an option is equivalent to price insurance.A swap contract is an agreement to exchangeor swapa floating price for a fixed one (or vice versa) for a given quantity at specific time intervals. Swap contracts are the equivalent of a series of scheduled forward contracts lined up on a schedule, but do not involve physical deliveries. A variation on this is the commodity note. This, too, can be customized and does not necessitate physical delivery. However, such notes are shorter-term, usually from six months to a year.In commodity-linked loans, interest and/or repayment amounts are linked to the price of a certain commodity or to an index of commodity price(s). A variation is the commodity inventory purchase agreement-linked note, in which the transaction centres on bonded warehouse receipts as security for the loan. Commodity bonds are yet another instrument. These are useful to producer Governments because of their long-term nature. However, since most are for periods exceeding five years, they are not suited to soft commodity or grain markets. Moreover, they require a fairly sophisticated distribution network to market them.While all these instruments help to reduce uncertainty, this is not the same thing as lessening price variability. Commodity futures prices are only slightly less variable than cash prices. However, a policy of futures sales permits the individual producer, or producer Government, to eliminate the uncertainty associated with such variability over an annual time horizon. This has a variety of benefits, including increased budgetary control. While the advantages may be substantial, they are not equivalent to revenue stabilization, nor do they shift the terms of trade in favour of commodity producers.Attempts to stabilize commodity prices have had a chequered history at best. Their inherent difficulty raises the question whether stabilization is worth the effort. The case for stabilization rests on three premises: the benefits for consumers, the benefits for producers, and the macroeconomic benefits. In the absence of stabilization, sharp price hikes for staple foods in low-income countries could cause severe hardshipsfamine evenfor consumers who are not wealthy enough to afford the price increase. Such a situation would clearly have negative health and welfare implications. Moreover, there may also be adverse consequences for labour productivity. This is an argument analogous to the efficiency wage argument, which states that higher wages may result in higher worker productivity. On the supply side, farmers also benefit from stability because they are protected from periods of abnormally low prices, which can enhance efficiency in the farm sector. Then, too, there may be macroeconomic benefits in terms of investment and growth effects. This will be especially true if, as earlier suggested, there are negative growth consequences to negative commodity price shocks.Prime among the policy concerns is the question of the extent to which there is a role for government intervention and how to assess alternative intervention strategies. Of paramount importance here is determining not only the point of the intervention (whom it is designed to help) but also the nature of the problem (whether the volatility is temporary or not). For example, there is some evidence that private agents in developing countries may be more resourceful than often believed in finding ways to smooth consumption. In contrast, Governments have frequently shown a tendency to display less foresightfor example, by overspending during temporary booms.Thus, institutional arrangementssuch as stabilization fundsthat establish rules for government behaviour as regards revenue acquisition from commodity exports can be useful. By the same logic, trading boards and other government devices to smooth producers income can easily become distortional and hence welfare-reducing. From the perspective of avoiding distortions, futures and options markets are useful tools, enabling countries to trade away the risk associated with commodity price volatility and thereby diminishing the need for incomeor consumption-smoothing policies. At the same time, however, futures markets will not reduce the vulnerability of poor consumers and farmers unless these actors participate directly in such markets themselves. This is still fairly rare in developing countries and even harder to imagine in the poorest developing countries.Policy prescriptions emanating from well-fitting, but inappropriate, models are potentially catastrophic. Thus, in some instances, the institutional underpinnings may be absent. To take another example, income from a commodity boom, instead of being assessed as a long-lived, but nonetheless temporary, windfall, may be misdiagnosed as permanent or as but the first instalment of a larger windfall to come (when prices changes are positively autocorrelated). In either case, based on an incorrect supposition, a government would feel justified in raising consumption more than current windfall income.Indeed, the need to get policies and assessments right highlights the importance of fundamental microand macroeconomic policies, such as improved efficiency, constant flexibility, and diversification in the longer run. Trade is but one tool in the development planners arsenal. Other necessary conditions include macroeconomic discipline, improving the physical and human infrastructure, tax reform and strengthening the financial sector. All of these are critical in reducing vulnerability.At the same time, as a counterpart, the world trading system needs an activist trade agenda to ensure future openness. Measures need to be in place to prevent the imposition of unjustified NTBs and to avoid placing issues on the world_trade_organization agenda, that are not, first and foremost, traderelated since such topics can easily evolve into daggers aimed at the developing countries.THE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIESMany of the transition countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) as well as Mongolia are in a difficult geographical location which is not helpful to economic development: they are far from the three major markets in the worldJapan, the united_states of America and Western Europeand some are landlocked. Unlike the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe countries, there are no rich neighbours, which, in theory, can help to pull their economies out of stagnation through trade linkages and by serving as models for learning by watching.They also were hit by huge socio-economic shocks in the s, the first decade of transition, and were affected more severely than the Central and Eastern European transition economies by many of them. In and , the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) trading arrangements broke down as the Central and Eastern European countries sought to re-establish their trading links, this time based upon market principles, with their natural partners in Western Europe. CMEA was formally abolished in June and they suddenly became actors in the market economy without traditional market economy partners. CMEA had provided the present CIS countries and Mongolia with industrial and trade links with each other and the russian_federation and with the Central and Eastern European economies. Whereas it was natural for the Central and Eastern European transition economies and the Baltic States to revert to their traditional trade and industrial links with Western Europe, there were no such alternative and traditional partners for the CIS member countries.At the end of , the Soviet Union itself collapsed, and the constituent republics, with the exception of the Baltic States, formed CIS. The Soviet Unions eventual collapse had been anticipated and prepared for by the Baltic States which achieved the sort of independence that they had enjoyed before . However, for many of the CIS countries, independence came unexpectedly and they suddenly found themselves with the task of creating the institutions needed for existence as small States. Moreover, unlike the Baltic States, whose transit links the russian_federation needed, many of the newly independent countries became, at a stroke, landlocked. With the collapse of the Soviet Union came the breakdown of all the transfer payments from the central Government to the different republics of the Union. These represented a net transfer to the poorer republics and poorer members of CMEA, such as Mongolia. The budgetary transfers had financed a wide range of social and economic proTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIESgrammes in these republics. The newly independent States were also subjected to new constraints that had not existed when they were part of a unitary State, such as having to balance imports with exports and fiscal revenue with expenditure at appropriate existing prices.CIS, however, could not preserve, and even less strengthen, the links between the different countries that had existed when they formed part of the same country. In particular, in , the rouble payments area was terminated. This had allowed the different CIS countries to use the Russian rouble to settle their accounts and so had facilitated the preservation of their trading links. Now the different countries had to establish their own currencies and conduct trading relations with partners that would expect payment in a transferable currency.The most recent shock to the smaller CIS economies was the financial crisis in the russian_federation. This resulted in a large devaluation of the rouble against the united_states dollar and a reduction in demand in the russian_federation. The fall in Russian imports affected adversely many countries in CIS. At the same time, significant depreciations against the dollar of the currencies of many (but not all) countries in the region worsened their external debt situation.The various shocks that the CIS countries went through in the course of a decadethe sudden losses of reliable trade partners as well as fiscal and financial transfers, and the necessity of adjusting their industrial and trade structures in line with market forceshave seriously reduced the fiscal and financial strength of many CIS Governments, with consequent harm to the economic and social lives of the people. There was a resurgence of several diseases in the s that had largely disappeared during the decades under the central planning system, because of post-reductions in healthrelated expenditure. Rates of secondary school enrolment also declined in response to economic hardship and reductions in education subsidies. The countries were also struck by natural disasters, such as the unusually hard winter of in Mongolia and the summer drought of in Armenia, whose impact was exacerbated by the lack of or reductions in financial and material resources available to the relevant authorities.The present chapter looks at the impacts of these shocks on three countries Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia. They share the characteristics of being small, formerly centrally planned landlocked countries. Two of them suddenly became landlocked independent countries. They did not have the oil or natural gas wealth of many of their neighbours and have been vigorously pursuing market and trade liberalization policies as part of their strategy to build modern, market-based economies. While liberalization of their economies led to improved economic performance in the second half of the s, the sharp decline of government revenues forced many reductions in the provision of social services, especially health care and education, which led to a worsening of some social indicators. Their experience will, then, shed light on the time framework needed in order for liberalization policies to produce results.Although they do not have the energy resources of some of the other countries in CIS, and are all net energy importers, the three countries have considerable mineral potential. Kyrgyzstan mines and processes the folTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES lowing mineralsantimony, coal, gold, mercury, molybdenum, tin, tungsten and uranium. It is the third largest gold producer of CIS and the countrys immediate prospects very largely depend on the gold industry. Armenias mineral industry has attracted foreign investment and increasing production of copper, cut diamonds, gold and molybdenum would be significant for its economy. At the present time, some per cent of Armenias exports are now finished diamonds and jewellery from three firms owned respectively by Belgian, British and Israeli investors. In Mongolia, the enactment of the Mineral Resources Law of which conferred equal rights to investors, regardless of their nationality, and allowed complete foreign ownership with no restrictions on the repatriation of dividends and profits, has led to a boom in exploration, and major companies have taken out licences for exploration. The output of the mineral industry is important for the economy, having contributed in about per cent of the output of the industrial sector, per cent of exports and per cent of State budget revenues. The major export mineral products are gold, ore and concentrates of copper, fluorite and molybdenum. The industry has proved a strong defender of its interestsin , it strongly opposed a government plan, backed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), to impose a value-added tax on sales and exports of gold. The President accepted its arguments that this would have an adverse impact on the investment climate. The industry can be expected to play a major role in the overall development of the three countries although it will be some time before many investments come on line. The three countries have shown an appreciation of the industrys special needs and the opportunities for development that it presents.The mineral industry is but one of those in which the countries have shown the need to provide an environment conducive to private enterprise and domestic and foreign investment. They did not have an industry, such as the oil industry, that would provide them with large rents which could be used to develop other industries or to cover social expenditures. Nor were they geographically located near a major market, or expecting to become part of such a market and so attract the foreign direct investment (FDI) seeking to gain access to it (as was the case for the Central and Eastern European countries that will soon enter the European Union). For their long-term growth, then, they had to rely on the free market to build up their economies. They needed to become very attractive to domestic and foreign investment and to ensure that those industries that could not operate in a competitive globalized market economy, and would otherwise have been a drain on the State budget, were closed down as soon as possible. These factors thentheir geographical remoteness, the small size of their domestic markets and the absence of a huge rent-generating industryhelp explain the strategy of rapid liberalization that they followed. The speed and depth of the liberalization might have surprised some observers, but not the policy makers, who appreciated the realities of the situation, nor those who understood the differences between these economies and other transition economies.This chapter examines the forms of liberalization and economic cooperation pursued by these countries in the past decade. It assesses the impact of this cooperation on their economies. Finally, it analyses the long-term prospects of these countries based on the size of their economies, their landlocked situation and their remoteness from world markets. It should be noted that these three factors not only limit the prospects of economic development, but also restrict options available to the countries policy makers.The chapter aims to focus more international attention on these countries so as to promote effective, long-term regional and global cooperation that will help them to carry out sustainable development and to achieve reintegration into the globalized world economy.While Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia each have a unique, proud history and culture, they share many economic, social and geographical characteristics. The fact that all three have small domestic populations and markets makes any attempt at widening their export bases difficult. That they are landlocked and remote from world markets makes trade links with the rest of the world more difficult because of high transport costs and the need for goods to go through a complicated transit system. Mongolia occupies a large, but thinly populated land area between China and the russian_federation. Armenia is located in the Transcaucasus area, surrounded by four countries (Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Turkey); Kyrgyzstan, in Central Asia, is surrounded by China, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Armenia and Kyrgyzstan are involved in, or close to countries involved in, conflict. Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, as republics of the former Soviet Union, and Mongolia as an independent country, pursued socialist policies on educationthat is to say, they tried to provide the widest possible access to all levels of education to the populationuntil the collapse of the Soviet Union in . Largely because of those policies, educational levels and literacy rates in these countries are much higher than in countries with similar income levels in other regions in the world. Their per capita income levels (in purchasing power parity) are, however, among the lowest in the CIS countries at present, and are roughly equal to those of South Asia.The similarities among the three countries are not, however, confined only to their geographical locations and the legacy of the central planning system. They proceeded, in earnest, with deregulating and liberalizing their economies during the s in order to maximize the potential benefits from reintegration within the world economy. While the implementation of deregulation and liberalization measures often constituted a precondition for receiving aid from international financial organizations, their not having a rent-generating industry like the mineral fuel industry that could provide sufficient export earnings to cover import needs, and sizeable tax revenues to cover budget needs, left them with few alternatives to accepting international assistancewith conditionsso as to cover their foreign exchange and budget exchange needs during the transition. Moreover, while sizeable fuel resources can earn foreign exchange and attract FDI, countries without such resources cannot afford to sit and wait for trade or investment partners to rush to develop their resources.THE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES The integration of the three countries into the multilateral trading system has been smoother than anticipated by many observers at the beginning of the transition. As a result of the successful implementation of liberalization and deregulation policies during the s, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia are now members of the world_trade_organization and Armenia is at an advanced stage of setting out the terms and conditions of entry. All three countries have taken measures to restructure and liberalize their economies, in the expectation that a more liberalized and open economy will enable them to be quickly integrated within the world economy. The resulting benefits should thus help them recover from the collapse of CMEA and the Soviet Union and counteract the adverse effects of having become at a stroke small and landlocked. Armenia and Mongolia have gone so far as to establish the most liberal trade regimes in the world. Because of economic and geographical factors, the gestation period during which these economies are put on a firm footing for long-term economic development path can easily last a decade or longer. The depth, size and duration of regional and international assistance to these countries must be strengthened to help them carry out the policies that will result in sustainable development.The three countries have not so far been able to take full advantage of the possibility of access to the globalized world economywith increasing shares of market-based, cross-border activities and more intense competition among private enterprises and even among States. The legacy of their central planning systems, together with their intrinsic geographical disadvantages, continues to hinder them, to varying degrees, from participating effectively in global markets. Their industrial and trade structures were parts of the overall economic structure of the CMEA member States, particularly the Soviet Union; and, in many instances, the existing industries were built for the sake of creating employment or industrializing local areas, and thus were without firm economic cost calculations. Their geographical location makes international trade more costly because of high transport costs; insufficient physical and institutional infrastructure also makes transport slow and expensive. Their not sharing a common currency and the erection of national borders after their independence are also not conducive to international trade. Moreover, their lack of experience with market-based economic development, for seven decades, also hampers their efforts to integrate their economies into the global market.Macroeconomic conditionsEconomic performance in the CIS countries and Mongolia was poor for much of the s. The average cumulative output decline from (the generally accepted starting point for the transition) among the countries in the former Soviet Union was more than per cent. While most of these countries recovered somewhat in the second half of the s, their combined output level in was still only per cent of that in . This contrasts with the economic performance of some countries in Eastern Europe, such as the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, which have nearly or fully recovered from the initial decline of output in the early s.Among Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, the transition shock affected Mongolia least; its gross domestic product (GDP) in , its lowest year in the decade, was about three quarters of that in , which was the highest level in its history (see table VI.). In contrast, in Armenia the cumulative output decline from its high in to its low in was per cent, and in Kyrgyzstan output declined per cent from its high in to its low in . Such declines are unprecedented in peacetime: real GDP in Indonesia andTable VI..MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS OF ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -ArmeniaGDP at market prices (=)Industrial output Agriculture Industry ServicesDebt service as proportion of GNP (percentage)External debt stock ( of dollars)KyrgyzstanGDP at market prices (=)Industrial output Agriculture Industry ServicesDebt service as proportion of GNP (percentage)External debt stock ( of dollars)MongoliaGDP at market prices (=)Industrial output Agriculture Industry ServicesDebt service as proportion of GNP (percentage)External debt stock ( of dollars).. .. .... ... ... ... ... ... .... .... .... ... . ... . . .... ... . .. ... . ... . . .... . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . ... . . .... ... . .. .... .. .... ... . .... ...... .. .... ..THE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES Thailand dropped by and per cent, respectively, in owing to the financial crisis in east_asia.Since the beginning of the transition, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia have deindustrialized their economic structures. The real value of their industrial output fell sharply and its share in national output decreased, while the shares of agricultural output and services increased. Because the previous central planning regime did not emphasize development of the service sector, that sector has developed rapidly with the emergence of market-based economic activities. In contrast, the industrial sector, which Soviet planners considered to be the engine of economic growth and the main source for job opportunities, has experienced a sharp decline.The decline in industry was partly the result of changes in relative prices and of disruption and disorganization of the input-output linkages and payment systems among the former State enterprises. The changes in relative prices were most pronounced for energy prices, including the price of oil, which had been priced at unrealistically low levels. For the energy-importing countries in CMEA, the collapse of the central planning system and the adjustment of energy prices caused an oil shock in the form of a sharp deterioration in their terms of trade. The collapse of the rouble bloc in , which entailed the breakdown of the payments system among the CIS countries, disrupted their economies and reduced labour and total factor productivity, aggravating the depth and duration of their economic contractions. The sharp decline of demand in the former CMEA member States reinforced a vicious international cycle of output contractions.The decline of industrial output was per cent in Kyrgyzstan, per cent in Armenia and per cent in Mongolia. As with GDP, output in the industrial sector recovered somewhat during the second half of the s, but in it remained well below the pre-transition level in the three countries. Employment in the industrial sector declined and many former industrial workers became economically inactive or found new jobs in agriculture, retail trade, or other services (see table VI.). In Kyrgyzstan, employment in the industrial sector shrank about per cent from to , even as total employment in the economy increased slightly; in Armenia, the share of industry in total employment dropped from per cent in to per cent in , and the number of industrial workers dropped even more drastically, as total employment fell more than per cent over the same period.The agricultural sectors of the three countries have become their major source of employment, providing half of the total in Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, and over per cent in Armenia. The agricultural output of the three countries now exceeds or is close to its pre-transition level, but it did not increase as fast as the sectors employment; thus, productivity per worker is lower than before. Particularly during the first half of the s, the shift in economic activity towards the agricultural sector reflected the populations need to survive in such harsh economic conditions, rather than new economic opportunities. In many instances, farmers and nomadic herdsmen had to return to traditional, more subsistence-based agricultural activities, owing to the breakdown of State-assisted production and distribution systems of foods and agricultural inputs. The systems were valuable instruments for farmers and nomads, who could exchange their products for foods and other materials. The breakdownTable VI..SECTORAL EMPLOYMENT IN ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -ArmeniaTotal employment (thousands)Share (percentage) Agriculture IndustryOthersKyrgyzstanTotal employment (thousands)Share (percentage) Agriculture IndustryOthersMongoliaTotal employment (thousands)Share (percentage) Agriculture IndustryOthers.... .. ... . .. . ..... .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . ..... .. ... . .. . ..... .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . ..... .. ..was caused by the fiscal retrenchment at the onset of transition and the shrinking role of the State thereafter. The use of agricultural inputs declined substantially. Subsistence household plots and individual farms became the dominant forms of agricultural production.The appropriate policy for the agricultural sector, however, has to be assessed in the light of the countries suddenly becoming independent. Previously, food security could be assured by supplies coming from other parts of the same country. If these had been imported supplies, they could have been financed by other exports, especially those of mineral fuels of which the Soviet Union had abundant supplies. However, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the new countries had to achieve food security by increasing their own agricultural production or by ensuring that their non-agricultural food exports provided sufficient revenue to purchase food imports. This latter policy was not an option for the mineral fuel importers in the short termeven their exports of non-fuel minerals would take some time to reach their full potential, as mentioned earlier. Thus, the three countries had to increase domestic agricultural production to achieve food security. They laid the foundations for doing so by undertaking the privatization of the agricultural sector which was itself anTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES important factor contributing to household food security in the critical period -. However, in the longer term, for the agricultural sector to reach its full potential, many of the constraints on marketing the product must be removed. This is recognized by the international community which is giving assistance to help marketing. With a liberal and encouraging climate for FDI, foreign investors can also be expected to contribute to the agricultural potential of these countries.In the short to medium term, however, the transition to a market-based system was bound to cause difficulties. The extent of disorganization in both production and distribution in agriculture in the first half of the s is suggested by the sharp decline in the consumption of fertilizers, especially in Mongolia and Armenia (see figure VI.). Poor maintenance of roads has made transportation difficult and costly in Armenia. Government institutions used to transfer food, fodder and other non-food materials from one district (or region) to another in case of an emergency. During this transition period, farmers, nomadic herdsmen and their animals are more exposed to risks from natural disasters and have suffered more damage than before. In Mongolia, the severe winter weather in killed an estimated million livestock, affecting about per cent of the countrys population.Closely related to the economic disruption has been increased emigration from Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, prompted by limited prospects for new job opportunities, particularly for the economically skilled, who are more likely to be mobile. While detailed data on outflows of workers are lacking, net emigration to the russian_federation, the major destination, increased sharply in the middleFigure VI..CONSUMPTION OF TOTAL FERTILIZERS OF ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -Metric tonsArmeniaa Kyrgyzstan MongoliaaFigure VI..NET EMIGRATION FROM ARMENIA AND KYRGYZSTAN TO THE russian_federation, -ThousandsArmenia Kyrgyzstanof the s (see figure VI.). In the short term, the large movement of skilled workers out of these countries exacerbated the drastic decline in industrial output. In the longer term, shortages of skilled workers will hinder the adaptation and efficient use of new production technologies. In Kyrgyzstan, emigrants include not only nationals, but also Russian nationals and ethnic Germans.Most of the economies in transition began the transition process with varying degrees of monetary overhang and price controls, which generated latent or actual inflationary pressure. When price controls were removed in the early s, the three countries experienced extremely high rates of inflation. Armenia had inflation as high as , per cent in ; Kyrgyzstan experienced inflation of over , per cent in (see table A.). Mongolia fared better, but it suffered triple-digit inflation in two consecutive years. The inflationary pressure contributed to the contraction of output in all three countries.The high inflation was reduced by anti-inflationary measures as part of overall macroeconomic stabilization policy in the three countries. These measures included tight monetary and credit policies, wage control policies and the introduction of treasury bills and other non-inflationary sources of fiscal deficit financing. Mongolia, one of the early reformers among the economies in transition, implemented its first stabilization programme in . Because of this early action, together with the fact that it already had its own currency, Mongolia was the first of the three countries to dampen its inflationary pressure and it suffered the least from inflation. Despite having excess stocks of roubles, Kyrgyzstan did not start a stabilization programme until mid-, and Armenia not until late /early , after prolonged and severe inflation.THE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES Export demand fell sharply as a result of the economic decline of other CMEA member States and the shift from State-managed trade to a marketbased trading system. Following the breakdown in CMEA trade arrangements in and , the collapse of the rouble bloc in and the fall in output in their former markets, payment problems caused a drastic decline in trade among the former CMEA member States and a rapid shift towards trade with countries outside the CMEA area (see table VI.). Of the three countries, Mongolias trade structure changed the least, but depressed commodity prices during the second half of the s hurt its exports. The loss of export markets seems to have been particularly significant for Armenia and Kyrgyzstan. These two countries trade with other republics in the Soviet Union had been as great as their annual GDP.Imports recovered faster than exports, reflecting the more open and liberalized trade regimes in the second half of the s. As a result, trade deficits have become a major concern for these countries. The trade deficits stood at . per cent of GDP in Armenia in , . per cent of GDP in Kyrgyzstan in and . per cent of GDP in Mongolia in . These trade deficits, together with deteriorating fiscal positions, put strong pressures on their external debt positions, as discussed below.Fiscal balances deteriorated sharply at the beginning of the transition, but later stabilized in response to fiscal consolidation efforts and modernization of the fiscal system (see figure VI.). Fiscal deficits in the early stage of transition probably were inevitable because of the sudden loss of revenues from taxes on income and profits, due to the sharp decline in total output and, to a lesser extent, the loss of resource transfers from the central Government of the Soviet Union. While the transformation of a centrally planned economy to a market-based system implies a large reduction in the role and size of a countrys Government, the fiscal authorities in most of the transition economies were unable to devise and enforce tax collection methods that could keep upTable VI..INTERNATIONAL TRADE OF ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -Total exports and imports( of dollars) Armenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaTrade with non CIS-countries as percentage of total tradeArmenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaExportsImportsExportsImportsExportsImportsExportsImports.a.a ..... ..a .a ..... .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .Figure VI..GOVERNMENT REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP OF ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -aPercentageRevenue ExpenditureArmeniaPercentageRevenue ExpenditureKyrgyzstanPercentageRevenue ExpenditureMongolia with the changing nature of private economic activities, including a growing unofficial economy. At the same time, demands for fiscal expenditure remained high to maintain previous social and educational programmes, in which the pre-transition levels of attainment had been high relative to countries with similar income levels in the rest of the world.The sudden and complete loss of fiscal and financial assistance from CMEA and the central Government of the Soviet Union further worsened the fiscal position of these countries. During -, the three years prior to its independence, about per cent of the total fiscal revenue of Armenia, or per cent of its GDP, was in the form of grants, presumably from the central Government of the Soviet Union; the corresponding figures were per cent of revenue and per cent of GDP for Kyrgyzstan. Moreover, the grants of government revenue alone do not capture the total magnitude of resource transfers from theTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES central Government of the Soviet Union. Economic assistance was often embedded in the form of barter exchanges of goods and services, with artificially set prices: petroleum produced in the Soviet Union was probably exchanged for less than its international price, for cotton or wool from Kyrgyzstan, for example. Turnover taxes, subsidies and profit rates were set arbitrarily, and sometimes used to inflate or deflate the value of products, making difficult any attempts to estimate the true value of the assistance from the central Government of the Soviet Union to each of its republics and to Mongolia.The rising external debts of Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia during the s reflected both trade and fiscal deficits. The total external debt stock increased from zero at the start of the decade to $ million in Armenia ( per cent of its gross national product (GNP)), to $, million in Kyrgyzstan ( per cent of its GNP) and $ million in Mongolia ( per cent its of GNP) in (see table VI.). In less than years, the ratios of the total external debt stock to GNP of Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia had risen to exceed the average ratio among the developing and transition countries ( per cent). Armenias had risen to reach the average. Along with their increasing external debt, annual debt service is rising in the three countries, though their ratios of debt service to GNP are still below the international average (. per cent in ), mainly because most of their debts are in the form of publicly guaranteed long-term loans from donor countries or international financial organizations, including IMF, the world_bank, the Asian Development Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. However, without a rapid and significant improvement in their macroeconomic performance and/or a combination of debt rescheduling and forgiveness, these countries, particularly Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, will have difficulty servicing their debts in a few years time.Their dependence on external financing is manifested in the fiscal budgets of the three countries. During -, the average ratio of external financing to total government revenue was per cent in Armenia, per cent in Kyrgyzstan and per cent in Mongolia; as a proportion of GDP, the averages were . per cent, . per cent and . per cent, respectively. While caution is required in comparing the situations before and after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the dependence of Armenia and Kyrgyzstan on external financing for their fiscal budgets seems to be equal to or greater than their dependence on grants from the central Government of the Soviet Union. Their increasing dependency on external financing and thus their rising debt-service requirements will put significant pressure on the cash flows of the Governments of all three countries, reducing their ability to combat increased poverty and deteriorating social conditions.Increased vulnerability: poverty and deteriorating social conditionsThe severe economic contractions and difficult fiscal conditions during the s have affected every aspect of the lives of the people in the three countries. The economic contractions reduced personal incomes through the loss of jobs, wage reductions and often the non-payment of wages or other forms of compensation. The shrinking role of government institutions, particularly for social programmes, has harmed many aspects of peoples lives, and is likely to inhibit mediumto long-term development.In the former Soviet Union, relatively low income inequality went along with high levels of social expenditure. Since the majority of workers in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia were employed in State-owned enterprises, almost all forms of incomeincluding transfers as well as wages and salarieswere determined by and transmitted through State institutions. As a result, while the average income levels were not as high as those in developed countries, virtually no poverty was reported.The economic contractions and the resulting shrinkage of the public sector sharply increased the incidence of poverty (table VI.). The contractions greatly reduced the average income levels in the three countries and many workers lost their jobs in the official sector. The Gini coefficient for the distribution of monthly earnings in Kyrgyzstan increased from . in to . in . Armenia, which is rapidly reforming its economy, now has the highest Gini coefficient (.) among the economies in transition, for which the average level stands at .. The fall in average incomes and the widening of the income distribution have pushed many people below the poverty line.The weakening of pension systems also has worsened the incidence of poverty. The systems were inherited from the State pension system in the Soviet Union. They became unsustainable, mainly because of the collapse ofTable VI..INCIDENCE OF POVERTY IN ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA AS PERCENTAGE OF THE POPULATION, -aArmeniabExtreme povertyPovertyKyrgyzstanc Food povertyPovertyMongoliaPoverty (world_bank)d Poverty (Government ofMongolia)ePer capita income in (united_states dollars).. .... .... .. .... .... .. .... .. .. .... .... .. .... .... .. .... .... .... ..month. The difference is that the latter takes into account the relative shares of food and non-food expenditure of an average household.met. Poverty represents a minimum level of consumption, taking into account both food and non-food necessities.THE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES employment, the acceleration of inflation and the loss of tax revenues, leading to the accumulation of pension arrears.While it is generally agreed that income inequality widened during the initial stages of economic transformation of the former command economies, there is little evidence that the continued liberalization efforts throughout the s have further worsened the situation of the poor. Income distribution in Mongolia seems to have stopped deteriorating in the middle of the s. However, it deteriorated in Kyrgyzstan from -to -. Some researchers assert that, among four of the Central Asian countries Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and UzbekistanKyrgyzstan experienced the most pronounced rise in income inequality. As the earliest reformer among this group, Kyrgyzstan vigorously undertook market reforms, which were expected to eventually result in actual or potential earnings becoming more closely linked to each persons human capital (education and training), efforts and risk-taking. The countries that reformed less rapidly also had increasingly unequal income distributions during the same period, but the changes were less drastic than in Kyrgyzstan. Poverty, and thus vulnerability to natural or humancaused shocks, also has other facets that cannot be fully described in terms of personal income or expenditure. One is access to public services, such as those that help to provide adequate nutrition for a healthy life, free of avoidable morbidity, and education. Both input variables (especially government expenditure on social programmes) and output variables (social indicators) help to outline the noneconomic aspects of poverty and vulnerability. Government expenditure on education and health declined dramatically in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia during the economic contractions noted earlier, both in absolute terms and as a share of GDP. The shares stabilized, but remained lower than before, in the second half of the decade (see table VI.). The decline in education spending had noticeable effects on school enrolment ratios in the three countries, particularly at the secondary level. The secondary enrolment ratios in Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia dropped by to percentage points from to the mid-s, and in Armenia by percentage points. Primary education continues to be compulsory, however, keeping the enrolment ratios at that level of education above per cent (table VI.).Cuts in education-related subsidies, combined with increasing poverty, have made education more costly relative to household income; the cost of textbooks, school supplies and transportation increasingly have been passed on to students families. The declining enrolment ratios at the secondary level contrast starkly, however, with increases at the tertiary level, which has seen a proliferation of private colleges and other institutions. More children from relatively affluent families now receive higher forms of education, which will enable them to earn higher incomes in the future, while children from poor families now receive even less education, making it more difficult for them to escape from poverty. There already is some evidence of a stronger relationship between the level of education and earning ability in the economies in transition. The widening education gap between the rich and poor may thus impede both social mobility and economically and socially balanced development in the future.Reductions in health spending and decreased effectiveness of their healthcare systems have worsened the general level of health in Armenia andTable VI..GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE AND SOCIAL INDICATORS OF ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -Public educational expenditure as percentage of GDPArmenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaPublic-health expenditure as percentage of GDPArmenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaPrimary enrolment ratio (percentage) Armeniaa bKyrgyzstanMongoliaSecondary enrolment ratio (percentage) ArmeniabKyrgyzstanMongoliaTuberculosis incidence (number of new cases per , population)Armenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaInfant mortality rate (per , live births) ArmeniaKyrgyzstanMongoliaLife expectancy at birth (years) ArmeniaKyrgyzstanMongolia. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. . .. . .c. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . ... . .. . .. . .. . . . .. . .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. . ... . .. . .. .. ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. .. ... .. ... . . . .. . .. . ... . ... .. ... .. ... . .. .. .. .. ..based on the registered population.Kyrgyzstan, particularly during the first half of the s, as evidenced by the increase in tuberculosis (see table VI.). It is difficult to identify the causes of the deterioration, but it is generally attributed to poor sanitary conditions, infectious diseases, a lack of pharmaceuticals, lower quality of medical care and fragmented health services at the regional level. Another aspect of the weakening of the health system is a lack of good data on morbidity; but thereTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES is evidence that the incidence of tuberculosisa disease that is partly influenced by poverty and economic disadvantageand sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), such as syphilis and gonorrhoea, are on the rise. The rising incidence of STDs is particularly worrisome because the incidence of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) has followed the trends in STDs in some of the countries that now have major epidemics of HIV/AIDS.The spread of infectious diseases reflects increased susceptibility of both children and adults, which is largely a consequence of the deterioration of general socio-economic conditions and the lack of funding for building and maintaining the health infrastructure, providing vaccines and other control measures. Because of the increase in susceptibility, the countries systems of disease surveillance and control, which formerly included widespread childhood vaccination, aggressive case investigation and vaccination of adults in high-risk occupations, have lost their effectiveness.REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION DURING THE sDuring the s, the three countries strengthened cooperation with other nearby countries, to try to alleviate the difficulties and increased vulnerability brought about by the transformation of their economies. The international community, recognizing the hardships that these three countries faced and their determined efforts to liberalize their economies, has provided much external assistance, including bilateral aid from donor countries and loans from IMF, the world_bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Asian Development Bank. Mongolia received high and relatively steady flows of aid, amounting to over per cent of its GNP during most of -, and Kyrgyzstan received aid amounting to -per cent of its GNP in -. Aid to Armenia, however, declined from a range of -per cent of its GNP in -to -per cent in -and to only per cent in (see table VI.). International assistance has helped to ease the countries hardship and vulnerability by financing some of their economic and social programmes, but many aspects of the new cooperation are at an early stage and have produced only limited results.Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia and their neighbours, some of which have similar economic, political and social problems, have recognized the synergy that regional economic cooperation can create. Through stronger trade and investment linkages, robust growth in one country can have a positive effect on the others. The experience of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has shown the contribution that regional cooperation can make to its member countries intraregional trade, and also to trade and FDI between them and north-east_asia, particularly Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China. Such an association can facilitate the reduction of intraregional tariffs and non-tariff barriers and can create an environment in which member States are more willing to learn from each other about prioritizing, planning and implementing economic and social policies (so-called learning by watching).Table VI..INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE TO ARMENIA, KYRGYZSTAN AND MONGOLIA, -Net official development assistance( of dollars) Armenia Kyrgyzstan MongoliaInternational aid as percentage of GNPArmenia Kyrgyzstan Mongolia.. .. ... .. .... .. ... . ... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. .. ..CIS represented an early attempt to form such a regional association, but it has not been an effective vehicle to ignite economic synergy among the member States, largely because its formation was based on the former political alliance and not on market-based economics. The trade flows of its member countries have tended to be with countries outside CIS.In the past years, diverse political and economic interests among the members of CIS led to the formation of several subregional and interregional groups or to different members, applying to join existing organizations. The pre-existing or new groups include Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC), the Central Asian Economic Community (CAEC), the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) and the alignment of five countries: Georgia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova, known as GUUAM. These groups have been established, inter alia, to strengthen regional cooperation in economic development and to facilitate cross-border trade. Because they are still at a very early stage of institutional development, it is difficult to forecast the results these groups eventually produce.The viability of EAEU as an economic group is uncertain since it does not derive any obvious economic advantage from the cooperation except for its members proximity to the russian_federation, which is the centre of economic and political gravity in the region. BSEC and GUUAM have a more viable market-based economic rationale and thus have better prospects of producing regional synergies among their members. BSEC aims to strengthen regional cooperation in the field of economic development, including transport and communications, environmental protection, the elimination of obstacles to the expansion of trade and the creation of appropriate conditions for investment. GUUAM aims to create a free trade zone, strengthen development of Caspian oil deposits and integrate its members into European structures of cooperation. The Presidents of the five countries in GUUAM have emphasized, among other things, cooperation in building a Eurasian Transcaucasus transportation corridor (TRACECA) and other transportation projects. CAEC and ECO have notTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES yet been very active, but the similarity of the trade structures of the Central Asian member countries in both groups would appear to limit the possibilities for increasing intra-group trade flows.Mongolia does not belong to any of the foregoing regional groups. It is a member of the world_trade_organization and has been reorienting its trade towards several East Asian partners, especially China, Japan and the Republic of Korea; such a reorientation is geographically natural and economically more viable. These partners have traditionally preferred to participate in the multilateral, that is to say, world_trade_organization-based, trading system rather than in regional or bilateral systems, though they are now discussing the possibility of establishing regional and bilateral agreements to supplement the multilateral system.Regional conflicts in the Transcaucasus area and related political, rather than economic, considerations are major reasons why Armenia has not joined the GUUAM group. Given the currently fragile economic conditions of the GUUAM member countries, Armenias decision not to join the group does not seem to be having any negative (or positive) economic impacts. While the lack of economic linkages to adjacent countries is not encouraging for Armenias long-term development, its membership in the BSEC group should be helpful. Historical differences have complicated the process of regional integration in the Transcaucasus area and neighbouring countries, and will continue to be important obstacles for the foreseeable future, but strong political will and leadership at both national and regional levels could facilitate viable integration.As part of their efforts to liberalize their economies, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia have become members of the world_trade_organization and Armenia is at an advanced stage of setting out the terms and conditions of its entry, as noted earlier. world_trade_organization membership will consolidate their open trade policies and is expected to help them, to some extent, re-establish regional and establish new global trade linkages in the future. world_trade_organization membershipeven the act of negotiating itis an important signal of a countrys intentions because it legally binds a Government to policy reforms.In the short run, however, the remoteness of these countries from the major global markets and the small size of their economies and of the economies of most of their adjacent countries will limit the impact of trade liberalization; with a narrow trade base and limited access to the external market, the immediate impacts of liberalization cannot be expected to be very large. Ongoing regional conflicts, particularly some involving Armenia, and an increasing incidence of illegal drug trafficking in Central Asia, including Kyrgyzstan, make customs clearance at their borders slow and costly, constraining the potential benefits from their world_trade_organization accession. Kyrgyzstans accession to the world_trade_organization has posed economic problems for other members of a customs union formed by members of EAEU: Kazakhstan and the russian_federation (non-members of the world_trade_organization) raised tariffs, at least temporarily, on imports from Kyrgyzstan, to prevent imports that have originated outside of Kyrgyzstan from evading Kazakh or Russian customs duties.The reduction of transport costs is an issue that the three countries and the international community have recognized as being important for sustainable development. The united_nations General Assembly and united_nations organizations have emphasized the importance of the transit environment in the landlocked countries, including countries in the former Soviet Union and Mongolia, as a factor affecting their ability to enter world markets. Various efforts have been undertaken to improve this environment, including efforts to introduce the Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) and the Advanced Cargo Information System (ACIS) in some countries. However, there is a lack of financial resources, infrastructure, human resources and managerial development to put these systems in place, as recognized by the Assembly and other united_nations bodies.Investing to create more efficient transit transport systems in landlocked countries should benefit consumers because they could purchase more varieties of imported goods at lower prices. However, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia already have chronic trade deficits and large accumulated external debts, because their exports have not grown as fast as their imports. Governments and the international community should pay due attention to the trade balance of these economies when they become more integrated into the global economy through improved transport systems.Geography and its effect on policy choicesThe economic and social shocks associated with the collapse of CMEA and the Soviet Union are not the sole reason for the hardships suffered by the transition economies in Central Asia. Some countries in Central and Eastern Europe are already recovering from these shocks, having devised new policies and institutions aimed at establishing fully fledged market economies. However, many of the smaller, less developed countries, notably Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, have found it difficult to develop new market-based activities that could benefit from their new access to the globalized economy. The main differences between the Eastern and Central European countries and these three countries involve geography and other initial conditions at the onset of transition. International proposals to reduce their transport costs reflect a recognition of the geographical burden that landlocked countries must shoulder.Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia are landlocked inside the vast Eurasian continent, do not have the large fuel resources of other CIS members, are distant from the major world markets and are surrounded by countries with similarly low per capita incomes. Besides these geographical disadvantages, these countries did not have any recent history of market-based development; when CMEA and later the Soviet Union collapsed, they did not have the types of institutions needed to support or complement the development of market-based activities. Their difficult path of economic transformation during the s has reflected, to a large extent, their initial conditions and geography, which imply that different countries faced different opportunities, and these differences in prospects might account for the success and/or the speed of transition. In short, their initial conditions were not conducive to achieving sustainable development in the short to medium term.Some recent analyses of economic growth theory have found that the lower the initial per-capita income (one of the many initial conditions), the faster theTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES subsequent rate of growth. According to these analyses, with other things being equal, countries with lower levels of per capita income at the onset of the transition have more opportunities to catch up with the worlds most productive technologies than those with higher levels of income. They should thus experience a higher growth rate, although they might not attain in the medium term a higher per capita income. The experience of the economies in transition in the s, however, shows the opposite; those with higher per capita income grew faster than those with lower income because other things were not equal. In particular, any market system must be supported by a set of institutionslaws, regulations and organizations to enforce themthat facilitate, strengthen or complement market transactions and in this case the quality of institutions varied widely across countries. There were also great differences in the geographical situation of the transition economies.Differences in geographical conditions have important implications for long-term development. First, a remote country (as measured by its distance from the nearest cluster of rich countries) is at an obvious disadvantage for trade. While there is no comprehensive explanation of how distance affects trade, the geographical distance between two countries can be thought of as a proxy for differences in language, culture, consumer taste, market conditions and so forth, as well as a measure of transport cost, all of which make international marketing efforts more difficult, thus limiting trade flows. Second, high costs of international trade associated with being landlocked represent a serious constraint on the economic development of landlocked countries. Third, the newly independent countries in the former Soviet Union have established their own currencies and national legal frameworks, which add extra costs to their already high trade and transit transport costs, further inhibiting trade of goods and services and movement of people among these countries. Fourth, because of their small economic size, establishing large-scale industries in these countries is difficult. Without large external markets, increasing returns to scale in production (the characteristic of large-scale industries and continuing improvement in global transportation) may limit the extent to which a small country can develop or sustain a viable industrial structure. Finally, geography itself is a factor in the choice of economic policy, which, in turn, affects the path of development; for example, countries with large rents coming from the export of mineral resources may be able to afford a restrictive trade policy.The disadvantage of suddenly becoming remote is clear if one compares Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia with the Baltic countries, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. One of the reasons why the Baltic (and other Central and Eastern European) countries had a better economic performance than these three countries during the s was their proximity to Western Europe. Partly because of this proximity, the historical and cultural traditions in the Baltic countries also are more like those in Western Europe, and these areas also had had more recent experience with a market economy than Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia. While the three Baltic countries are small and resource-poor, they have access to the sea and to richer neighbouring countries. This access helped them to recover from the collapse of the Soviet Union and CMEA, through water-borne trade with the West. The external trade of Latvia and Lithuania did not decline as sharply as that of the three landlocked countries in the s, and Estonias trade was even higher in than in . Partly because of their geography and favourable initial conditions and effective policy implementation, the Baltic countries had better growth performance during the s than other countries in the former Soviet Union.High transit transport costs hinder the integration of landlocked countries into the global economy. The high costs of exporting goods and services, including high insurance payments for potential losses or damages, limit the price competitiveness of these countries; similarly, the high costs of importing goods and services make domestic prices more expensive than typical international prices. The high prices of imported materials, capital goods and services also may be reflected in the prices of exportable goods produced at home, further eroding these countries competitive position. Freight costs were . per cent of total c.i.f. (cost, insurance and freight) import values of a number of landlocked developing countries in (the latest year for which data are available), compared with . per cent for all developing countries and . per cent for developed countries. Similarly, landlocked countries had to spend . per cent of their export earnings on freight and insurance while the developing countries as a whole spent . per cent. Mongolia spent . per cent of its export earnings to cover these costs in . Data on Armenia and Kyrgyzstan are not available, but it is reasonable to assume that the two countries have a high ratio similar to or higher than that of Mongolia, given the poor conditions of their and their neighbours transport infrastructure.If the gravity model of bilateral trade is used to measure the disadvantages of being remote and landlocked, and thus of having high transit transport costs, it posits in a simple form that the volume of bilateral trade is positively related to the product of the sizes of two economies (typically measured by GDP or population), but inversely related to the distance between the two economies. The model implies that, given the size of a country and its location, it should trade more with countries in the same region, because they are closer, and more with larger countries. African countries should trade more with Europe than with the united_states of America, while countries in latin_america and the Caribbean should have stronger trade linkages with the united_states than with Europe. Small, remote countries, such as Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, will not be major trading partners for most countries.According to a typical analysis based on this theory, after allowing for the effects of other relevant variables, when the distance increases by per cent, trade falls by . per cent. This implies that, for example, if Armenia were located halfway between Western Europe and its actual location, the volume of trade between the two areas would be per cent higher. Similar analysis suggests that being landlocked further limits bilateral trade. One estimate is that, if one bilateral trading partner is landlocked, trade is about one third less, when other variables, including the sizes of the countries and the distance between them, are held constant. If Armenia had access to navigable waters, for example, its trade with Western Europe should be similar to that in the hypothetical case of reducing its distance from Western Europe by half.The basic gravity model does not, however, encompass changes in institutional arrangements (including political and legal frameworks) over time. For example, the decline in trade among countries in the former Soviet Union is difficult to explain solely by the contractions of aggregate economic activitiesTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES of these countries. One possible explanation for the drastic declines is that the trade framework under CMEA had favoured trade among CMEA member States but once the framework was dissolved and the legal and political barriers between these countries and the West were lowered, trade among the former CMEA members became relatively less attractive.Of particular significance has been the creation of the new economic borders between the countries that were part of the former Soviet Union. Each of these countries has established its own legal and policy frameworks within its own territories and these national systems may be detrimental to increased international trade. Visa requirements and other forms of border inspections, which are important at least partially to prevent smuggling and terrorist activities in some countries in Central Asia, also limit the legitimate cross-national movement of people, goods and services, and may cause hardship for people living in remote areas. National borders have surprisingly large effects on flows and prices, according to many empirical studies. For example, trade between two provinces in Canada is more than times larger than trade between a province in Canada and a State in the united_states, after accounting for other relevant variables. The historical, linguistic and legal differences between two countries may partially account for such border effects, but some economists argue that exchange-rate volatility and other costs of international trade, including tariff and non-tariff barriers, explain a larger part of the border effect.No matter what factors account for the effect, borders have negative effects on trade flows. Strong feelings of national spirit at the initial stage of independence may not harmonize well with those of other countries, especially other former members of a unified State, thus leading to mutual isolation. This consideration is less relevant for Mongolia than for Armenia and Kyrgyzstan.A third implication of a countrys geographical isolation for its long-term development is that fewer economic linkages with the rest of the world, particularly with neighbouring countries, imply fewer chances of establishing new industries in small countries (other things being equal). Once a country seeks to end its isolation, it should expect to see the development of industries that are location-specific, such as mineral extraction, tourism and agro-industry. Industrial development in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia seems to have evolved along these lines, notably mining industries in Mongolia and Kyrgyzstan, tourism in Kyrgyzstan and agro-industry in Armenia and Mongolia. The question, however, is what other industries can be expected to develop subsequently. Agroor mining-processing industries based on raw materials that the countries produce can be expected to arise. However, high transport costs are not conducive to the development of those industries with a high weight-to-value content, such as unprocessed primary products. In general, high transport costs offset or limit the gains from liberalized market access and impede landlocked developing countries effective participation in international trade. The advance of transportation and communication technology over the last years has made it faster and cheaper to ship goods and deliver services, but has not eliminated the distance factor in bilateral trade flows. Even though transportation has become faster, cheaper and safer, the distance between two locations still matters, partly because technological improvement in transportation has not completely eliminated the cultural and linguistic distance between countries. Better transport technologies have affected all modes of transportationair, ground and waterfor both short and long distances, so that the transport costs of landlocked countries have remained high relative to those of other countries.Just as the size of a country limits the types of industries that can operate profitably there, so does its geographical conditions as a whole limit the spectrum of policy options. One aspect of the relationship between geography and the choice of economic policy is the availability of mineral rents. Countries with large mineral rents face less stringent foreign exchange constraints, but they often form over-optimistic expectations about future returns from mineral extraction, leading to a less disciplined fiscal stance. A striking difference between the policies of Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, on the one hand, and those of some CIS countries with relatively abundant mineral fuel resources, on the other, is in their degree of liberalization of the external sector. As noted above, Mongolia and Kyrgyzstan are now members of the world_trade_organization and Armenia is at an advanced stage of setting out the terms and condition of entry; although some other CIS countries have established working parties with the world_trade_organization to prepare for possible accession, they still lag behind Armenia in this respect.Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia, with few economically exploitable mineral fuel resources (as of now at least) and small domestic economies, had very limited options for sustainable development without ready access to external markets and financing. Their decision to join the world_trade_organization, therefore, is a sound policy choice. It enables them to benefit from the mostfavoured-nation clause guaranteed under its rules, with the lower tariff rates of the Generalized System of Preferences, and affords them access to official multilateral funding, which often is conditional upon the implementation of new policies for structural reform and liberalization. It has been suggested that Mongolia and the Kyrgyz Republic, for example, reformed more rapidly than would have been expected given their initial conditions; but this type of assertion, based on cross-country regressions, does not pay due consideration to the role that geographical conditions play in policy choices. As argued earlier, liberalization was the correct strategy for the countries to pursue, and this has been recognized by those who have provided external financing, including IMF, the world_bank, and the regional development banks.CONCLUDING REMARKS: IS LIBERALIZATION A BLESSING OR A CURSE?As a result of the sharp contraction of economic activity during the first half of the s, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia are facing increased uncertainty, and are more vulnerable to economic shocks and natural disasters. Severely restricted government resources do not permit the authorities to shield the population from adverse impacts. Yet these countries have not yet reached a stage where they can expect much acceleration of economic activity or social improvement in the near future, even though their economic performance has stabilized and even improved somewhat since the mid-s. Among the three countries, Mongolia was affected least by the collapse of the centrally planned economic system, and its overall macroeconomic perforTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES mance has fared the best. Even so, some people in Mongolia are more exposed to risk than they were before the transition, as their recent experience with drought and winter storms demonstrated. The countries are vigorously rebuilding their economies and societies, but remaining weaknesses in the current system, particularly in the legal and financial spheres, hinder their full integration into the global economy.At the same time as they strive to maximize the potential benefits from increased market-based activities and greater integration into the global economy, it is a major responsibility of the Governments to rebuild the countries economic and social systems so as to limit economic damage during the transformation to market-oriented economies. The Government, with participation of local communities and civil society, is the primary national institution that can consider, prioritize, plan and implement the realignment of a countrys economic structures, based on local needs, conditions and social values, including justice. The international community and neighbouring countries can play a catalytic role in assisting these countries to rebuild their economies.Liberalization of their economies and increased global flows of goods and services can benefit consumers in these countries, through wider access to higher-quality imported goods; but many of their existing industries have already lost domestic and external markets because of the collapse of CMEA and the Soviet Union. Underdevelopment of the financial sector, which was neglected under the socialist system, hinders both the mobilization of funds to finance domestic investment and the efficient allocation of resources among sectors and subnational regions. To ease the constraints on their economies, the countries have undertaken much deregulation and market liberalization, which caused hardships for many of their citizens. Globalization of the world economy, particularly increased access to markets in other countries and to private external finance, is potentially beneficial to these countries (and other newly independent countries in the former Soviet Union). In fact, inflows of FDI increased sharply in the late s; in , the year for which the latest data are available, the share of FDI in gross fixed capital formation was per cent in Armenia and per cent in Kyrgyzstan (though investment levels in the two countries have been depressed). In Mongolia, the share was only per cent, but the average annual FDI inflow for the period of was times greater than the average of . In certain industries, FDI is playing an important role in rejuvenating production activities. For example, Canadian investment in gold mining industries in Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia led to sharp increase in gold outputs, now making gold exports the leading source of foreign exchange earnings for the two countries. Outside the mining sector, the impact of external financing has still been limited, however. Potential investors in areas often use current macroeconomic fundamentals and the perceived potential of a country as the litmus test for new private investments, and have not yet found these countries attractive. However, as the investment they are attracting is long-term FDI, and not speculative short-term flows, the Asian crisis did little damage to them. Moreover, the major part of their external financing has come from official sources.Overall, it is fair to say that the three countries have completed or are nearing completion of the first stage of transforming their economiesthey have attained political and macroeconomic stability and laid an institutional foundation on which market prices can efficiently determine the allocation of resources. Price indicators have stabilized and so has output, albeit at a rather low level. As is evident in the successful accession of Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia to the world_trade_organization and the advanced state of Armenias progress towards that goal, the majority of their economic activities are now free from unnecessary government control; private motivation and coordination through market mechanisms can now replace the former role of central planning. The achievements of the three countries during the past years have exceeded most observers expectations at the beginning of their transition. Their efforts deserve recognition, as does the hardship suffered by their people during the difficult first stage of transition.From the beginning of the transition, the international community, particularly the Bretton Woods institutions, recognized that the rapid creation of macroeconomic stability and an environment conducive to private activities would be the key to successful transformation, as some Central and Eastern European countries have demonstrated. However, the international community underestimated the difficulties of transforming an economy from a centrally planned to a market system. These difficulties were rooted in the lack of experience with large and sudden transformations. Many ideas implemented during the transition had to be borrowed from other experiences, which might not have been readily transferable. The sudden transformation of the economies to a market-based system also disrupted many public services. The market mechanism has proved to be inadequate in providing a socially optimal level of these services even in developed countries. The deterioration in education and health services, in particular, is now feared to be having long-term negative impacts on the countries growth. During the first stage of transition, the international community learned that the legacy of the central planning system would be tenacious and that local conditionsincluding geographical and other initial conditionshad a strong influence on the process of transformation; the outcomes in different countries have varied a great deal. In a sense, it was naive to assume that well-functioning markets would emerge as soon as the central planning system broke down.What, then, should be the main elements of the second stage of the transformation? A likely answer is to create market-supporting or complementing institutions, including some to enforce or implement laws and regulations enacted during the first stage, in a sequence that will help markets to function effectively. And how can the international community best assist these and other countries with economies in transition to pass through that stage? A likely answer to this question is: by providing goods and services that markets often fail to offer. In some ways, these are more daunting tasks than simply removing State controls and regulations. The new laws and regulations that were enacted during the early s must be effectively enforced, and new rules must be introduced to make contracts binding and enforceable, particularly those in the area of competition policies, and property rights and those involving the financial industry. At the same time, public institutions must be transformed so as to create appropriate incentives (rather than impose output goals) for private activities, through regulation and monitoring.The Governments also need to build institutional capacity to complement market activities. These cannot be expected to provide the socially optimal levTHE CHALLENGE TO SMALL, LANDLOCKED TRANSITION ECONOMIES els of all goods and services, especially those with public-goods characteristics. Such institution-building includes the establishment of tax codes and tax collection authorities, which should fairly and equitably levy taxes based on market transactions. The areas for government action include the provision of health care and education; the design, management and provision of social safety netsincluding pensions and unemployment insurance; and environmental management. Not coincidentally, these areas experienced the steepest declines during the s and, as a result, many people are now more vulnerable to poor health and other consequences of reduced income or natural disasters. At present, inefficiency in the health-care system, together with the restricted general government budgets, has led to discussions about rationalizing services, including privatization of health-care services and the institution of a payment mechanism. However, due consideration should be given to carefully balancing the need for fiscal consolidation with the need to control disease and to maintain a viable health-care system extending to all citizens.Beyond institution-building and enforcing laws and regulations, however, questions remain about the most appropriate role for Governments during the next stage. Should the Government be actively involved in industrial policy, for example, or should the allocation of resources among different industries be left to markets, which in theory should eventually establish an economically efficient mix of busineses? While criticizing over-industrialization in the past, no one has convincingly proposed a way to reabsorb the large numbers of workers who left the manufacturing sector during the s and are now economically inactive or employed, although not very productively, in other sectors. The postwar European experience in restructuring industry suggests a useful role for active involvement of the State, but current thinking stops most development advisers far short of recommending that role to the Governments of the countries in transition. On the other hand, the world has changed greatly since the end of the cold war, and globalization of the world economy may have made the idea of active industrial policy obsolete. In these circumstances, the best policy is the one the countries are pursuingto rely on the market to determine how industries are structured and what type of workers and how many of them are employed in each particular industry. This is especially the case as many of the industries that operated previously had been set up without consideration of market forces or of transport costs. New industries should only be market-based and competitive on world markets, and external official assistance, therefore, must aim at assisting these countries in building their capacity both to facilitate and to complement market activities so as to attract domestic and foreign investment. Such assistance should certainly not attempt to revive industries that could not survive in the new competitive global environment.The international community, together with each country, must devise tailormade aid programmes that suit the countrys local conditions and needs, without worsening its external debt situation. Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia have proceeded very far in liberalizing and stabilizing their economies. With the legacy of the central planning system, with small domestic markets and with their situation of having become suddenly landlocked, the three countries have many obstacles to clear before embarking on a more sustained economic growth path. Their endeavours should continue in the foreseeable future. To sustain their determined efforts to allow their economies to develop, the international community needs a long-term strategy to assist them. For example, at present, the fact that the external debt situations of Kyrgyzstan and Mongolia are deteriorating rapidly will mean that their debt-payments situations will be difficult in a few years time. Furthermore, all three countries will face, to varying degrees, a tight liquidity constraint (high ratio of debt-service to export earnings), which limits the Governments ability to consolidate their fiscal structures and rebuild the social safety nets that existed before the transition. Bilateral donors and international financial institutions can help by devising debt-relief programmes, perhaps comprising a combination of debt-payment rescheduling and forgiveness with increases in the grant element of concessional loans.The number of people affected by natural disasters in the world appears to have increased considerably over the past few decades. There is also evidence that the costs of natural disasters have accelerated in recent years. The fact that rapid demographic and economic growth patterns have disturbed the balance between ecosystems has, in turn, increased the frequency or severity of some natural disasters, such as floods and droughts. It is also generally agreed that poverty and disaster vulnerability are closely intertwined because low income tends to force poor people to behave in ways that expose them to greater risk.Vulnerability to natural disasters is the result of a complex range of variables that include not only the location of human settlements and the magnitude of the disaster itself, but also the socio-economic, institutional, demographic and environmental characteristics of the disaster area, as well as the quality of its basic infrastructure. Recurrent natural disasters may have adverse impacts on economic growth because they can disrupt investment patterns, create obstacles for integration into an increasingly globalized world economy and limit capital accumulation in the long run. Poorer developing countries prone to natural hazards are particularly vulnerable because they are often forced to divert scarce resources from socioeconomic development into disaster relief activities.The present chapter shows that floods were by far the most damaging type of natural disasters during the s, in terms of both human impacts and socio-economic losses. Vulnerability to flooding disasters around the world is almost always differentiated by the socio-economic conditions of different income groups in the disaster area. In general, the poorer the income group (or the country), the more vulnerable it is likely to be to the adverse impacts of floods. Although structural engineering approaches to flood control are widely used around the world, this chapter argues that innovative tools to mitigate the impacts of natural disasters, such as floods, can be particularly effective in poor developing countries.The interaction of human development and natural disasters has gone through continuous but distinct phases, from human adjustment to natural phenomena in primitive times to increasing human control over nature during the modern age. However, rapid economic and population growth during the twentieth century had adverse environmental consequences which, in turn, contributed to exacerbating the negative impacts of natural disasters. Rapid economic and population growth has also led to the concentration of more people, capital and infrastructure in disaster-prone areas, which has increased the potential costs of damage caused by natural disasters. In addition, it is now generally agreed that poverty, disaster vulnerability and environmental degradation are closely intertwined. This interaction of economic growth, and social and environmental impacts has placed the analysis of natural disasters in a broader sustainable development context. While a universally acceptable practical definition of sustainable development has proved elusive so far, the concept has evolved to encompass three interacting dimensions: economic, social and environmental. Natural disasters can clearly threaten all three dimensions of sustainable development.The economic approach to sustainability is based on preserving the asset base that yields the maximum amount that an individual or community can consume over a period of time and still be better off at the end of the period than at the beginning. Loss of natural capitalthat is to say, natural resources and the assimilative capacity of the natural environmentcan play a significant role in limiting development because it can disrupt investment patterns and have adverse impacts on economic growth. Moreover, post-disaster relief places financial and administrative burdens on Governments and can divert scarce resources from projected development activities. In addition, natural disasters sometimes result in the loss of critical levels of human capital and may lead to social and political instability which could, in turn, affect economic recovery. Disasters are also a development problem in that they tend to have greater adverse impacts in poorer countries because their negative impacts on long-term development prospects are considerably greater. Lack of capital or wealth accumulation over the long run tends to undermine sustainable development because economic growth requires increasing both physical and human capital. Recurrent floods and windstorms, for example, not only destroy national wealth, but also hinder efforts to accumulate physical and human capital.The social approach to sustainable development assumes, inter alia, that vulnerability to natural disasters is a function of human behaviour. The interaction of social capital formation and improvements in natural capital (and thus a reduction in disaster vulnerability) plays a central role in this dimension of sustainable development. The resilience of socio-economic organization may thus be improved through disaster preparedness and mitigation efforts, through adaptation to anticipated risks and, ultimately, through economic development and improved living standards that enhance capacity to cope with disasters. Disaster vulnerability and poverty are mutually reinforcing because low income, poor housing and public services, and lack of social security and insurance cover, among their other effects, force the poor to behave in ways that expose them to greater risk. This vital link between poverty and disaster vulnerability was clearly exposed years ago in World Economic Survey, , which, inter alia, stressed that the victims (of natural disasters) are overwhelmingly the poor.While the environmental dimension of sustainable development is often associated with the overexploitation of natural resources or with environmental degradation, its temporal dimension also emphasizes the concept of intergenerational equity. Broadly speaking, the main priority is to preserve the resilience and dynamic ability of ecosystems to adapt to change caused by human actions. Given that the occurrence or increased intensity of many types of natural disasters can be influenced by human activities, there is a clear link with environmental sustainability. For example, while overgrazing and deforestation may increase the risk of flooding, excessive carbon dioxide (CO) emissions arising from the burning of fossil fuels are likely to contribute to global warming, and thus sea-level rise and coastal flooding. Failure to limit environmental degradation resulting from human intervention can thus increase the vulnerability to risks posed by natural hazards.Although it is not always possible to differentiate purely natural disasters from partly human-induced ones, the following major categories of natural disasters are generally used: (a) avalanches and landslides; (b) droughts; (c) earthquakes; (d) floods; (e) forest and scrub fires; (f) hurricanes, typhoons, cyclones and other windstorms; (g) volcano eruptions; and (h) other disasters, such as epidemics, insect infestations and cold waves. The number of people affected by natural disasters in the world has increased considerably over the past three decades. It rose from million during the s to . billion during the s and to almost . billion between and . There is also evidence that the costs of natural disasters are increasing. While real annual economic losses (in prices) averaged US$ . billion in the s and US$ . billion in the s, such losses averaged an estimated US$ billion per year between and . It is worth noting, however, that since monitoring has increased and improved over time, recent disasters are likely to involve higher estimates of damage and of number of people affected.One single category of natural disaster was particularly damaging to human settlements around the world during the s. As table VII. shows, among people affected by all types of natural disasters during the last decade, moreGenerally speaking, the concept of intergenerational equity assumes that the current generation owns the natural environment in common with past and present generations. This concept is thus based upon the utilitarian principle of maximizing the sum of total welfare of different generations, which allows the welfare of one generation to be traded off against that of a future one. For example, "if the benefit to us from economic activities which continue to emit greenhouse gases at the present rates outweighs the harm done to future generations from global warming, then the criterion would recommend no change in our activities" (S. Anand and A. Sen, loc. cit., pp. -). Since the full environmental impacts of current economic decisions, such as the generation of nuclear waste and emissions of greenhouse gases, will not be felt for many decades or centuries, discount rates are usually employed to compare present and future costs and benefits. It is now argued, however, that the methods considered reasonable for measuring gains and losses for one or two generations into the future may not be appropriate when applied to a longer time span. For an interesting review of long-run alternatives involving simultaneous consideration of valuation, discounting and political acceptability, see P.R. Portney and J.P. Weyant, eds. Discounting and Intergenerational Equity, (Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future (RFF), ).As defined by the OFDA/CRED International Disaster Databaseelectronically available at  by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) of the Universite Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. OFDA is the Office of united_states Foreign Disaster Assistance. A disaster is entered in the database if at least one of several criteria, such as at least people reported killed or reported affected, is met. Although there is no standard definition of loose categories, such as "internally displaced people" and "people affected by disasters", CRED takes care to update the data on a daily basis, check them at three-month intervals and revise them at the end of each calendar year.Table VII..NUMBER OF PEOPLE AFFECTED BY NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE WORLD, -Category of natural disasterNumber of people affecteda ()Proportion of total number of people affected by natural disasters (percentage)Droughts Earthquakes Floods Landslides Volcanoes Wildfires Windstorms OtherbTotalc. . . . . . . .. . . . . . .immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) pandemic.because of rounding.than per cent were impacted by floods. Similarly, floods are responsible for the largest share of economic damageas measured by annual average estimated damage in current united_states dollarscaused by all natural disasters. During the s, over one third of the total estimated cost of natural disasters was the result of floods (see figure VII.).The most flood-prone geographical areasHuman activity tends to concentrate in flood-prone areas either along river basins or on coasts because they are often the most suitable locations for both human settlements and economic activities. Many flooding disasters are thus exacerbated by inappropriate location of human settlements on flood plains. Nonetheless, periodic floods often take place in the same river basins and urban areas around the world during their respective rainy or monsoon seasons, as shown in the case study of Bangladesh given below. Similarly, many serious floods are caused by hurricanes, typhoons, cyclones and other windstorms in their respective seasons. Much of the devastation caused by hurricane Mitch in Central America in resulted from a combination of torrential rains and storm surges, which led to serious floods and mud slides both in coastal areas and inland. River floods and windstorm-related coastal floods may sometimes occur at the same time or follow one another closely with catastrophic effects. In the case of the flooding disaster that disrupted the lives of , people in southern and central Mozambique in February , forFigure VII..SHARE OF TOTAL DAMAGE CAUSED BY DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF NATURAL DISASTERS DURING THE sPercentageDroughtsEarthquakes FloodsWildfiresWindstormsOthers example, the impact of the original river floods was exacerbated by downpours caused by cyclone Eline.Rising sea-levels associated with global warming can also have geographical repercussions in that they are likely to make many coastal settlements and small islands particularly vulnerable to storm surges and flooding (see box VII.). Small islands and low-lying coastal areas are, in any case, vulnerable to tidal waves, which are often caused by other natural disasters, such as earthquakes or volcano eruptions. The devastating tidal wave on the north-west coast of Papua New Guinea in estimated to have killed over , people and to have left over , people homelesshad been originally caused by a submarine earthquake whose seismic activity did not damage the island directly.Low-lying coastlines can also be highly vulnerable to other periodic climatic phenomena, such as El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), particularly in the Pacific basin. Generally speaking, El Nino refers to abnormally warm sea temperatures in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean, whereas the Southern Oscillation involves an oscillating pressure pattern in the western equatorial Pacific Ocean. In fact, it is now known that ENSO has a warm phase (El Nino) that is usually followed by a cold one, generally referred to as La Nina. There is some evidence that these two different phases of ENSO are responsible for massive floods and other natural disasters not only in eastern and western Pacific countries, but also in other countries in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, including countries as far away as eastern Africa. The increasing geographical spread of the impacts of such climatic events is highlighted by the fact that it was an Atlantic Ocean rather than Pacific Ocean country that experienced Latin Americas worst ENSO-related natural disaster: the heavy rainfalls, floods and mud slides estimated to have killed , people and displaced another , in a Venezuelan coastal State in December .Socio-economic vulnerability to floodsVulnerability to natural disasters is associated with a complex range of variables that include not only the location of human settlements and the magnitude of the disaster, but also the socio-economic, institutional, demographic and environmental characteristics of the disaster area, as well as the quality of its basic infrastructure. Vulnerability to natural disasters is almost always differentiated by the socio-economic conditions of different income groups in the disaster area. According to the World Disasters Report, , increasing evidence of disparities in vulnerability between lowerand higher-income groups has been accumulated throughout the world ever since torrential rains and heavy floods struck urban areas of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in . Although the floods affected contiguous rich and poor neighbourhoods, their devastating impacts were experienced only in the latter. It is invariably poverty, not choice, that forces growing numbers of low-income groups to live in poorlybuilt dwellings in the least valued plots of landsuch as unstable hillsides and marsheswhich tend to be most vulnerable to floods.Poverty can also encourage people to engage in environmentally unsustainable development practices that further increase their vulnerability. Massive logging operations and exploitation of wetlands, for example, reduce the soilsunited_nations Environment Programme/National Center for Atmospheric Research/united_nations University/World Meteorological Organization/ International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNEP/NCAR/UNU/WMO/ISDR), Lessons Learned from the -El Nino: Once Burned, Twice Shy? (Tokyo, united_nations University, October ). It is interesting to note that the highest annual numbers of people affected by floods in the world during the s were recorded in El Nino years: and (see table VII.).Box VII.THE ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DROUGHT IN AFRICA: KUZNETS REVISITED?Over the past years, Africa has recurrently experienced some of the worlds most devastating droughts in terms of both human suffering and relative economic damage. According to the secretariat of the united_nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa,a drought and desertification have their greatest adverse impacts in Africa, two-thirds of which has become desert or drylands.b The continent contains extensive agricultural drylands, almost three quarters of which are already degraded to some degree. Land degradation is caused by both climate variability and unsustainable human activities. The most commonly cited forms of unsustainable land use are overgrazing, over-cultivation and deforestation,c as well as poor irrigation practices and inadequate drainage which lead to salinization of croplands. While land degradation can also be caused by drought, the latter is a natural meteorological phenomenon that occurs when rainfall is significantly below normal recorded levels for a long period of time.Although the human and agricultural impacts of drought in Africa have been extensively studied, little research has been conducted on its non-agricultural and macroeconomic impacts. A recent study on the impact of drought in sub-Saharan African economies, however, has shed some new light on overall macroeconomic impacts in economies with different degrees of diversification.d This study shows that in Africas least developed economies, the economic impact of drought is largely experienced through its effects on the agricultural sector. Provided that targeted agricultural support is available in the aftermath of the drought, economic recovery can take place relatively fast and the return of good rainfalls can restore gross domestic product (GDP) to pre-drought levels almost immediately.eOn the other hand, in African developing countries with more diversified economies, the impacts of drought are spread more widely through the economy, reflecting greater overall integration and stronger intersectoral linkages than in the least developed economies. As in the latter economies, the agricultural sector in more diversified economies may recover fairly rapidly after the drought. However, this agricultural recovery is often insufficient to offset a much slower recovery of the manufacturing sector, given the relative importance of the latter in the sectoral structure of GDP. For example, largely as a result of the devastating drought in southern Africa, manufacturing output fell by almost per cent in Zimbabwe in and remained well below its pre-drought level in . As a result, despite a strong recovery of the countrys agricultural sector in , Zimbabwes GDP failed to reach its predrought level in that year. The slower recovery of the Zimbabwean manufacturing sector was caused by a series of factors ranging from reduced hydroelectric output to shortages of agricultural inputs to the important agro-processing sector.fThese findings suggest that the economic impacts of drought increase during the earlier stages of development, reach a peak and then fall as an economy becomes more developed and thus better prepared to absorb those impacts, as opposed to the conventional assumption of a continuously declining impact as economies develop. It is actually argued, in other words, that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between the macroeconomic impact of drought and the overall stage of development of a country,g based on Kuznets seminal hypothesis of an inverted U-shaped relationship between growth and inequality.h This also helps to explain why, as a result of the -drought in southern Africa, less diversified economies such as Malawi and Zambia restored GDP to indices well above pre-drought levels by (basically because of strong agricultural recovery), whereas intermediate economies such as Zimbabwe failed to do so, in spite of an equally fast recovery of its agricultural sector. These findings also imply that Africa-wide strategies to mitigate the economic impacts of droughts are likely to be less effective than calibrated policies that take into account differences in economic structure among African countries.ability to absorb heavy rainfall, making erosion and flooding more likely. In addition, significant increase in population densities in many developing countries forces greater numbers of poor people to live in high-risk areas. This spatial distribution of vulnerability is thus a critical determinant of risk in natural disasters. It can be argued that spatial poverty traps arise when households living in areas containing poorer-quality physical capital (or geographical capital) see the fall of their standard of living over time, which contributes to a further deterioration of the quality of physical capital in these areas.At the national level, vulnerability to natural disasters such as floods can be associated with the level of development of a particular country, including the size and structure of its economy. In principle, larger economies are better equipped to absorb the impacts of natural disasters. Nonetheless, poorer developing countries (both large and small) tend to be more vulnerable to natural hazards in view of their limited capacity to take measures to mitigate or respond to such hazards. It is no surprise, therefore, that a disproportionately high share of both casualties and direct economic loss from natural disasters are found in poorer countries. For example, more than per cent of the estimated , deaths caused by all disasters in occurred in developing countries. Similarly, over half of the US$ billion in economic losses caused by all natural disasters in was incurred by developing countries. Moreover, at least per cent of those losses were attributed to a single event in a developing country: the devastating flooding of the Yangtze River in China (see box VII.).According to some estimates, the average annual direct economic loss caused by all natural disasters between and (US$ billion) was more or less equally split between developed and developing countries. This is somewhat surprising, given the relative concentration of capital assets in the former and the fact that the financial value attached to basic infrastructure in most industrialized countries is usually many times higher than that of equivalent structures in developing countries. In addition, some estimates of damageJ. Jalan and M. Ravallion, Spatial Poverty Traps?, world_bank Working Paper, No. (Washington, D.C., world_bank, December ).Including purely human-made disasters, such as industrial and transport accidents. See A. Kreimer and M. Arnold, op. cit.Ibid.Table VII..NUMBER OF PEOPLE AFFECTED BY FLOODS IN THE WORLD, -YearNumber of people affected by floodsa ()Proportion of total number of people affected by all natural disasters (percentage). . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .Box VII.There is increasing scientific evidence that human activity has begun to change the average temperature on the Earths surface. According to the authoritative united_nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), this process of global warming has been caused by several factors associated with the intensification of economic activities, including the emissions of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide (CO) produced by burning fossil fuels and forests. According to the forthcoming Third Assessment Report of IPCC,a it is expected that the globally averaged surface air temperature will have warmed . to . degrees Celsius by relative to . One of the main consequences of global warming will be sea-level rise: according to IPCC, it is projected that globally averaged sea level will have risen between and almost centimetres (cm) by . In addition, global warming is also expected to increase climate variability and to provoke changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme climate events, such as tropical windstorms and associated storm surges and coastal flooding.Although significant rises in sea level would cause serious problems to densely populated low-lying countries such as Bangladesh,b they are also of particular concern to small island developing States. According to IPCC, because of their high degree of environmental vulnerability, small islands are likely to be among the countries most seriously affected by climate change. Furthermore, IPCC concludes that the impact of climate change and more extreme weather would fall disproportionately on the poor who have the least capacity to adapt. The likely impacts of sea-level rise and coastal flooding on small island States would include increased coastal erosion, loss of land and property, dislocation of people, increased risk from storm surges, saltwater intrusion into scarce freshwater resources and high resource costs associated with the attempt to respond and adapt to these changes.Adverse impacts on coastal ecosystems, such as bleaching of coral reefs and deterioration of mangroves, are also expected to threaten fisheries and thus those who rely on coastal fisheries for their income and for a staple source of food. It is also foreseen with a high degree of confidence that their limited arable land and soil salinization will make agriculture in small island States, both for domestic food production and for cash crop exports, highly vulnerable to sea-level rise and climate change. In addition, climate change is also expected to severely disrupt tourism activities, which are an important source of income and foreign exchange for many islands.In worst-case scenarios, the very existence of some small island developing States could be threatened. According to a Pacific island climate change study recently carried out by the world_bank,c a sea-level rise of cm, together with storm surges, could inundate over half of the capital of Kiribati and cause shoreline retreats of up to metres (m) in Fijis main island (Viti Levu), where losses from associated coral reef bleaching could amount to US$ -US$ million a year. Under the sea-level rise scenarios selected for the study, Viti Levu could be experiencing overall annual economic losses of US$ to US$ million (in prices), equivalent to between and per cent of Fijis GDP.caused by natural disasters include only insured assets, which in most developing countries represent only a small proportion of losses. It should also be emphasized that, given the disparity in per capita gross domestic product (GDP) between developed and developing countries, the damage caused by natural disasters as a proportion of GDP tends to be much higher in the latter group of countries.The economic damage caused by natural disasters can be divided into direct and indirect costs, and secondary macroeconomic effects. Direct costs are defined as damage to fixed assets, including infrastructure and residential, commercial and industrial buildings, as well as inventories of finished and intermediate goods, raw materials and crops destroyed or damaged by the natural disaster. Indirect costs relate to damage to flows of goods that will not be produced and services that will not be provided as a result of the disaster. The latter also include additional costs arising from the use of more expensive inputs owing to the destruction of or damage to cheaper usual sources of supply, and from more expensive distribution channels for the provision of goods and services. Secondary effects refer to the shortand long-term impacts of natural disasters on overall economic performance, as measured by the most significant macroeconomic variables. Examples of such macroeconomic effects include a decline in tax revenues or increase in government expenditure to cover emergency or reconstruction measures, and a deterioration in the trade balance due to a disaster. Not only are secondary effects felt during the current fiscal year but they may spill over a number of years.While the estimation of direct impacts can be relatively straightforward, it is often difficult to estimate indirect costs accurately because the complexity of indirect impacts, particularly over the medium run, can lead to (a) inaccurate estimation of the exact share of a specific disaster, (b) double-counting and (c) inadequate consideration of their knock-on effects. For example, while the costs of disruption in the provision of basic services, such as water and energy, are often underestimated, indirect costs can also be partially offset by positive knock-on effects, such as increased economic activity associated with reconstruction and rehabilitation, which tend to be ignored in estimations of indirect costs. The estimation of secondary effects is equally, if not more, complicated, not only because they require an estimation of indirect costs, but also because of the complexities of evaluating both their spillover macroeconomic repercussions over a number of years and their exact impacts on specific macroeconomic variables. Given the difficulties of evaluating both indirect costs and secondary effects, most estimations of the economic damage of natural disasters are based only on direct costs and, as a result, such evaluations tend to be underestimates.In some ways, Bangladesh can be considered the worlds most flood-prone developing country, even when compared with vulnerable small island developing States, which are threatened by frequent coastal floods and storm surges. While China was home to the overwhelming majority of people struck by floods in almost every single year during the s, in relative terms Bangladesh was worse off in of those years (see figure VII.). This wasAccording to R. Zapata Marti (loc. cit.), the estimation of secondary macroeconomic effects is based upon "a comparison between the economic performance anticipated by public and private sector organizations ... and a modified projected performance estimated after the direct and indirect damages are assessed and valued".Figure VII..SHARE OF NATIONAL POPULATION AFFECTED BY FLOODS IN SELECTED COUNTRIES, -PercentageBangladesh China Top SIDSNote: Top SIDS refers to the small island developing State with the highest share of its national population affected by floods in any single year. Different SIDS are thus used for different years.clearly illustrated in , during which both countries suffered from particularly severe floods, and which recorded the highest annual number of flood victims in the world during the decade (see table VII.). In that year, although China had less than per cent of the worlds population, more than per cent of the million people affected by floods in the world resided in China, making up per cent of the countrys population. By comparison, while Bangladesh flood victims accounted for less than per cent of the total world population affected by floods in , they represented almost per cent of the population of Bangladesh (see figures VII. and VII.). Primarily because of the devastating impacts of recurrent floods in the countrytogether with the fact that floods are by far the most damaging category of natural disasters in the worldBangladesh can also be considered one the worlds most disaster-prone developing countries (see figures VII. and VII.).The most damaging flood in the history of BangladeshAnnual flooding during the monsoon seasonwhen one third of the country is usually floodedis a fact of life in Bangladesh. Lying at the confluence of two major regional rivers (the Brahmaputra and the Ganges) flowing into the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh has the largest system of deltas and flat lands in the world (see map). Among the four types of floods that occur in the country, monsoon floods from major rivers cause by far the most extensive damage. Nonetheless, normal floods (barsha) resulting from monsoon rains,BangladeshLDCs ODCsFigure VII..ECONOMIC COST OF NATURAL DISASTERS, -Percentage of GDP--Note: Average of annual shares for each country or group of countries during each decade. LDCs refer to the least developed countries (including Bangladesh) officially recognized by the united_nations; ODCs refer to () other developing countries.within certain limits of timing, duration and magnitude, are generally considered socio-economically beneficial in that they provide vital moisture and fertile silt for croplands. Two of the three types of rice grown in the country (aman and aus) cannot survive without floodwaters. In addition, fish caught during the flood season constitute a vital source of protein in the diet of Bangladeshis. It is the abnormal floods (bonna) occurring every few years that cause the widespread damage that it is often beyond the countrys ability to cope with. These floods invariably become a devastating human catastrophe because the countrys large population (almost million people) is crowded into a generally deltaic flat area of less than , square kilometres (km). With almost , people/km, Bangladesh is the State Member of the united_nations with the second highest population density.The floods were the worst in the history of Bangladesh. They were basically caused by a simultaneous rise of the countrys three major rivers (Jamuna, Meghna and Padma) that until then had crested at different times. The floods lasted an unprecedented weeks, between July and September. Their long duration was due to two major factors that contributed to slowing down the outflow of floodwaters into the sea: a rise of the tide in the Bay of Bengal; and the thousands of small mud embankments that had been built over the years to provide water for irrigation or as a protection against coastal flooding. The floods affected two thirds of the country, including of its districts, and disrupted the lives of over million people. They caused substantial damage to infrastructure, including almost , houses, , schools and ,A basic competitive model of the labour market would actually point towards a lower real wage rate when an aggregate shock, such as a severe flood, has reduced demand for labour. According to M. Ravallion ("Famines and economics", world_bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. (Washington, D.C., world_bank, December ), one possible explanation for such "wage stickiness downward" is tacit collusion on the supply side at the village level. For a path-breaking analysis and empirical evidence of a dramatic fall in agricultural real wage rates in terms of rice, following the floods and famine in Bangladesh, see A. Sen, Poverty and Famines (Oxford, Clarendon Press, ).bridges. In addition, , km of embankments and , km of roads were severely damaged. The road between the capital (Dhaka) and Chittagong, the countrys second largest city and major port, was blocked for months.Greater Dhakas million inhabitants were seriously affected and the citys drinking water, sewage and drainage systems were severely disrupted. As a result, diseases caused by polluted water and contaminated food, such as diarrhoea and hepatitis, spread rapidly through many poor areas of the capital. This flooding disaster once again highlighted that most poor households in Bangladesh are highly vulnerable to natural disasters. Empirical evidence that the socio-economic impacts of floods fall disproportionately on the poor had in fact begun to be produced after the second most severe flood in the history of Bangladesh, in . For example, while per cent of the assets of a low-cost house were lost in the floods, the proportion was only per cent for the highest-cost houses. Thus, not only are poorer groups invariably more vulnerable but they also tend to suffer greater relative losses. While it can be argued that under certain isolated conditions, some poor farmers are not necessarily vulnerable to fluctuation in their income, there is plenty of evidence to show that almost all poor households in Bangladesh are vulnerable to floods because of their frequency and magnitude.The floods had an immediate adverse impact on agriculture and on the rural economy as a whole. They caused the destruction of an estimated US$ million worth of rice crops, which normally make up over two thirds of the countrys agricultural production. Although average seasonal daily wage rates for most rural activities actually increased during the floods fiscal yearthat is to say, from July to June rural employment was particularly hard hit by the floods (see table VII.). Self-employment activities were also seriously affected, in particular those related to traditional work and small businesses. It is estimated that the average rural household income derived from self-employment activities declined by -per cent during the floods fiscal year. The agricultural sector, however, recovered fairly rapidly, mainly for three reasons: (a) many farmers had anticipated flood risks by adopting several traditional adjustment techniques; (b) increased aid was targeted at the quick rehabilitation of the sector; and (c) increased sedimentation arising from the extensive flooding contributed to improved soil quality and a bumper harvest the following winter. Although Bangladeshs GDP growth rate dropped slightly in the floods fiscal year, it was still an impressive . per cent, primarily owing to the performance of the agricultural sector (see table VII.).The negative economic impacts of the floods appear to have been more severe in non-agricultural sectors, particularly manufacturing. There is, for example, microeconomic evidence that smalland medium-scale manufacturing enterprises in the Dhaka area were severely affected by the floods, primarily because of their long duration. According to an extensive survey of damage caused to smalland medium-sized manufacturing firms, carried out immediately after the floods, average production loss represented . months of production, and total lossesincluding fixed capital and inventory losseswere estimated at Bangladesh taka (Tk) , per enterprise, or almost Tk . billion (approximately US$ million) in the Dhaka area alone.There is also evidence that the garment sectorprobably the most globalized industrial sector in Bangladeshwas adversely affected by the disruptionTable VII..BANGLADESH: RURAL WAGES AND EMPLOYMENTaAverage seasonal daily rates in rural activities (Bangladesh taka)Crop cultivationEarth workBrick-makingMechanized transport work Non-agricultural activities. . .. .. . .. .Loss of labour days in rural activities in -(compared with -)MaleFemaleFemaleOwn farmWage labour Self-employmentTotal in transport network leading to the countrys major port, Chittagong. The Chittagong export-processing zone (EPZ), which is dominated by garment manufacturing firms, was in fact seriously affected by the floods directly. The disruption caused by the floods contributed to slowing down the impressive growth of the sector: while national annual output of ready-made garments had risen steadily from . million dozen units (mdu) in / to . mdu in /, it actually fell slightly to . mdu during the floods fiscal year. The slow-down of the sector was, associated however, not only with flood-related disruptions, but also with several other factors, including the appreciation of the taka in relation to the currencies of competing garments manufacturers from other Asian countries. This slow-down was, in turn, partly responsible for the significant fall of overall manufacturing growth, from . per cent in / to only . per cent in the floods fiscal year and . per cent in / (see table VII.).It can be argued that Bangladeshs garment sector is at a crossroads in respect of facing the challenges of globalization. The countrys garment industry has so far benefited from various preferential agreements, such as the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), with regard to exporting readymade garments to the European Union (EU) and the united_states of America. However, the maintenance of current export levels (and prices) is threatened not only by the phasing out of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement, under the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, but also by recent changes in the trade regimes of the two main destinations for Bangladeshs ready-made garments. That EU, for example, has recently waived the quotas on certain categories of clothing from China and Sri Lanka, is likely to impact adversely on Bangladeshs garment exports. Similarly, the recently introduced united_states Trade and Development Act excludes Bangladesh and other least developed countries from the dutyand quota-free access to the united_states market granted to other least developed countries. It is estimated thatTable VII..GROWTH RATE OF GDP IN BANGLADESH, BY SECTOR, -aPercentageSectorAverage ///b/cAgricultureCrops and HorticultureAnimal farming Forestry FisheriesIndustryManufacturing ConstructionServices GDP-. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .economy.htm), based on official figures released by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.in order to offset the consequent tariff disadvantages and maintain their competitiveness in the North American market, Bangladeshs garment exporters will need to reduce costs by to per cent.Bangladeshs ready-made garment sector can thus survive intense competition from other countries only if it takes effective steps to overcome internal constraints, including unreliable infrastructure. Among the main measures proposed for the industry is the reduction of lead time for delivery, as it is generally agreed that there is a need for the industry to establish better backward linkages and more reliable delivery of inputs from other parts of both the country and the world. This would clearly require significant improvements in both the port facilities of Chittagong and the national road network, including effective measures to deal with the adverse impacts of recurrent floods. Given the overwhelming importance of the garment industry to Bangladeshs exports (see figure VII.), and the competitive challenges it faces, the adverse impacts of recurrent flooding disasters may not only discourage new foreign direct investment (FDI) into the country but also exacerbate the impacts of reduced competitiveness in world markets. Recurrent natural disasters can therefore become a further obstacle to the countrys efforts to benefit from current processes of globalization.Structural versus non-structural approaches to flooding disastersThe conventional approach to flood control is primarily based on large-scale engineering projects, such as embankments and dams, to protect particularly vulnerable areas. This emphasis on structural measures has been widely criticized in Bangladesh not only in terms of those measures engineering feasibility, but also because of the economic, social and environmental complexities, not to mention the relatively high financial costs, involved in building large embankments to prevent flooding. As a result, increasing attention has been turned to non-structural measures more suitable to poor countries subject to frequent floods, such as Bangladesh.There is evidence that some major buyers of Bangladesh ready-made garments in the united_states have withdrawn from dealing with the country's exporters, and concentrated on cheaper apparel exports from countries enjoying better preferential treatment (see Bangladesh Country Report ..., and Bangladesh Country Profile, ...).Other measures include upgrading labour skills and technology to produce better quality products at competitive prices, and diversification into new and higher-valued products and into new markets. See S.C. Zohir, "RMG: flourish or perish? external competitiveness beyond ", summary of paper prepared for a workshop on the review of the Bangladesh economy, , Dhaka, June , electronically available at .Bangladesh is one of the poorest countries in the world. According to the world_bank (World Development Report / Attacking Poverty (New York, Oxford University Press, ), selected world development indicators, table ) annual per capita income (GNP) was only US$ in ; over per cent of the population was below the national poverty line in ; and per cent of children under age suffered from malnutrition in the s. Bangladesh's low level of development is also associated with the facts that life expectancy at birth is only . years of age and that only barely per cent of its adult population is literate (see united_nations Development Programme, Human Development Report (New York, Oxford University Press, ), Human development indicators, table .Figure VII..EXPORTS OF BANGLADESH, /aof united_states dollars. .GarmentsbFisheriesJute goodscLeather OtherStructural approaches to flood control: the Flood Action PlanIn response to the devastating impacts of the flooding disaster, the Government of Bangladesh, in cooperation with several bilateral donors and international agencies, decided to channel various flood control proposals into a comprehensive national strategy. This initiative led to the formulation of a massive Flood Action Plan (FAP), under the overall management of the world_bank. The formulation stage of FAP entailed comprehensive studies to be funded by bilateral and multilateral agencies, at an estimated cost of US$ million. These studies were aimed at the implementation of systematic measures to control or significantly reduce the adverse impacts of future floods, with an emphasis on structural engineering solutions. This structural approach included large-scale river canalization and the construction of at least , km of embankments along major rivers, at an estimated cost of US$ billion-billion, over a -year period.The main anticipated economic benefit of FAP would be the protection of residential, commercial and industrial infrastructure, as well as transport and communication networks. This was, in turn, expected to have positive impacts on industrial output and exports. In addition, the implementation of the Plan would result in a substantial annual inflow of foreign aid and investment over a -year periodgiven that it would be mostly funded by foreign donors and in the generation of employment, particularly in the construction sector. Higher wage incomes arising from such additional employment would also help to reduce disaster vulnerability, as households would have more reserves to cope with flooding disasters. Other positive socio-economic impacts of the Plan included an expected reduction in the health costs and lost labour days associated with floods and ensuing diseases.FAP was also expected to have positive economic effects on agriculture, both by reducing crop and material damage from the destructive impacts of abnormal floods, and by allowing farmers to intensify wet season farming and to improve cropping patterns because of the reduced risk, and thus increase productivity. More productive cropping practices would be primarily based on the greater use of higher-yield rice varietieswhich were not as flood-resistant as a popular lower-yield variety. The enclosed embankments, or flood control compartments, would allow the control of flood levels through a system of drainage regulators designed to simulate normal flood levels and ensure more reliable agricultural output. In addition, embankments were expected to slow down damaging processes of erosion and destruction of fertile land on river banks which exacerbated geographical aspects of poverty and forced considerable numbers of peasants either to look for other available farmland or to migrate to urban areas.FAPs emphasis on a large-scale structural approach to flood management has been criticized for several reasons. First of all, the effectiveness of many large structural flood control projects in Bangladesh can obviously be undermined by continuous erosion of river banks and embankments, and above all by the constant shifting of river courses. A segment of the Jamuna River is locally known as the dancing river because of its gradual course shifts. River straightening and canalization tend to cause higher peak flows and increase the possibility of more frequent flooding. Embankments may also divert floods toand exacerbate their impacts inunprotected areas. In addition, increased accumulation of sediment and silt that cannot be deposited on flood plains (because of the embankments) cause river beds to rise, and thus may lead to more frequent floods and even the topping of embankments during abnormal floods. When a high embankment is breached, flooding and its resulting damages are proportionately more severe, as exemplified by the collapse of an embankment on the river Meghna during the flood, which resulted in the total destruction of crops and infrastructure. There have been many cases of embankment failure in Bangladesh, the main causes of which are: (a) erosion and river shifts; (b) poor construction and inadequate maintenance; and (c) deliberate breaching by people adversely affected by them.One of the main negative economic impacts of embankments is that they tend to block or reduce the accumulation of fertile silt on croplands and reduce agricultural productivity. Other adverse impacts include a significant reduction in fish catch on flood plains and the spread of weeds and pests due to a disruption of the natural regulative mechanisms associated with alternating floods and dry spells on flood plains. The fact that flood control also encourages farmers to reduce the diversity of crops and crop varieties increases the danger of blights, plagues and pests. In addition, embankments often lead to a decrease in livestock, especially cattle, because of the ensuing reduction in the size of grazing areas along river banks. At a broader macroeconomic level, it is often noted that operation and maintenance of flood control structures are expensive and to adequately cover this may be beyond the means of the Government ofH. Rasid and A. Malik, "Flood adaptations in Bangladesh: is the compartmentalization scheme compatible with indigenous adjustments of rice cropping to flood regimes?", Applied Geography, vol. , No. (July ).Ongoing shifts in river courses are responsible not only for erosion of river banks but also for the creation of river islands, locally known as "charlands", in which hundreds of thousands of small farmers live and grow crops. It was also argued, on the other hand, that some of the FAP embankments would threaten the existence of these river islands (see B. Imhasly, "The dancing rivers of Bangladesh", Swiss Review of World Affairs, No. (December ), pp. -).In the case of the Meghna River downstream, its gradual eastward drift took place in one sudden shift of . km in just hours in (B. Imhasly, loc. cit.).Time-series data gathered by the Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council show that the total area flooded appears to have actually increased because of greater numbers of flood control embankments (see B. K. Paul, "Flood research in Bangladesh in retrospect and prospect: a review"..., p. ).J.U. Chowdhury, "Flood Action Plan: one sided approach?", in J. L. Wescoat, Jr. and others, "Five Views on the Flood Action Plan for Bangladesh", Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center/Institute of Behavioral Science (NHRAIC/IBS) Working Paper, No. (Boulder, Colorado, University of Colorado, March ).According to a detailed study carried out by a foreign donor agency (see Netherlands Development Cooperation, "Flood Action Plan, Bangladesh", Evaluation Report (The Hague, ), there is evidence that high-yield rice varieties favoured by many farmers under flood control schemes are less resistant to blight and pests.Bangladesh. According to one estimate, adequate annual maintenance of the FAP waterworks would require per cent of the initial investment. An investment of US$ billion would thus incur an annual maintenance cost of US$ million a yearfar more than the total cost of the estimated crop damage caused by the floodsor one third of the countrys estimated total foreign exchange reserves in .Potential socio-economic drawbacks include the above-mentioned adverse impacts on the consumption of fisha primary source of protein for poor Bangladeshis; on household food security; and on possible losses by specific socio-economic groups. Besides fishers, the landless, poor rural farmers and river island (charland) dwellers have sometimes been adversely affected by the construction of embankments. This has occasionally led to the deliberate breaching of embankments by some of these groups, to the disadvantage of others, which has resulted in increasing social conflicts. There is also evidence that average flood losses inside flood control projects were actually greater than in unprotected flood areas, during previous floods. Even different areas within a so-called flood protection compartment may each have different flood control requirements, and even slight variations in flood level can have significant adverse impacts on agricultural output of different farmers. Compartmentalization cannot always meet specific demands of small-scale farmers, given that evidence from largescale flood control and irrigation projects in Bangladesh show that regulated water levels are likely to be influenced by the interests of local rural elites and wealthier landowners. Compartmentalization schemes also tend to be incompatible with indigenous practices of rice cropping because of operation and maintenance constraints.Probable environmental impacts of embankments include interference with migration of aquatic species and reduction of biodiversity, including loss of fisheries, given that fish habitats cover up to half of the countrys area during the monsoon season (as opposed to per cent in the dry season). In addition, embankments can act as obstacles to the replenishment of groundwater reservoirs during annual floods. Owing to inadequate maintenance and poor drainage, many embankments have given rise to an accumulation of stagnant water, with adverse environmental and human health consequences, including the spread of mosquitoand water borne diseases. Major environmental problems associated with stagnant water behind the km embankment in western Dhaka include the accumulation of urban sewage and the spread of water hyacinth.By the mid-s, many of FAPs major structural projects had been scaled down or dropped altogether. By the end of the decade, the whole FAP, as originally envisaged, was practically abandoned, primarily because of the abovementioned engineering, socio-economic, financial and environmental complexities. Although no comprehensive flood prevention strategy has been developed to replace FAP, some large-scale flood control projects, such as a large embankment in Dhaka, have been built. In fact, a cordon approach to flood controlprimarily based on the construction of large embankments to cordon off selected urban areasappears to have emerged. Given that criticism of such an approach is remarkably similar to that directed at FAP projects, increasing attention has been turned to alternative, non-structural measures.Ibid.See, for example, D. J. Parker, "Social impacts of the Bangladesh Flood Action Plan", in J. L. Wescoat, Jr. and others, op. cit.; P. M. Thompson and P. Sultana, "Distributional and social impacts of flood control in Bangladesh", The Geographical Journal, vol. , part , pp. -; M. Leaf, "Local control versus technocracy: the Bangladesh flood response study", Journal of International Affairs, vol. , No. (summer ), pp. -; and P. M. Thompson and P. Sultana, "Operation and maintenance performance and conflicts in floodcontrol projects in Bangladesh"....P.M. Thompson and P. Sultana, "Distributional and social impacts of flood control in Bangladesh"....D.J. Parker, loc. cit.B.K. Paul, "Flood research in Bangladesh in retrospect and prospect: a review" ....Ibid. N. Islam, for instance, shows that such "cordons" are harmful because, among other reasons (a) they deprive floodplains of the nurturing effects of inundation, (b) they lead to a huge waste of investment and (c) they do not solve the flood problem, as illustrated by the failure of the Dhaka-Narayanganj-Demra project to protect the area supposed to be cordoned off during the floods.Alternative approaches to flood mitigationGenerally speaking, non-structural measures should complement structural ones, provided that the latter are (a) properly designed and implemented; (b) suitable to local conditions; and (c) affordable in terms of building and maintenance. According to comprehensive regional guidelines on flood management prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), structural measures, such as the construction of embankments and river channel improvements, can provide flood protection only up to the level of the expected flood. As a result, special provision should be considered at the design stage to incorporate measures that will ensure that the effects of failure are minimized and that the associated damages and disruptions are made no worse that the pre-protection situation. Given that structural flood prevention measures usually require considerable financial resources, ESCAP guidelines also stress that countries with scarce financial resources should give emphasis to policies and measures that will steer development away from high-risk areas and diminish vulnerability of new investments.Non-structural approaches to flood mitigation also include adaptive actions taken by affected communities, either individually or collectively, and by local and national government agencies before, during and after the floods. Most of the measures resorted to by affected communities are of a preventive or corrective nature in that they are intended to minimize damage caused by floods. Some of these adjustments are related to material responses at the individual level; others are related to social organization or relationships. Selling land, livestock and personal belongings; borrowing from friends, relatives or microcredit organizations; and spending previous savings are the most popular nonstructural measures used by lower-income urban and rural dwellers to mitigate loss caused by floods.There is evidence that increased subsidized microcredit provision by a leading local institution (the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC), for both emergency relief and supply of seeds, contributed to mitigating the impacts of the floods. Most rural flood victims consider it important to maintain close ties with traditional organizations (samaj)informal social groups based on kinship and the social and religious interests of their members. There is further evidence that households that belonged to traditional or other non-governmental organizations were better prepared to mitigate and cope with flood losses than non-member neighbours. This leads to the conclusion that the development of local social and institutional networks can effectively lessen the impacts of natural disasters such as floods.There are also economic measures, particularly in the small-scale agricultural sector, that can be preventive. Farmers of Bangladesh often select the most adaptive rice varieties to hedge against abnormal floods. For example, aus rice is generally cultivated in elevated areas since it cannot survive floodwaters, whereas flood-adaptive aman rice is cultivated in low-lying areas. Most farmers intercrop both rice varieties as a means of minimizing risk and in order to be able to harvest at least one rice cropalbeit at the expense of forgoing higher yields. Other preventive measures include the construction of traditional storage silos and flood shelters on naturally higher ground or on artificial levees. It is actually recommended that such public high grounds be considerably expanded as a vital flood mitigation measure, with emergency facilities,Box VII.THE FLOODING DISASTER IN CHINAIn mid-, China experienced one of the worst floods in its modern history, as the central and southern parts of the country along the Yangtze River and its tributaries suffered heavy flooding for more than two months. Huge areas behind the Yangtze River embankments were inundated for almost three months and some of these embankments were deliberately breached in order to reduce flood levels in the main river course. It is estimated that approximately million people were affected and that at least million were made homeless.a The floods caused severe damage to basic infrastructure and services, including roads, bridges, irrigation and water supply systems, hospitals and schools, as well as industrial and commercial buildings. At least million hectares of crops were affected and over million hectares were completely lost. According to the united_nations, by March , the direct economic losses were estimated to have exceeded US$ billion.The two most evident causes of the disaster were (a) excessive rainfallwhich, according to Chinese meteorologists was partly associated with El Nino/La Ninaand (b) the melting of deep snow accumulated in the Qinghai-Tibet plateau in south-west China. It is also possible that sea-level rise in the Yangtze delta may have contributed to slowing down the drainage of flood waters into the East China Sea.b Recent research identifies other less obvious causes, such as a deterioration of the Yangtze embankment network and deforestation in the upper and middle sections of the Yangtze River basin.cSince , a huge effort has been made to build embankments along , kilometres (km) of the Yangtze and its tributaries. Flood detention areas and reservoirs were also established as part of this flood control strategy. Other structural flood control measures have included the construction of diversion canals and multi-purpose dams. Financial constraints, however, have prevented the upgrading of these structures to deal more adequately with abnormal floods, such as the and Yangtze floods. In recent decades, intensified soil erosion in the Yangtze basin has contributed to the silting up of many reservoirs, tributaries and the main river course itself. For example, the river bed in a -km section near the city of Wuhan rose by centimetres (cm) between and owing to the accumulation of million tons of silt. It is estimated that in other sections, the river bed has been rising by metre (m) every years. It is also calculated that . billion cubic metres (m) of reservoir capacity along the Yangtze River is lost every year. In addition, extensive land reclamation from lakes for agriculture has considerably reduced their storage capacity and thus their flood regulation role in the Yangtze basin.A second explanation for the magnitude of the floods is the increasing destruction of vegetation upstream. It is estimated that the total forest cover in the Yangtze Basin fell from -per cent in to only per cent in , and that it continues to fall significantly. Part of these forest cover losses in the mountainous areas of the Yangtze basin is caused by natural factors associated with the impacts of heavy rainfall on abrupt slopes and thin soils. Most of the deforestation in the upper and middle section of the basin, however, is associated with human activities, notably the conversion of natural forest into agriculture. The population of the Yangtze basin is estimated to have doubled to million during the second half of the twentieth century, most of whom continue to be engaged in agricultural activities.Although non-structural flood control measuressuch as flood plain zoning, forecasting and warning systems and flood insurancewere introduced in China during the s, until the flooding disaster, the countrys flood control strategy had essentially been based upon a structural approach, that is to say, the use of embankments and other hydraulic engineering facilities. It is interesting to note that a survey of flood plain residents conducted in the mid-s showed that non-structural measures, such as flood insurance, attracted more favourable responses ( per cent) than any of the structural measures (-per cent).d Despite the huge efforts made by the Chinese authorities to mitigate the impacts of the floods, it became evident that structural engineering measures alone were insufficient to deal with abnormal floods. Attention has thus turned to non-structural measures, notably the control of deforestation and the acceleration of reforestation, particularly in the middle and upper reaches of the Yangtze River basin.e As a result, in , the Chinese Government formulated the National Ecological and Environmental Construction Plan (NEECP), primarily aimed at forest and freshwater conservation, as well as reforestation.such as a public well, a small health unit with basic medicines, sanitary facilities, radio equipment and grain storage facilities.There is evidence that many of these non-structural measures, together with prompt action by government agencies, in cooperation with non-governmental and traditional organizations, were crucial in mitigating the impacts of what turned out be the worst floods in the countrys history. The increased capacity of government agencies to cope with crises, demonstrated during the flood and its aftermath, points to a greater role for non-structural measures in future flood-mitigating efforts. The experience from the floods in Greater Dhaka shows not only that non-structural measures contributed significantly to flood damage reduction, but also that coordination between agencies responsible for flood protection and drainage could significantly reduce flood damage. Furthermore, swift emergency relief and rehabilitation measures can be crucial to dealing with the vulnerability to flooding disasters and their adverse impacts. In addition, it is argued that an emergency food-based safety net is required to maintain poor peoples access to minimum acceptable levels of nutrition and to enable them to preserve assets that would have otherwise need to be sold off to ensure their subsistence.More recently, an open approach to flood control appears to be emerging as an alternative, more comprehensive response to recurrent floods. It includes (a) dredging watercourses in order to reduce the intensity of flooding in the major rivers, (b) minimizing obstruction on flood plains, (c) strengthening the freshwater fisheries sector, (d) redirecting crop research towards flood adaptation strategies, (e) increasing the elevation of urban and rural dwellings at risk, and (f) consolidating rural settlements around permanent flood shelters. This moves the emphasis away from structural flood prevention and control strategies towards flood preparedness and mitigation. The ultimate goal of this new approach is thus to revitalize the culture of living with floods. It is also argued that there is a greater need for developing a more people-centred approach to disaster management and rehabilitation.A comprehensive approach to disaster management should include at least four phases: prevention, preparedness, mitigation, and recovery. Although many countries tend to be primarily concerned with the first and last phases, the greatest potential for minimizing economic losses and reducing disaster vulnerability, particularly among lower-income groups, lies with the preparedness and mitigation phases. As the impacts of natural disasters tend to fall disproportionately on the poor, specific policies are required to tackle the link between poverty and disaster vulnerability. In addition, given that improved warning systems and dissemination of information on disaster prevention have significantly reduced the number of people seriously affected in developed countries, the availability of such information to the population at risk in disaster-prone developing countries is equally, if not more vital to their disaster prevention and mitigation efforts. Once the population mostly at risk is identified in these countries, specific prevention measures should be taken to protect them, including the enforcement of appropriate building standards.Effective policies to regulate further growth of human settlements in risky areas should also be formulated and implemented as part of a broader disaster prevention and mitigation strategy. Since the location of human settlements is partly determined by the spatial location of economic activity, the reduction of disaster vulnerability requires the implementation of appropriate economic policies, such as fiscal incentives for orientation of economic activities away from disaster-prone areas. Efforts aimed at reorienting economic activities away from risky areas may require cooperation with the private sector, given that recurrent natural disasters can play a role in determining patterns of investment and discouraging new investment in particularly disaster-prone countries.The case of the garment industry in Bangladesh illustrates how recurrent natural disasters can become an obstacle to both economic development and efforts to benefit from ongoing processes of globalization. Marginalized developing countries can thus help to create the enabling environment suitable for an increasingly globalized world economy not only through economic and institutional measures (such as trade liberalization, improved education and the establishment of a well-defined legal system) but also through infrastructural improvements required to render them attractive for FDI and as a competitive base for international trade. Such countries should make a particular effort to ensure that infrastructural improvements are targeted at the adverse impacts of recurrent disasters.While it is widely assumed in the international community that development itselfand the ensuing improvement in living standardswill reduce vulnerability to natural disasters, international development assistance should be more explicit about the extent to which it is aimed at combating disaster vulnerability. This is particularly important in view of the evidence that poorer developing countries prone to natural hazards are often forced to divert scarce resources from the development of infrastructure, required to render them attractive for processes of globalization, into disaster relief activities. Within the united_nations, further support should be given to the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, which works through an inter-agency secretariat and task force comprising united_nations agencies, as well as several organizations outside the united_nations system, to support national decision makers and local communities in the formulation and implementation of longterm disaster prevention and mitigation strategies. Given that floods are the most damaging type of natural disaster in terms of both human losses and socio-economic damage, international assistance should also be specifically focused on the impacts of flooding disasters, particularly on the poor in developing countries.Nonetheless, the recent flood experiences in Bangladesh show that disaster mitigation and response are best managed at the national level. Disaster response can be particularly effective when jointly carried out by government agencies, local communities, non-governmental organizations, and business and financial institutions, including microcredit organizations. Furthermore, bearing in mind the engineering, economic, social and environmental complexities of large-scale embankments, dams and river canalization projects together with their often prohibitive costgreater attention should be given to non-structural measures designed to prevent, mitigate or minimize the damage caused by floods in poorer developing countries. The main lesson from the recent flooding disaster in Bangladesh is that, in the absence of expensive structural measures, many non-structural ones can go a long way towards reducing vulnerability to natural disasters and mitigating their impacts.