Part two of the wess, analyses new thinking on and experiences of public-private interaction in achieving societys goals. It explains how the role of the State is itself changing to ensure that the private sector brings the fullest possible benefits to society.Societies have many goalsto ensure the well-being of its present citizens and a better future for the next generation in terms of good health, housing, education, and prosperity, justice for all, the extension of personal freedom, and the maintenance of domestic and external peace. Governments are held accountable if the people or the electorate considers that they are failing to make adequate progress in advancing societys overall goals. However, while society expects the government to assist in the achievement of these goals, it has not entrusted to government the full power to take any steps that it wishes to accomplish them.Such extensive power could conflict with the expansion of the personal freedom of citizensto determine how to build up their own capabilities, how to spend their own income, how to pursue happiness in their own way, and how to earn a living, including by setting up a business. The extension of personal freedom is also viewed either as a goal in itself or as a key element in achieving societys goals. The government, though, has a major role in ensuring that there are opportunities for all, that the benefits of development are equitably distributed, that those affected adversely by factors outside their control such as job loss or illness are protected and that conflicts among the different interest groups within society are justly resolved. Fulfilling these tasks does not necessarily mean a larger or even more intrusive role for the government, but rather a continual refining of the role of the State. This is especially relevant at the present time which is marked by the realization that the private sector can make a major contribution to the achievement of societys goals but that government has an important role in enabling this sector to realize its full potential.There has been considerable movement in all countries to expand the role of the private sector in the provision of goods and services. As described in the World Public Sector Report, recent experience has shown that people often benefit when the State is not involved in the production of goods and, generally, the provision of non-social services. Greater competition brings down prices and enhances the choice to consumers. In reducing the role of the State in the production of goods and non-social services, Governments are responding to a perception that citizens, as consumers, should have a greater choice regarding what is produced and that the profit motive and accompanying hard budget constraints can work to expand the quality and quantity of goods and services available to citizens.The private sectors role in the economy is expanding in many ways. One is through the privatization of State-owned enterprises (SOEs) producing goods and non-public services. In the provision of public services, the private sector is also playing a greater rolein the construction and running of infrastructure such as power stations, in the supply of such services as cleaning and laundry in hospitals, and in the running of schools and airports.This expansion of the role of the private sector does not mean just that it produces a larger share of a fixed bundle of goods and services and that the State produces a smaller share. The consequences of this expansion are more profound. A comparison of the health and welfare of the citizens of countries that are historically similar but were under different social systemsfor example, the two German States before unification, or many European economies in transition before their transition and at the present timeshows the extent to which private sector involvement in economic activity has large consequences. A system in which, within the limits of the law, citizens can freely choose what goods and services they want and private companies, both domestic and foreign, can attempt to make a profit from supplying them is very different from one where the State takes these decisions.Where the State makes decisions that, in a competitive market environment, would be left to a myriad of individual economic actors, the total volume supplied is likely to be smaller. On the whole, State-run enterprises tend to use greater amounts of inputs to produce the same output as privately run concerns. This constitutes a waste of societys resources. However, State involvement in the production of goods and services is not just a matter of efficiency in the production of a particular good. The composition of what is supplied is likely to be different from what individual economic actors would provide. On the whole, individual actors are more sensitive to what consumers demand and so avoid the mismatch between demand and supply characterizing the former centrally planned economies which constituted an inefficient outcome on a national scale. Whether or not the private sector is involved is one determinant of the speed and direction of the development of new goods and services. In many countries, after the privatization of the telecommunications sector, the quantity and quality of services changed. The provision of mobile phones, in particular, expanded rapidly. Moreover, whereas the State might have financed some of the research and development (R&D) that led to a particular invention, its subsequent development and refinement by the private sector could lead to new and hardly imagined uses, as in the case of the Internet.In the present competitive and globalizing world economy, it is increasingly difficult for the State to anticipate future demands for goods and services and thus plan for their production. Moreover, too great a degree of State control over economic decision-making during a long period is incompatible with democracy and fundamental freedoms. The advent of democracy in the economies in transition was invariably accompanied by a rapid expansion of the private sector as electorates felt that the role of the State should not include intervening in decisions as to how individuals decided to spend their income and, in general, what particular desires they wished to see satisfied.However, the expansion of the role of the private sector in the provision of goods and services does not necessarily mean a contraction in the overall role of the State: the role of the State in assuring, either directly, or indirectly by working with the private sector, minimum levels of nutrition, education and health will remain. Even in countries with a very small public productive sector, the State is involved in the supply of almost all goods. It sets the legal framework whereby property rights, including intellectual property rights, are enforced and claims arising from the use of a product can be judged. It seeks to ensure that the consumer is purchasing a safe product (as in the case of medicines, foodstuffs, automobiles and childrens toys). It is also involved in ensuring that the consumer is not cheated.As more actors are involved and a greater array of goods and services are supplied, overseeing the system becomes more complex. Although the public sector may have less direct participation in the actual production of goods and services, it needs to play a more active role in regulation. The State always had these responsibilities but these are now situated in a different context requiring a highly skilled government, not necessarily a smaller or a larger one, and possibly different regulations rather than necessarily more regulations.In general, the respective roles of the public and private sectors are constantly being redefined, with citizens seeking justification for the States direct involvement in economic activity and transparency for the costs of the public sectors provision of a good or service. For instance, in many countries, the public no longer considers that the State is under any obligation to own and operate supposedly strategic industries such as iron and steel. If these industries cannot be operated profitably by the private sector, there is often less of a constituency, outside those working in the industry, for government intervention. Even if the Government does intervene, it is expected to ensure that the costs of its intervention are transparent.Governments often intervene indirectly in other ways to assist people and industries. They can finance national agricultural research in order to help develop new crops for farmers. In the matter of health care, Governments are expected to take steps to prevent epidemics and to ensure that a poor person is not denied vital medical treatment, but the governments role in building and operating hospitals and in paying medical personnel is being rethought.There are many different ways in which the private and public sectors can interact. While, as indicated above, there is no one clear-cut determination of what should be undertaken by the public and private sectors, insights into the new relationship between the two can be derived from examining the experiences of different sectors. Interaction can range from full privatization of a productive enterprise to arrangements through which provision of a good or service is set out in the form of a contract between the public and private sectors. Such contracts would be build-operate-transfer arrangements for infrastructure, a lease whereby the private sector pays the public sector for the use of one of its assets or a concession whereby, for instance, a private supplier pays for the right to provide a service in a publicly owned facility. In drawing up these contracts, the government should try to ensure the most efficient outcome through competitive bidding. In general, an aim of policy should be the promotion of competition, as well as the construction of a regulatory framework that will protect the interests of consumers.Other examples of interaction are cooperation between government-run research institutes, universities and private research institutes in areas of socially desirable research, such as agriculture or medicine; arrangements for privately owned and run hospitals to treat patients on behalf of the State; and the relationship between public authorities and for-profit private universities that ensures that the latter reach the required standards.Part two of the Survey deals with only some of the main interactions, with a view to drawing conclusions that are applicable in similar industries or conditions.The following three chapters look at the issues and trends in those activities where the role of the private sector has scarcely been questioned, but where there is still a major role for the State, while the last two chapters analyse the changes in two sectors, health and education, that have always been viewed as a particular responsibility of the State.In the past years, many countries have considerably reduced the direct role of the State in economic activity by privatizing SOEs and selling State assets. Privatization can yield long-run benefits to a country. However, privatization is part of the process of constructing a market economy and, for this process to be a success, it should have firm governmental and popular support. Privatization should be a policy willingly embraced by a country rather than one seen as imposed. If the process is owned, its success can be expected to be greater.Privatization is founded on the premise, itself based on both theory and experience, that enterprises in which the private sector, rather than the State, is the residual claimant on the net revenues are more efficient. There is evidence from many different industries that privatization leads to an improvement in an enterprises performance. However, the full benefits to the consumer will be realized only in a competitive and well-regulated market-friendly environment. In order to ensure that the privatization process takes place smoothly and that enough private investment is attracted to the former SOEs, the Government should create a favourable investment environment.The success of privatization cannot be measured by the proceeds that the Government receives from the sale, in part because it might be able to obtain a greater price by selling its assets to a monopolist. Governments have many different objectives when divesting their assets, and, while raising revenue from the direct sale is one, it could be secondary to other objectives such as raising efficiency, increasing consumer benefits, and promoting competition and wider share ownership. Sales of shares of State enterprises to the public can promote the growth of capital markets, and involve the public in the benefitsand the risksinherent in stock markets.While there are benefits in creating the ancillary institutions necessary to ensure the success of the privatized enterprises prior to their sale, and while pre-sale investment and restructuring might make the properties more valuable to the private investor, there are also dangers in delaying the sale. This is especially the case when the properties are being operated at a loss and when the state of the enterprises equipment is deteriorating: the costs of rehabilitation could reduce the net profits that the future owner might expect from operating it more efficiently. The methods of sale must also be carefully considered, since errors in the design of the sales process can yield smaller revenues. The transfer of currently profitable SOEs can bring the Government future benefits in the form of tax revenues resulting from their even more profitable operation under private ownership. The one-time revenues from their sale could be used to reduce public debt, but it would be unwise to use them to maintain otherwise unsustainable levels of government expenditure, especially when there are fewer attractive assets to sell in the future.In some countries, SOEs were used as a vehicle to provide social services, social insurance and social protection. Privatization will then often require the construction of an alternative form of social services. The construction of a social safety net is particularly important in the case of those countries where SOEs could not compete in normal market conditions and where divestment would result in heavy job losses.Privatization implies a change in the Governments role in promoting R&D. In cases where SOEs had been used to conduct some of the R&D that the Government felt to be desirable, it could separate, before privatization, those parts of the research infrastructure that it would like to see remain in the public sphere. After privatization, it could further encourage its own institutions and universities to conduct R&D. However, privatization can help a nations R&D effort by fostering the growth of new private companies that can form alliances with other private companies, both domestic and foreign, and collaborate in market-driven R&D.Chapter V examines the role of the private and public sectors in R&D from the perspective of agriculture. That chapter reviews the performance of agriculture during the past four decades and demonstrates how technology has prevented until now the realization of a Malthusian trap where population would be limited by a shortage in food supply. This has been achieved through a combination of public and private participation in agricultural R&D.However, with the continuing growth in the worlds population, this situation where adequate food supplies exist at a global level cannot be expected to persist unless the momentum of agricultural R&D is maintained. At the present time, a large amount of second generation green revolution technology is being testedin parts of Africa, for exampleor waiting to be tested and applied. In addition, biotechnology and genetic engineering can be expected in the future to play a greater role in augmenting food supplies.Both public and private actors must participate in agricultural research, with the public sector increasingly directing its efforts to areas that are socially worthwhile, but that have not been privately developed. Because much R&D involves serendipity and requires certain threshold levels to be effective, a regional approach is often desirable. Such a course makes particular sense in agriculture because of the similar geophysical properties within a region.The government can also foster private R&D in agriculture by taking steps to boost the commercial viability of the agriculture sector. Yet R&D alone will not suffice to increase agricultural output, nor will it allay hunger where it exists. Other complementary activities and policiesfor example, those relating to non-price policies, such as land reformare also necessary before returns from agricultural R&D can be realized.The provision of basic services, such as infrastructure and social services, has been seen and is still seen in many countries as an area under the responsibility of the public sector owing to the existence of large positive externalities. Chapter VI deals with electricity, which has long been a government monopoly in most countries. However, as countries have developed and require a greater, more efficient and less costly supply of utilities, the need to promote competition and financial constraints in the public sector have propelled the shifting of assets in this area towards private hands. Moreover, technological developments have made it easier to unbundle the electricity sector, separating the generation of power from its distribution and marketing to the final consumer and allowing different bodies to compete in the provision of these different services. Previously, they had all been undertaken by a State monopoly.The privatization of electricity has shown that increased competition at the retail level, achieved by offering choices to consumers, has provided incentives to raise operational efficiency, improving the quality of service and ultimately lowering prices. Increased consumer choice also provides an incentive for innovation and the improvement of services by private electricity providers that did not exist under State-owned monopoly systems. Public-private interaction thus involves not only increasing private sector participation in the provision of utility services but also enhancing competition and increasing consumer choice.The success of efforts to attract private sector investments to public utilities partly depends on the establishment of transparent and reliable contract legislation and regulatory machinery that offers a minimum level of guarantee to private investment. Effective regulation by the government should be primarily aimed at dealing with monopoly power, price discrimination and other market failures, at promoting competition and at ensuring that an adequate supply of electricity is available to all consumers at all times at prices that try to even out the fluctuations caused by short supply, while encouraging the growth of capacity to meet expected future demand.In view of the factors necessary for the success of electricity privatization, in many developing countries, only a gradual or even partial move towards private sector provision of electricity and other utility services may be feasible. This is because of a series of limitations, such as the small size of their electricity markets, the lack of a developed capital market and regulatory constraints, notably inadequate institutional and human resource capacity.Chapter VII analyses the role of the private and public sectors in the provision of health services. It demonstrates how the private sector has played a larger role in providing health care in developing countries than in developed and transitional economies: private expenditure on health is about per cent of the total health expenditure in developing countries while its share in developed countries is about one quarter. In developing countries, the private sector plays a large role even in the provision of essential health care, which has traditionally been considered to be most properly undertaken by the public sector.Incorporating effectively private health services provision into a well-structured national health system, based on the interaction between the public and private sectors, can contribute to improving the health of the population and thus development in general. The need to devote adequate resources to health care at a time of tightened fiscal resources for many governments has been another factor behind the greater interaction between the two sectors. However, the fact that interaction between a countrys health authorities and its private medical providers has often been inadequate has rendered health-related regulations ineffective. Insufficient interaction has led to widespread, unnecessary uses of antibiotics in some developing countries, for example.The health authoritys role in a system where private activities are substantial differs from its role in a State-led system. The role of the authority is to understand the health needs of its population, evaluate the status of its national health system and coordinate the health-care activities of both public and private providers. The authority is further required to monitor and regulate both public and private health-care providers in order to ensure that patients receive proper and safe treatment and that equitable access to medical services is enjoyed by different social groups, including the poor.The education sector in developing countries continues to struggle on many fronts: to increase enrolment and to improve quality under the constraint of limited resources. Numerous attempts have been made to reduce the cost burden to the State by involving the private sector and by imposing user fees.Chapter VIII shows, however, that in the case of primary education, except for those few countries with a long history of private schooling, such attempts failed. Rather than assign the financial responsibility for education directly to individuals, private interaction should focus on involving local communities in monitoring resource allocation and the quality of teaching in primary education.In the case of the secondary level of education, to provide the skills required by the labour market and to attract candidates for this form of education, vocational and technical programmes should be developed in close partnership, including financing, with the private sector.The chapter finds that private sector participation is rising in all regions in response to increased demand for higher education and a lack of resources in public universities. Innovative financing strategies, including student fees and revenue-generating activities, are reshaping the public higher education system. In general, an economic development strategy that creates demand for educated and skilled workers stimulates private investment in education. This greater private provision of educational services should be accompanied by more efficient regulation and some form of intervention by the government to ensure equitable access and high quality.Part two describes the process of greater public-private sector interaction in achieving societys varied goals. This process has brought great benefits but also equally great challenges. One challenge is to adjust the role of the State so that the process takes place smoothly and will yield the fullest benefits to present and future citizens.The past two decades, and especially the s, have witnessed throughout the world an unprecedented expansion of private sector involvement in the production of goods and services that had previously been provided by the public sector. Greater private sector participation in the economy has occurred not only in the management and financing of State-owned enterprises (SOEs), but also as a result of a substantial transfer of State-owned assets to the private sector. This transfer of SOEs has encompassed a broad range of sectors, from extractive and manufacturing industries to transportation, banking and notably public utilities, such as energy, telecommunication and water services. The present chapter analyses this process as it has affected productive industries, rather than public utilities such as electricity, public services such as rail travel, or social services such as health and education.Developed countries accounted for the bulk of global privatization proceeds during the s (see figure IV.), and privatization programmes are beginning to mature in many of them, partly because of their success in disposing of a large number of their more attractive State-owned assets. For example, although privatization in developed countries was led by the telecommunications sector, most telecom assets in those countries have now been transferred to the private sector. Provisional data compiled by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) show that privatization proceeds in fell by per cent in OECD countries.Much attention regarding the future transfer of State-owned assets has thus been turning to developing countries, particularly those that have made or are likely to make the most concerted efforts to create the enabling environment for private sector expansion. Proceeds from such transfers have risen considerably in developing countries over the past decade, notably in latin_america. Annual proceeds from the disposal of State assets in developing countries rose from US$ billion at the beginning of the s to a peak of US$ billion in , from which they fell to US$ billion at the end of the decade (see table IV.). In subSaharan Africa, the increase in proceeds was rapid from a small basefrom $ million in to $, million in and $, million in .In many countries, such as the Central and Eastern European economies in transition and the former Soviet Union, privatization has resulted in a massive expansion of the role of the private sector. In , almost all enterprises in these countries were State-owned, whereas in mid-, in of the countries the share of the private sector in gross domestic product (GDP) was overFigure IV..GLOBAL PROCEEDS FROM PRIVATIZATION, -of US dollarsGlobal OECD. .. . . . . . .Table IV..RECEIPTS FROM PRIVATIZATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES BY SECTOR, -of US dollarsYearPrimary sectoraManufacturingEnergybTelecomsOther infrastructurecFinancial servicesdOther serviceseTotalSuch figures are indicative of the changes taking place. An examination of individual industries shows dramatic changes. The example of Ghanas mining industry (see box IV.) illustrates that privatization is not simply a matter of selling assets. Ghana, as many other developing countries, has been seeking to establish credibility in its policy of privatization. It has aimed to achieve a larger participation of the private sector in economic activity, which not only means divesting State assets, but also enacting legislation to attract new domestic and foreign investment on mutually beneficial terms and establishing a proved record of stability and reliability as an investment location.For all countries engaged in the process of expanding the role of the private sector, establishing credibility has meant that, although setbacks have been encountered on the way and some enterprises did not perform as well after privatization as had been expected, there has been no consistent attempt by the State to return to the levels of direct control over economic activity that it once exercised. In the globalized world economy, where foreign direct investment (FDI) flows have increased sharply and the market plays a greater role in investment, Governments are unwilling to take steps that could act as a disincentive to domestic and foreign private investors. An attempt to change radically the terms under which the industry had been privatized or to resumeAfter , Ghana, a country with great mineral potential, started to adopt investor-friendly legislation and in adopted a new mining code.a In it launched a divestiture programme at the national level and subsequently established the Divestiture Implementation Committee. In , it put up for sale per cent of its per cent stake in Ashanti Goldfields Corporation, thereby ceasing to own the majority of the shares.The results of this process of liberalization and privatization were spectacular. Gold production had declined from , ounces in to , ounces in ; diamond production from ,, carats in to , carats in ; bauxite production from , tons in to , tons in ; and manganese production from , tons in to , tons in . With a change in the mineral regime, investment in the industry expandedfrom $. million in to $. million in and production increased dramatically. Gold production rose to . million ounces in , diamond production to , carats in , bauxite production to , tons in and manganese production to , tons in .Mineral reserves also increased in spite of the increase in output: gold reserves rose from . million troy ounces in , equivalent to times that years production, to million troy ounces in , equivalent to times that years much higher production; and diamond reserves rose from . million carats in , equivalent to times that years production, to . million carats in , equivalent to times that years production.bBox IV.Government control of an industry on terms that were not acceptable to its private owners would be seen as such a step. The difficulty in reversing privatization means that ensuring its success has been an important policy objective which, in the case of the economies in transition and developing countries, has been supported by international institutions.The success of privatization efforts will depend on several factors, such as improved governance and macroeconomic stability, maintenance of relevant laws and stable post-privatization regimes, and investor confidence in emerging markets, together with their continued openness to FDI.Privatization represents a conscious attempt by the State to forge a different relationship with the private sector from that which hitherto existed and, ultimately, one that will lead to greater production and domestic availability of the goods and services of the quality that consumers want. This has been most apparent in the case of the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe where the array of goods and services produced is today very much different from that which obtained before the transition when SOEs dominated production. Privatization is part of a process not just of disposing of State assets but of relying on the private sector to spur the development of new industries and products. For instance, the privatization of the telecommunications industry meant that the government relied on the private sector to develop the new technologies and supply their products, such as mobile phones, to domestic consumers.The privatization of industries changes the role of the State. Rather than operate the assets and obtain an income from the net revenuesand not just the taxeson the output of the industry, it will be entering into what, under the right terms, could be a mutually beneficial relationship with the private operators. Growth in the prosperity of the enterprise will benefit not just the private owners if their post-tax revenues rise, but also the State if its tax revenues increase. Furthermore, if prosperity in the privatized industry leads to the growth of new ancillary industry, the State will further benefit by a more diversified tax base. In a sense, the State has a stake in a wider range of productive activities, from which it would derive tax revenue, without incurring the risks involved in operating a limited number of industries. Privatization is especially justified if it is felt that the risks involved in the particular industries should be borne by the private sector which has every incentive, through the profit motive, to operate the assets efficiently.One of the first major programmes of privatization was that undertaken in the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland after . The lessons learned from this experience, both positive and negative, were to influence subsequent privatizations. The Government saw privatization as part of a policy to reverse the decline in the British economy which it attributed to policies pursued, or at least not opposed, by Governments of both parties. By , the share of SOEs in the British economy had been reduced from per cent (in ) to virtually nothing. The goals of the policy were to: (a) promote economic efficiency, (b) provide the opportunity to introduce competition, (c) subject SOEs to market discipline, (d) promote wider share ownership and help develop the national capital market, (e) reduce government interference in the economy and (f) raise revenue for the State from the proceeds of the sale.The early privatizations in Chile, Germany and the united_kingdom took place in what were essentially market economies and were intended to remove some of the impediments to the fuller interplay of market forces. In other countries that began privatization, the initial situation, and therefore the motives for privatization, was different. In the transition economies, privatization was part of the process of building a market economy. In some developing countries, privatization was part of a reaction to what had been perceived as the shortcomings of a policy that had relied on SOEs to promote growth; in others, difficulties in obtaining the finance to expand the capacity of SOEs, for example, in the power sector, encouraged the Government to grant an ownership stake to the private sector; in still others, privatization was often part of a programme supported by the international financial institutions.In the British case, privatization was largely effected by share issues, with the general public being able to purchase shares at the initial public offering (IPO) on terms designed to attract wide interest, thus giving a large number of shareholders a direct stake in the companies involved and making it more difficult for any future Government to take control of the privatized enterprises. However, the successor Government accepted most of the changes effected by the privatization policy, having amended its Partys constitution to remove the reference to public ownership of the means of production. As will be seen below, it organized a successful auction of an asset within its controlthe air above great_britain.The difficulty in reversing a policy of privatization and the fact that it cannot be viewed in isolation, but should rather be seen as part of a policy of marketization, have implications for analysis and policy advice. The need to establish credibility makes it important to get it right the first time. Considerable experience has been amassed during the various privatizations in many different countries of the world to help policy makers adopt the most appropriate privatization policies. The varied goals set for privatizations mean that these decisions are never simple. For instance, the goal of raising revenue for the State could perhaps best be achieved by selling a SOE to a foreign company in the same line of business or by retaining the monopoly position of the SOE when transferring it to private ownership, both of which strategies would conflict with the goal of promoting wider share ownership among the domestic population and promoting competition.The end result of this process of marketization is expected to be a different kind of economy and different socio-economic relations. This was the case with the transition economies where State control of the economy often disintegrated rapidly, not allowing for a measured and considered path to privatization but often giving rise to the takeover of the enterprises by the management of former SOEs. In these countries, privatization can best be seen as only a partalthough an essential partof the transition, and its effects have been hard to separate from the other changes taking place as central planning collapsed and policies intended to create a market economy were adopted.Privatization was one element in a broader picture of social change. However, it was often adopted as a reaction to what had been perceived as the failures, or inadequacies, in the context of the current globalized world economy, of previous policies, which had themselves been adopted in the expectation of their achieving a high rate of growth or high standard of living for the population. After the Great Depression of the s in the developed countries, some economists there thought that government control of production and distribution furnishes the means for eliminating the economic causes of depressions, cumulative destructive processes and unemployment of capital and labour ... Economic problems in the old sense no longer exist when the coordination of all economic activities is effected by conscious plan instead of by the natural laws of the market.Later, the end of colonialism meant that Governments often inherited assets, in particular infrastructure, that had been constructed in the colonial period. They often continued to operate these assets after independence. These newly liberated and other countries, both developed and developing, frequently assumed control of more directly productive assets, often owned by foreign corporations. There was concern that important national objectives could be sacrificed in the interests of overall corporate strategy if the industries were to remain in the hands of multinational corporations. In sum, the argument was that the States assuming, or at least not relinquishing, control of productive assets would improve the economic situation compared with what it would have otherwise been. Privatization implies a move away from this particular model of development which might have been valid in certain circumstances at an earlier period but is less so in the present competitive and liberalized global economic environment.Within the market economies, both developed and developing, the divide has not been between State ownershipbig governmentbig taxes versus private enterpriselittle governmentlittle taxes. A country can determine to leave decisions as to productive activity in the hands of the private sector with the expectation that this is the best way to generate wealth and taxable income and with the belief that it should not be involved in commercial activities. It could use its taxing powers to redistribute the resulting income and to provide for the social safety net and whatever other services it feels government should be responsible for. Its regulatory powers could be used to ensure that the private sector does not violate societys norms. The share of government total spending in GDP, then, could be large at the same time as the share of public corporations in goods producing output is minuscule, as in the case of Sweden. While privatization implies a decision by society to obtain the revenues that the Government needs from taxes and not from any net revenues that public corporations might generate, it does not imply that society has made the decision to reduce the role of the State in these other areas.SOME LESSONS FROM YEARS OF PRIVATIZATIONThe period of intense privatizationroughly yearsallows some tentative conclusions to be drawn as to what was achieved in economic terms. Such an assessment is fraught with difficulty, as it essentially relies on a counterfactuala comparison of what happened with what would have happened without privatization.Promoting economic efficiency and the growth of the private sectorOne goal of privatization has been to improve economic efficiency in order that societys limited resources may be used to satisfy, directly or indirectly through trade, the peoples demand for goods and services. Theory suggests that the ownership of an enterprise, and especially whether it is in private or public hands, will make a difference to performance (see box IV.). Privatizing SOEs can also help depoliticize economic decision-making and thus eliminate the accompanying inefficiencies. These inefficiencies can take the form of excess employment, well-above-market wages, special privilegesThe economic case for privatization is that a market system where free economic agents operate in competitive conditions and enterprises are subject to hard budget constraints will, in the end, be more efficient and lead to greater wealth than other systems. Under private enterprise, economic agents have incentives to operate efficiently, to increase productivity and to develop new products.The incentive to operate efficiently comes from the consideration that property rights arrangements help determine economic performance.a Those who own property have residual claims on the assets. When profits are generated by the efficient use of these assets, the private owners of the property, the residual claimants, see their own wealth increase. Thus, they have an incentive to monitor the behaviour of the managers and employees to ensure that they supply goods that consumers demand in a cost-effective manner. The market for shares acts as a court of last resort and shareholders can oust incumbent managers who are shirking or, as many recent examples have shown, have not been acting ethically or in the best interests of the company. Consistent loss-making will eventually lead to bankruptcy.By contrast, theory indicates that when the owners of a State-owned enterprise (SOE) are the general public, these residual claimants have little effective control over the enterprise and little incentive, or often ability, to monitor the behaviour of the managers and employees. They cannot vote by buying or selling their stake in the SOE. The cost to the public sector bureaucrat of shirking is low and there is every incentive to acquire perquisites that add to production costs. The threat of bankruptcy hardly applies under soft budget constraints.bIn theory, SOEs could attempt to compete against private firms, whether domestic or foreign, on a level playing field. However, whenever a difficulty arises, their very status will tend to make them seek a special advantage from the Government in the form of, for instance, special subsidies, tax breaks or preferential purchasing arrangements. This in turn can be expected to subvert the working of the overall economic system, where the key to an enterprises success will be seen to rely not on its satisfying its customers but rather on its seeking extra favours from the Government. Whereas, if unchecked, both private and public firms can be expected to pursue monopolistic policies and try to eliminate competition in order to boost their earnings, SOEs have the advantage of the direct involvement of the State, which can use its coercive powers to restrain competition.c This coercive power could be applied to stifling competition, erecting barriers to entry and assuming government control over successful firms in the private sector, further inhibiting the development of an entrepreneurial culture in the economy.Box IV.for the staff, investment in projects that benefit politicians rather than consumers and distortions arising from skewed pricing schemes. In the present competitive global environment, it is felt that such inefficiencies or non-commercial obligations make it difficult, if not impossible, for SOEs to compete with private sector firms that are free to pursue their commercial objectives and can adjust more quickly to new market conditions. With barriers to trade and investment falling, SOEs cannot be insulated from competition.Privatization in itself can help promote the growth of the private sector as the existence of a large State productive sector is often inimical to the growth of the private business sector and a competitive environment. In turn, the existence of a vibrant private sector can facilitate the Governments pursuing a strategy of private-public partnerships for the delivery of some of the services that the Government would like to see providedsuch as transport links, education and health services. Particularly in the case of foreign corporations entering countries with very limited services, part of their obligations as corporate citizens could be to provide, directly or indirectly, some of the services that are missing, such as education and health to their employees and perhaps even to a wider community. In the long run, this is only feasible if their private operations are successful and profitable.Another factor behind the increased reliance on the private sector in the present globalized and competitive economy is that many countries, including major economies and jurisdictions, are becoming increasingly critical of a Governments support for its own national enterprises, both SOEs and private firms that enjoy special State support. Firms, both domestic and foreign, seeking to enter these markets can expect a close scrutiny of any State involvement, both direct and indirect, that might give them what these jurisdictions would consider an unfair competitive advantage.Competition policy can be expected to play an increasingly important role in international discussions. The Ministerial Declaration of the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the world_trade_organization (A/C.//, annex), held in Doha in November established that, in the period up to the Ministerial Conference, the Working Group on the Interaction between Trade and Competition Policy would focus on clarifying: core principles including transparency, non-discrimination and procedural fairness, and provisions on hardcore cartels (that is to say, cartels that are formally set up); ways of handling voluntary cooperation on competition policy among world_trade_organization member Governments; and support for progressive reinforcement of competition institutions in developing countries through capacity-building (para. ).Promoting competitionMuch of the gains from privatization are lost if a public monopoly is replaced by a private monopoly. In a competitive environment, subject to the rule of law and with regulations covering health, safety and environmental issues, the threat of bankruptcy and normal mechanisms of the market would be expected to provide a degree of discipline for firms. Exceptions, such as anti-competitive behaviour and fraud, could be dealt with by the courts. As economic activity is continually evolving, new laws will need to be enacted and case law built up to confront new situations, as has been recently demonstrated by legislation passed as a result of the scandals in the corporate sector in the united_states of America.One of the objectives of privatization in different countries has therefore been to promote competition. This has often been explicit in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) and interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers drawn up by Governments which have combined privatization with opening up of the sector in question to competition. The Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development emphasized the need for encouraging the private sector and for promoting a competitive environment. The Consensus did not specifically mention privatization, but recognized that the appropriate role of government in market-oriented economies will vary from country to country.Competitive forces have not always been introduced at the same time as privatization. Transforming a nationalized monopoly into a privately owned monopoly has by itself often led to increases in the profitability of operations and heavy investments in expanding output, especially if there is a huge unmet demand. This has been the case with some privatizations in the telecommunications sphere where coverage expanded rapidly after privatization, especially where foreign sources of capital and technology were involved. The expansion of telephone service in itself helps to promote economic activity, with the lower-income members of society, for instance, being more easily contactable and therefore in a better position to offer their services and so engage in economic activity.Yet, even when a temporary monopoly was granted over some parts of the telecommunication network, provisions have been put in place to open up the field to competitors later on. Competitive forces have proved essential to greatly expanding the coverage of traditional services and driving down the costs of both fixed-line and mobile phones in developing countries that have privatized their telecommunications industry. In the case of Peru, for instance, the monopoly over telecommunications granted to a private firm lasted from privatization in June to August . The authorities gave the following reasons for promoting competition: operators would have an incentive to innovate and offer better services; consumers would be provided with information and alternatives; prices would fall as producers sought to gain markets; and, finally, these benefits would accrue to the consumers without the need for direct intervention by the State.As both competition and innovation could be expected to drive down prices and as there would have been some technical change even if the industry had remained in public hands, it is difficult to estimate the effects of privatization alone in the telecommunications industry. However, from , the year before privatization, to , the number of fixed lines rose from , to over million, the waiting time for a telephone was reduced from months to days, the cost of a connection fell from $, to $, the network was upgraded with digitalization increasing from to per cent, competition was promoted with the number of concessions rising from to (in February ) and employment in the sector increased from , to ,. Lower-incomes households benefited from the advent of mobile phones. The communications industry attracted the largest share of foreign investment: per cent of the total, compared with per cent for industry, per cent for energy and per cent for mining. Similar results came from privatization is several other countries.In the telecommunications industry, it is possibleand, experience shows, desirablefor there to be competition within the country itself. In some industries, however, competition is really between entities in different countries between, in the case of copper, private producers throughout the world and SOEs such as Codelco in Chile. In the case of such industries, especially in the case of integrated concerns where a treatment plant is shared between mines and where difficulties in one mine can be offset by production increases in another, it is not clear that promoting competition requires breaking up the concern into its constituent parts.Twenty years of experience with widespread privatization has shown that the theoretical argument for privatization at the level of the firmand in a competitive environmentis supported by strong empirical evidence. The evidence from many different studies comparing firms under private ownership and those under government ownership is that ownership is a significant determinant of behaviour and that the former are more efficient and profitable than SOEs. This conclusion applied to all groups of countries.In markets for public goods or natural monopolies, where competitive considerations are weaker, and which are not examined in this chapter, a case can be made for government ownership. In other markets, the case is weaker, but could, in certain instances, be made. An example would be that of a foreign company that had a limited time-horizon when exploiting a natural resource, minimizing its investment and extracting only the highest-grade material. Under government control and ownership, a longer-term view might be adopted. Alternatively, however, the behaviour of a firm that is under private ownership might be changed by means other than the Governments assuming ownershipby regulation or tax policies, or by adjusting the government policies that may be driving the private firm to take a short-term view.In general, State ownership or control can be seen as a response to an actual or perceived market failure, and privatization as a response to the failings of government ownership. Yet privatization is itself a government activity and hence subject to government failure. The Government has to take whatever steps it can to ensure that the process of privatization is a success. This implies action on many fronts.Changing the Governments role in the economyPrivatization has necessarily reduced the Governments role in the economy in that the share of the private sector in production has increased in line with a shrinkage in the public sector. In the industrialized countries, the share of GDP accounted for by SOEs declined from about . per cent in to below per cent in . In the low-income countries, the fall was from per cent of GDP in to about per cent in , and in the middleincome countries (which included the transition economies), the fall was also pronounced.The Governments role in the economy cannot, however, be measured by the share of SOEs in output, as government can affect business decisions through the regulatory environment: legal framework regulations, general economic regulations and market regulations. The legal framework establishes the broad parameters within which industry must operate, allowing individuals access to civil and criminal courts for such matters as defining and enforcing property rights and obtaining protection against fraud and misrepresentation. General economic regulations apply to all firms and would cover such matters as workers health and welfare, pollution control, antitrust policies and transactions with the rest of the world. Market regulations are specific to the industry and include such matters as regulations on establishing a bank, entering a particular market (for example, opening a restaurant or starting a law firm) and setting a price or a price cap for a product (such as electricity).Measuring the degree of regulation is a subjective exercise, inasmuch as a set of draconian rules that are not enforced do not represent as high a degree of regulation as a less stringent set that are enforced and that involve high costs of litigation. One way of measuring the degree of regulation is by questioning those who are subject to such regulationin this case, business people. The results of some studies have been surprising. For instance, among the developed countries, the united_states appeared in the middle of a list of countries ranked by an index attempting to measure the extent of general economic regulations, whereas it might be thought that it would have ranked as one of the least regulated countries. However, the business executives surveyed felt that the adversarial legalism in the united_states system meant that expenditures on lawyers, studies, litigation, insurance and legally imposed delays were considerably larger than in other countries, especially as the regulatory process was fragmented among many governmental authorities.A comparison between the degree of regulation and the degree of government ownership of the means of production showed that the two were complements of, and not substitutes for, each other, indicating that both had originated in the political desire of limiting the forces of the market. This conclusion encompassed general economic regulations that would apply to all firms. In the developed economies that had privatized productive public assets, there was already considerable regulatory control over economic activities. New regulatory arrangements were often needed for newly privatized public utilities or natural monopolies as described in chapter VI. However, other countries, particularly the transition economies, were not functioning as market economies subject to government regulation: government ownership and control were to some extent expected to substitute for regulation. The move to privatize, as part of the move to a market economy, should, then, necessarily have been accompanied by the construction of a new regulatory framework. In developing countries, a new mining code was often needed to set the parameters within which the privatized firms could operate and provide the security of tenure and other certainties required to attract domestic or foreign investment.However, particularly in the former Soviet Union, where market institutions had been systematically destroyed over a period of years and where the implosion of the State in the early s took place with surprising rapidity, an orderly and carefully planned process of market-building and privatization was rendered impossible. One tentative lesson to be drawn from developments during this tempestuous period was that bringing in new management was helpful with respect to ensuring post-privatization success and that insider privatization was not so successful. Another related finding was that institutions mattered and that change in ownership in itself was not sufficient to improve macroeconomic performance. The gains from privatization came when the change in ownership was combined with other reforms such as the establishment of institutions to address incentive and contracting issues, hardened budget constraints, removal of barriers to entry and an effective legal and regulatory framework. In the absence of these complementary reforms, privatization may even have a negative effect on performance, the explanation being that transfer of ownership without the institutional structures in place for owners to exercise their authority simply replaces poor government control of management with weak or no private sector control.The role of the legal and regulatory framework is to set the parameters within which private enterprise can lawfully operate. Establishing such a framework is a continually evolving process and requires skilled personnel, whose training can itself take several years. In countries that did not have a market system, the task was doubly complicated by the absence of those with the experience and knowledge of the industry in question that would enable them to draw up and enforce realistic and sound regulations. As has been shown by major business scandals in the developed countries, even the most sophisticated regulatory agencies and oversight by shareholders might not detect at an early stage fraudulent business practices. Some observers have questioned whether it was feasible for some of these transition countries to wait until the regulatory framework was in place before privatizing: they felt that the benefits of privatization would be felt only when the share of the private sector in the economy had reached a large threshold level and that therefore a gradualist approach would have been incorrect and mass privatization the correct strategy. This is still a controversial issue where very much depends upo the situation in the individual country at the start of the transition.The regulatory environment has also changed with privatization. Provisions regarding employment have been relaxed to give the incoming private managers more power to adjust the size of the workforce. For instance, when part of the jute industry of Bangladesh, which had been nationalized in soon after independence, was privatized in , the law was subsequently changed to allow the new owners to lay off employees.The regulatory environment can itself help determine the future profitability of an enterprise that the Government wishes to privatize. Raising the barriers to entry for potential competitors or even excluding competitors, relaxing environmental or work safety standards or reducing applicable taxes could, in theory, make a State asset more attractive to a prospective purchaser and thereby increase the immediate revenue that accrued to the state from its sale. Over the longer term, the loss to the State, and to society at large, could be much greater. As mentioned above, it is now considered that one important aim of Government should be the creation of a competitive environment and a transparent, stable and predictable investment climate, with proper contract enforcement and respect for property rights.The situation is more complicated in the case of market regulations, whereby, for instance, the right to practise as a medical doctor is restricted to those with a degree from a recognized institution. Many of these regulations are essential. However, in theory, special regulations and controls could be imposed on a privatized industry so that the same outcome resulted as would have obtained under State ownership: regulation could, then, simply be a substitute for direct control. Yet, the State cannot achieve the same results with a privatized industry that it would have wished to achieve with a nationalized industry. It is not possible to draw up a complete contract with a private enterprise covering all possible eventualities during the lifetime of the contract. Some decisions that a private firm would take, acting totally within the terms of any prior contract that could have been drawn up between it and a Government, could differ markedly from those that a Government might have taken. This was seen in the s and s when management contracts were drawn up by nationalized firms with the previous owners. In spite of their extensive provisions, they sometimes proved unsatisfactory to one or the other party. The reason was not that the private firms were necessarily acting unlawfully: rather, they had different perceptions from the Government of what the firm should do. In general, in the matter of the provision of goods and nonsocial services for private consumption, private companies do not want to enter into a contract with a Government and to act, as it were, like its agent.The regulatory system, then, plays a different role in a market economy system than in another economic system and regulatory reform has been a major element in the move towards a market economy. In this respect, the first united_nations World Public Sector Report, in describing an intelligent, democratic State, argued that its role should be catalytic and supportivein other words, promoting without investingand supervisory/regulatory. Recent experience has shown that people often benefit when the State is not involved in the production of goods and, generally, the provision of non-social services. Greater competition brings down prices and enhances the choice to consumers. Inherent in this concept of the State is the critical notion of quality, in particular the quality of the normative, strategic and steering tasks of the State.Promoting wider share ownership and helping develop national capital marketsPrivatization can be seen in the context of the creation of a State whose citizens have a direct and tangible ownership stake in the economy. One of the aims of privatization has thus been to promote wider share ownership and, especially in developing countries, to help develop the national capital market. Accordingly, many privatizations were effected by making shares available to the public. The growth of stock markets has been rapid during the period of privatization. Between and , the total capitalization of developing countries stock markets rose from $ billion to $, billion. At the end of , the capitalization of the few British, Chilean and Singaporean firms that had been privatized was less than $ billion, but by the middle of the top privatized firms in the world had a total market capitalization of $. trillion. Individual privatized companies, usually telecommunication companies, were the first, second or third largest companies in their domestic markets and could account for a large share of market capitalization: Telefonica for nearly per cent in Spain, and Telefonos de Mexico for per cent in Mexico. The sums realized by individual share issue privatizations have been larger than many realized through placements by private corporations.Privatization assumed a major role in the development of capital markets throughout the world and, to the extent that efficient capital markets promote economic growth and allow individual firms to fund investment opportunities that they would otherwise have to forgo, contributed to global economic growth. The growth of stock markets also encouraged the development of those regulatory and supervisory institutions that made for tighter shareholder monitoring of enterprises. It also encouraged ancillary businesses, such as accounting firms, and fostered better accounting practices. The downside to privatization by means of share sales to the general public is that, as with any other share, the price of the share in the privatized company can always decline. This has happened most recently with the price of shares in telecommunications companies.Raising revenue for the State from salesAnother of the goals of privatization was to raise revenue for the State from the direct proceeds of sales. According to one estimate, the cumulative value of proceeds raised by privatizing exceeded $ trillion by the second half of , with annual proceeds peaking at over $ billion in . Since , privatization in OECD countries has raised over $ billion, with Western Europe accounting for one half of these proceeds. While proceeds from privatization can be significant and could be used to reduce public debt, they are a one-time occurrence and so it would be unwise to use them to maintain otherwise unsustainable levels of government expenditure, especially when there are fewer attractive assets to sell in the future.Controversies over the sale of assetsThe question of the revenue accruing to the Government from the sales of its assets has generated considerable controversy, particularly when it was thought that they had been disposed of at exceptionally low prices. The controversy has been especially fierce when foreign purchasers, especially from large corporations, have been involved or when the assets sold were in the natural resources industries, such as mines or oilfields. If the transfer of ownership was effected by insider deals, the same group of individuals could be operating the properties before and after privatization, although their objectives (to make a profit and enhance the value of the firm) might be different in a market as compared with a planned economy. In some instances, it has been alleged that the assets were transferred by criminal, and sometimes violent, means. Such accusations have been especially strong in the case of the transfer of the natural resource industries of the former Soviet Union from the State to private hands.There are two points to be made regarding transfers involving criminality: one, that the speed with which the Soviet system collapsed created the opportunity for the illicit seizure of former State assets; and two, that the lack of a legal system designed to assist the functioning of a market economy sometimes made it difficult to draw the line between criminal and non-criminal behaviour. The need for due deliberation in effecting privatization and for having in place the supporting institutions, including an appropriate legal framework, is reinforced by this experience. However, what should have been done in circumstances where these institutions were not in place is still a matter of debate. The speed at which the assets were privatized has been questioned; moverover,the manner in which privatization was often accomplished appeared unfair, with one set of individuals, the oligarchs, obtaining almost all the benefits. The perceived unfairness of the transfer of assets is thought to have weakened support for the introduction of the market economy.Sale of assets through share issuesEven when criminality has not been involved, there have often been considerable differences between what a State asset was sold for and its value a few years later or the value of what would appear a comparable asset in private hands.Studies of the sales of assets through share issues indicate that shares tend to be underpriced, often by considerable amounts. The initial returns to investors buying privatization issues were higher than those to private company issues. A comparison of (a) the returns to an investor who purchased a share at the offer price in the IPO of a privatized concern and then sold that share on the market on the first day of open trading with (b) the returns to an investor who did the same thing for a share of a private company, showed that the former would have enjoyed a much higher profit. Similarly, the returns to an investor who kept his shares in the privatized enterprise for a longer period, of up to five years, were often larger than the returns to an investor in a private company.As one purpose of privatization is to ensure that the assets are operated efficiently, generating greater revenues for the private owner than they would have for the public owner, and paving the way for a longer-term growth in profits as investments are channelled into the most promising avenues, it could be expected that the value of the assets would rise after privatization. However, such an improvement should, to some extent, be anticipated, and reflected in the share price. Moreover, it is difficult to see why privatization shares, which are shares in existing industries, should be seriously underpriced in relation to other IPOs, which are often in new and therefore high-risk fields.One explanation for the underpricing is that a Government may put the achieving of wider share ownership above maximization of revenue from the sale. It has been argued that political motives were sometimes involved and that the Government wished to shift political preferences among the median-class voters who could determine the future electoral outcome towards market-oriented policies. To induce the median-class citizens to participate in the privatization programmes, the shares were underpriced and restrictions were imposed on their resale. In this way, a constituency was created that would be averse to electing politicians whose policies reduced the value of their investments.Sale of assets to companies supplying management and financeThe presence of foreign investors is most needed when they bring not just financial resources, but also technical and managerial abilities that are not present domestically in adequate amounts. Although the SOEs might have tried to develop the skills necessary to run the existing concerns, in some countries they were not able to develop both the whole array of skills necessary for their successful operation and the quantity of skilled people who would be needed to start up new concerns in the same industry. This would be the case in the natural resource industries, for instance, in those countries where the existing SOEs were not run as efficiently as the large international firms would have run them, or where new deposits were found or suspected to exist and the country did not have the skills base or the access to capital markets to develop them, or, finally, where the State chose the private sector route as a matter of policy rather than of necessity.In cases where ownership and managerial control will be transferred from the previously nationalized concern to a foreign concern, many of the local staff will be retained, although there is likely to be a replacement of the top levels of management by personnel from the foreign concern (which could itself be a cause of domestic opposition to privatization). This transfer of management and ownership has proved particularly difficult in natural resource industries, where what is being sold has a finite lifespan, or in industries that have a dominant position in the economy.Some of the difficulties have arisen from the fact that privatization means far more than a transfer of assets from State to private hands, with private concerns appropriating the benefits previously appropriated by the State. In the case of foreign-owned concerns taking over control of SOEs, the expected benefits of new investment will be accompanied by part of the resulting profits being sent out of the country as dividends. Especially in the case of large natural resource properties, there are a limited number of companies in the world that can operate them effectively and attract sufficient investment funds to them. These companies can choose to operate properties in many different countries.The assessment of these companies has to take into account market factors, such as trends in demand for the product and expected changes in the price for inputs. In the case of natural resources, the following are to be considered: geologic factors, such as the nature of the ore body and the present state of the mine workings; infrastructure factors, such as whether adequate power supplies are available and whether the transport infrastructure is in place to ensure delivery to customers; and non-market factors such as whether an educated labour force is available, and, if not, how it can best be trained. It is difficult, then, to compare the value of one particular property with any other property: two deposits in two different locations containing the same tonnage of ore or the same volume of natural gas or oil are likely to be valued differently. Essentially, what is being purchased by the new owner is the right to make or, more accurately, to attempt to makea profit that will justify his expense in undertaking the purchase. Thus the book value of the property, or any other valuation depending upon the amount of past investment in the property, could be an unreliable guide to its value.In cases where investment in the SOE had been insufficient to maintain safety standards, considerable investment might be needed to put both the treatment plant on the surface and the mine workings into a satisfactory and safe state. Further investment might be needed to prepare for expansion. The sale price could be much smaller than the Government had anticipated, but it could be accompanied by a commitment by the new owners to undertake new investment. The decision whether to undertake the sale of the property as is, which sale could be at an apparently low price, or to invest funds to modernize the property and thus, it is hoped, increase its eventual sale price, has often proved difficult. The market prices of some privatized enterprises have risen even before privatization. However, it is not clear that this was because of the expectation that the privatized property would be operated more profitably than the SOE, or because of the prior steps taken to increase its market value.Even after the property has been transferred, there is no assurance that the properties will be developed in the manner expected. Private owners can decide to abandon a property even after purchasing it. In such circumstances, it is to be hoped that other buyers will find the property attractive and that output and employment can be maintained to the greatest extent possible. Assistance could be needed to assist the country during the transition period.The fact that a country might feel that it does not have the luxury of enough time to set up all the appropriate machinery for privatization and to restructure the properties before sale is being increasingly recognized by international agencies. Especially in the case of a property that was operating at a loss and adding to the countrys debt burden, and whose plant was deteriorating, a strong case can be made for a rapid sale. Countries are responding to the need for speed, for avoiding continuing losses in SOEs and for attracting new investment. In Romania, where much of the countrys industry and businesses are still State-owned and most have debts to State-owned utilities, legislation was passed in early to allow for the sale of loss-making properties for the nominal sum of one euroas long as the buyer pledged investment.The costs in delay would include not just a possible fall in the sales price, as this is only one, potentially minor, element in a calculation of the total benefits coming from privatizationother elements would include the possible change in profitability and therefore in taxable income and government revenues, in the production that might have resulted from the more efficient use of existing facilities and increased investment from private sources, and in the development of all the secondary economic activities that would have been fostered if the dominant industry or industries in the economy had been revived. Against these benefits would have to be offset possible reductions, at least in the short term, in the labour force at the existing propertieswhich might have been absorbed by expansion elsewhere in the economy. The benefits from privatization can never be measured as solely the change in the Governments financial position coming from the sale: the wider interests of society must also be considered.Sale of assets through auctionsIn the past decade, considerable experience has been gained in privatization or other government sales of assets that could be usefully applied to future sales. A particularly successful one was that undertaken by the British Government when it held an auction to sell airfive telecom licences for the third generation (G) of mobile phones (see box IV.). The Government was selling the right to make a future profit from an assetin this case, not a mine or factory but a licence. Auctions are becoming a popular way to sell such nationally owned or controlled assets. For instance, in early , for instance, Ecuador set the rules for the auction of three wireless local loop licences. Twenty-two firms, including privatized telephone companies from other latin_america countries and a local private company, had shown an interest.Yet when drawing up the precise rules for the auction, one size does not fit all. Finally, much could have been lost in delay: the prices of the shares of theBox IV.In , the British Government raised through an auction about $ billion from the sale of five third-generation (G) mobile phone licences.aThe second-generation licences had earlier been awarded in a beauty contest in which firms had submitted business plans to a government committee which then granted the licences to those that it judged had best met a set of published criteria. This earlier sale had realized about $, each for the licences. The problems with a beauty contest are that the difficulties of specifying and evaluating the criteria make it a time-consuming and opaque process, often leading to political and legal controversy and the perception, if not the reality, of favouritism and corruption. The British Government thought that an auction would treat firms fairly and transparently and yield the greatest possible benefits for consumers and taxpayers. In the autumn of , the decision was taken to auction the licences and those who were to design the auction were given the following objectives: to assign the spectrum efficiently, to promote competition and to realize the full economic value, subject to the other objectives. This, in effect, put competition ahead of maximizing the proceeds to the Government from the sale.Auction methods were tested with people who were paid a fee to attend trial auction sessions and a small amount proportional to the profit they made for the company on whose behalf they had been told they had been bidding. The designers decided to issue five licences, one more than the number of second-generations licences, and to make the rules of the auction such that one of the two large licences would go to a new entrant and no bidder could win two licences. The licences were to last until the end of and included an obligation to provide a network covering at least per cent of the British population by . Multiple rounds of simultaneous closed bids were to take place. The bids were revealed at the end of each round. An inactive bidder in any round was eliminated from the auction which would end when there were only five remaining bidders. These would then be allocated the licences on which they had been the top bidder. In early , the Government accepted the auction method and moved quickly, thinking that prices might be driven higher if bidders believed that winning the auction would give them a competitive advantage in future auctions in other countries.Thirteen companies qualified to enter the bidding which started on March . At that time, the media thought the licences would sell for a total of between $ billion and $. billion. After rounds, the first bidder dropped out, and after rounds the auction ended on April with the total raised being $ billion. This amounted to euros per person in the united_kingdom, the highest per capita figure realized by any auction and one considerably higher than the lowest figure realized during that of euros per person in Switzerland.bThis auction confirmed that it is difficult to predetermine the valuation of the worth of an enterprise or an asset that the Government is willing to sell, but that it is important to arrive at a method of sale that is fair and transparent and promotes the objectives set by the Government. The costs of devising the auction were small in comparison with the proceeds.c companies that were successful in the bidding were considerably lower in than in . Moreover, in later auctions, weak bidders would be discouraged from participating and existing bidders could acquire the experience of colluding together to keep their bids low.Addressing employment and social protection issuesOne of the most potent concerns about privatization has been its effect on employment. Individuals who fear that they will lose their employment and managers who expect a reduction in their benefits from running the enterprises have been opposed to some privatizations. Potential employment losses in those large SOEs that were run inefficiently or were obliged to employ workers for non-commercial reasons and on conditions other than those that would have been accepted by private enterprise, have proved one of the major obstacles to public acceptance of privatization. The need for safety nets to be in place as part of a package of market-based reform is now widely accepted and donors have assisted in supporting them. In industries where privatization will necessarily result in major adjustments to the labour force, the provision of social safety nets, quite apart from being necessary in itself, could determine public acceptance of privatization.Studies of the employment consequences of privatization have shown that privatization does not always leads to lay-offs. Sales can grow fast enough in privatized firms to offset the increase in labour productivity that privatization brings and to encourage new investment which itself creates new jobs. Frequently, it is not the manual workers who lose their jobs in privatizations but the middle-management ranks. However, it is difficult to separate the effects of privatization from other major changes in the economy that often accompany itin the s, the recessions in the transition economies and in latin_america rather than privatization itself played a large role in accounting for employment losses in these countries. Downsizing in an industry due to a fall in demand for its products can also be expected to lead to closures and job losses in both privatized and publicly owned enterprises. Moreover, in many cases the first firms to be privatized were the ones that would be most viable under private ownership and where substantial revenues would accrue to the Government from their sale. In cases where the most problematic firms, those with the largest reserves of excess labour, were left to the end of the privatization programme, the consequences for unemployment could be severe. Investigating the possible impacts of privatization on workers, including women, and mitigating any adverse effects through appropriate planning are essential functions for governments at all levels. Pursuing the correct policies can help build up the political support that successful privatization requires.In absolute terms, potential employment losses are greatest in China where the numbers involved are in the . In , the SOEs constituted two thirds of total assets, employed more than half of urban workers, accounted for three quarters of investment and absorbed three quarters of bank credit. The situation is especially delicate as the SOEs serve as the social security net. Chinas move to a more market-oriented economy will have to take into account the disruption that could result if the remaining SOEs were to shed labour rapidly and the need to provide a social security net to workers that are likely to be affected.In general, one intended consequence of privatization is the removal of the soft budget constraint. Whereas an SOE could continue to operate inefficiently and at a loss, absorbing budgetary resources, a privatized firm would be restructured or closed down. In the case of some SOEs, the provision of social services, including housing and childcare, was itself dependent on employment in the enterprise. This reflected an economic model one effect of which was to restrict the mobility and flexibility of labour. In these circumstances, privatization has to entail the construction of a different model for the delivery of social services, removing it from the control of the enterprise and transferring it to a more general authority. The continuing reliance on SOEs to provide social services, entailing the financial drain coming from subsidies, could itself delay the construction of these new forms of delivery.Privatization can entail a change in the sources of technological advance. The failure of the efforts devoted to technological advance in the former centrally planned economies to produce goods that were competitive in global markets or could even compete in domestic markets with products from the market economieswould indicate that the market economy is better able to generate worthwhile technology than a system that relied on SOEs. The comparison is especially relevant in the case of the two former German States that started off at comparable levels of education and technological development.Even over a longer-term perspective, the free-market system has proved to be the most powerful instrument for technological change and for raising living standards that the world has ever seen, a point made by its critics more than a century and a half ago. While many of the inventions upon which the Industrial Revolution was based had been known to ancient civilizations, and while these civilizations had many learned and inventive people, they apparently did not have the incentive mechanisms and institutions in place to enable or encourage individuals to exploit them for their own personal gain. The Romans had a steam engine but did not use it for productive purposesa recorded use for it was in opening the doors of a temple. James Watt was able to become a very rich man by putting considerable effort and ingenuity into adapting a steam engine that had been used to pump water out of minesthe Newcomen engineto work more efficiently. He saw that, with the protection of a patent, he would obtain his reward in the form of an income from those who used the steam engine to improve the profitability of their own operations. He later adapted his own steam engine, charging from an up-and-down motion to a circular one, so that it could be used in other industries, including milling.Recent studies have shown the importance of the free market as an innovation machine, where innovation is not an unexplained and chance occurrence, but rather, as in the case of Watts modifying his original engine to cater for an anticipated demand, a matter of routine. They point to how firms compete not so much over price as over innovation, their fear being that if they do not keep up with innovations taking place elsewhere they will be driven out of the market. Thus, within the firm, innovation is incorporated into its normal activities, with its objectives often being set by the management. Innovation results in new products and new processes for making a particular productfor instance, new mining or treatment techniques in the minerals industry.Patent protection is an important means of ensuring that there exists an incentive to innovate, but the average lag between the introduction of an innovation and the entry of a competitor has shrunkaccording to one sample, from years in -to . years in -. Yet private sector research expenditure has not sufferedindeed, it has expanded dramatically as enterprises ratchet up expenditure in order to maintain their competitive edge, aware of the severe consequences if they fail to keep up. An innovating firm has an incentive to license the technology to another firm if it can obtain the right price, and the potential customer has an incentive to pay the licence fee if it thinks that it can use the technology more efficiently. Because of the speed with which obsolescence supervenes, reverse engineering or industrial espionage could be a more costly way of obtaining the technology than through this friendly transfer. In any event, the fact that it takes time for the other firm to learn to use the technology that it obtains helps maintain the innovators advantage. Moreover, firms have an incentive to cooperate with other firms in voluntarily sharing their technology. This provides them with some degree of insurance against the possibility that one of them, or still another enterprise, will come up with an innovation that will give its proprietor an overwhelming competitive advantage. It also enables each member of the group to draw on a far larger pool of innovations than it could have generated by itself.These theoretical considerations are supported by evidence of firms frequently licensing their technologies and freely sharing their information. Between and , European, Japanese and united_states firms collectively entered into almost , strategic technology alliances. This interaction among firms helps explain the rapidity with which technology is being diffused. It also provides an incentive for privatization.Privatization is expected to result in the creation of new entities that will have the freedom to link up with similar entities in international networks that are usually the most powerful conduits for the transfer of technology. The above considerations show that the most promising networks tend to be those of private sector firms: networking in itself might not be very productive. During the period of central planning, the enterprises of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were able to link up only among themselves. Although these linkages were strong, especially in the military-industrial complex, it would appear that they had little knowledge, tacit or otherwise, that was worth transferring. If privatization of enterprises in the transition economies involves a foreign partner, or being taken over by a foreign company, access to the international networks of private companies is facilitated. Exploiting these links has allowed firms to develop their skills base and to progress to higher value added tasks up the supply chain.Outside the centrally planned economies, SOEs were assigned a role in the national research and development effort. One of the reasons for the nationalization of enterprises and their consolidation to form large SOEs had been the creation of national champions that could be large players on the national field, undertaking research and development (R&D) whose results could be spread to other areas of the economy. They would thus help build up national competencies in R&D and assist the country in advancing up the technological ladder, or in keeping abreast of leaders in the field. Such large SOEs were also expected to be significant players in the international arena, giving the country greater leverage in its dealings with large foreign players, including multinational corporations, and allowing it entry to multi-partner projects.Privatization, then, implies the abandonment of this particular model for industrial advance as the goals and nature of R&D undertaken by a privatized management are likely to change and to be focused on the interests of the enterprise. In the case of the wholly privatized British Telecom (BT), for instance, the first priority for its R&D was set as the BT operating divisions and the corporate headquarters and, in view of its public sector background, it was emphasized that this first priority did not include British industry, the Government of the united_kingdom or even the national interest except in cases where the interests of BT coincided.The volume and nature of research have changed as companies have moved towards privatization. One study showed that research expenditures, as measured in absolute terms or as a percentage of sales, had declined, as had the share in total R&D projects of long-term projects (those with an average duration of over five years that involved basic rather than applied research). Research was shifted towards meeting the specific needs of the businesses. The change in the pattern of R&D during the period of privatization could have reflected the readjustment that had taken place as the companies prepared for greater exposure to competition by trying to eliminate the waste and duplication of resources. It could not, then, be concluded that, simply because the volume of R&D expenditure had been lower during the period of privatization, future innovation in the economy would suffer. The rapid technological advances in the telecommunications industry, where considerable privatization has taken place, would indicate the contrary, although other factors such as deregulation and the encouragement of competition also played a role.Moreover, since privatization, collaboration has taken place with other firms in the same industry to generate basic knowledge and pre-competitive technologies that can be useful to different members of the group. The legislative and judicial branches of government have adjusted to the reality of technology alliances in their effort to promote innovation within a competitive environment. When the first major antitrust legislation was enacted in the united_states, the Sherman Act of , the possibility that a person with superior skill would be so successful as to be liable under the law was raised in the Senate debates. Over time, concerns grew that the fear of antitrust action was constraining corporate strategy, and that inconsistency in applying the rules could induce uncertainty which would undermine investments in innovation. Moreover, there was concern in the united_states that initiatives in advanced research in other countries could threaten the competitive position of domestic industry. In , leading united_states companies within the electronics industry formed the first high technology R&D consortium, the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (MCC), which subsequently pioneered research in advanced electronics and information systems, including artificial intelligence, electronic commerce, electronic packaging technologies and human interface. In , the antitrust regime was relaxed by the National Cooperative Research Act which explicitly eased antitrust sanctions against cooperative R&D ventures of otherwise competing firms, by applying the test of reasonableness and allowing worldwide capacity to be taken into account when determining the relevant market. Whereas there had been only newly formed research joint ventures before the passing of the Act, such ventures were registered in the five following years. Cooperation is taking place among competitors in different industries, including the automobile industry.Other countries have used various methods to promote research cooperation within private industry. Such efforts have been given greater urgency by the opening up of markets that the world_trade_organization is encouraging. Taiwan Province of China is seeking to increase government investment in R&D, while at the same time encouraging the R&D activities of private industry. The Governments role changed over time as the domestic technological base was built up. It moved from supporting only non-profit applied research institutes performing R&D projects to subsidizing qualified enterprises in performing such R&D projects. In , the Government required that non-profit research institutes performing research under the Technology Development Programme invite enterprises to participate. Its overall strategy is to take a supporting role as industrial technology development is shifted to the private sector. One of the results of private sector technological development in Taiwan Province of China is expected to be that world leaders in high technology will participate with Taiwanese companies in strategic alliances. Alliances with major foreign companies can give the Taiwanese companies access to technology that would be too risky and expensive for them to develop on their own.Privatization, then, offers the opportunity to give domestic and foreign technological leaders a direct stake in national enterprises and to bring their own technological knowledge into play in improving existing products and developing new products. In the less advanced technology sectors, this progress in introducing technology will be difficult to measure. Patents, one of the measures of progress in technology, are not likely to result from this kind of technology transfer. However, the participation of domestic and foreign firms can lead to better practices and an overall upgrading of technical skills. Especially in the higher-technology sectors, even the most technologically advanced industries in the developing countries have found that collaboration with foreign companies is useful.There is a concern that privatization could lead to a hollowing out of the national capacity for research. Private companies can be expected to undertakealone, in collaboration with other companies or in collaboration with the Governmentonly the kind of research that they consider will further their business interests. Privatization does imply, then, that those research tasks that had been previously undertaken on behalf of the government in SOEs and that would not be performed by the privatized concern should be transferred to governmental bodies, such as universities and research institutes. If the Government wished to keep control of a research institute belonging to a SOE that it planned to privatize, it could separate this from the rest of the enterprise before sale. The research tasks that Government wished to see performed could subsequently be undertaken by Government either alone or in cooperation with private concerns. The size of publicly funded research can itself attract private research, as has been shown by the relative switch in corporate pharmaceutical research from Europe to the united_states, encouraged by the heavily publicly funded medical research in the latter.Privatization to a foreign company raises serious issues if it results in the foreign owners shutting down the domestic research facility and relying on theR&D facilities of its plants in other parts of the world. The issues are complex: what is important is not necessarily the number of people employed in R&D facilities or the expenditure on R&D, but rather whether they conduct useful research that will result in products that can compete on international markets. The R&D of privatized concerns will be focused on the needs of the enterprise. There is evidence that privatized concerns have been successful in their R&D efforts. For instance, in Brazil, a recently privatized telecommunications institute has successfully exported a number of fibre-optic and digital exchange-related technologies.In Brazil, overall economic policy shifted over time towards trade and market liberalization. In , the Law of Patents was passed which substantially strengthened the intellectual property rights of foreign enterprises. The benefit of such a law, which is in tune with worldwide trends towards protecting intellectual property rights, is to foster a greater readiness among foreign enterprises to transfer more of their advanced technologies to Brazil, while an inevitable additional consequence must be some reduction in the scope that exists for reverse engineering and other foreign exchange-saving (though potentially patent-breaching) indigenous innovative activity.In many cases, privatization has been actively promoted by the international financial institutions and donors as part of their effort to help countries build a modern market economy. A world_bank study for Africa concluded: It is unlikely that there would have been much privatization without donors ... (With) few exceptions, programmes throughout Africa are perceived by the public to be not home-grown programmes but world_bank-International Monetary Fund (IMF) driven and supported by the donor community ... Privatization conditionalities are attached to some three quarters of World Banks loans or credits.The position of the world_bank on privatization has shifted over time. In , for instance, when discussing Africa, it argued that the problems that parastatals typically encounter do not stem from their public ownership, but rather come from their not being treated as commercial enterprises. It proposed that they should not be burdened with requirements to hire more people than they need, to provide services without payment, or to hold down prices of the goods and services they sell. Privatization was not proposed as part of the agenda for action to achieve accelerated development. Instead, until at least the early s, the Bank supported public sector-led industrialization even in countries where privatization is now advocated.As previously mentioned, the counterfactual cannot be accurately assessed: if privatization had been an essential element of earlier donor-assisted reform programmes, would the results in terms of growth and wealth creation have been greater than were the results of the application of reform programmes without privatization? The rationale for privatization is ultimately that, after measuring the benefits and costs of the enterprises being operated under private ownership against the benefits and costs of the enterprises under government ownership, the net benefits under the former regime would be found to be larger. The implication would appear to be that the absence of privatization from earlier adjustment programmes could be a factor accounting for part of their shortcomingsthat only the pain of adjustment but not the anticipated gains had been experienced.The shortcomings of previous adjustment programmes could then explain why the addition of privatization as a condition for assistance has been treated with some suspicion, with the numerical targets being met by the sale of numerous small enterprises rather than the sale of the really important assets. Privatization has often not been embraced wholeheartedly by the population, especially when the benefits were not realized at an early stage.The international institutions and civil society have a major role to play in ensuring that privatization is owned by the country and not seen as an imposition from outside. The international financial institutions, donor countries and the Governments are having to continually refine their approach in order to achieve success in this matter. The world_bank and IMF are working on strengthening their collaboration to address the different time frames under which they both work. Further coordination between the two institutions can be expected as they set up a process to help set priorities and clarify further their responsibilities.The primary justification for privatization remains the perception that an economy where the private sector is the residual claimant taking the risks and receiving the benefitswill, over the long term, achieve faster growth and higher living standards than one where the residual claimant is the State. In other words, the net benefits of a private sector-driven economy can be expected to be greater than the net benefits from an economy where SOEs play a predominant role. For this reason, assessing the success of a particular privatization based on the changes in output, on the number of people employed in the industry or even on whether the Governments fiscal position improved or deteriorated as a result of the change in ownership, is to adopt too narrow a perspective. Moreover, the discussion is bedevilled by the counterfactual: what would have happened if the enterprise had not been privatized.At a deeper level, though, the counterfactual, while difficult to apply at the level of an industry, is of dubious applicability at the level of the country. If privatization is seen as part of a strategy to turn over to private operatives, and therefore to a large number of decision makers, the major investment decisions in an economy, the result will likely be different from what would have occurred if SOEs had continued to operate. Since what these numerous individual decisionsand their effectswill be can never be known in advance, privatization may be characterized as a leap in the dark. There is now considerable experience to indicate that it is a leap worth taking, but, as it is difficult or costly to reverse, every effort should be made to ensure its success. This entails action on many frontsencompassing property rights, the rule of law, governance, investor protection, the construction of safety nets and the provision of social services and protection at a more general level than that of the firm and, in general, all those institutions whose growth over time in many countries has produced a private sector-driven economy that is viable and productive. In many countries, this agenda implies a different role for the Government though not necessarily a smaller role.The international community has an important role to play in this process of adjusting the economy to market forces. It can foster the interchange between countries of their experiences with respect to institution-building in preparation for and following privatization. It can put countries that are about to privatize their assets in contact with important actors, such as merchant banks and potential purchasers, to make certain that the process of privatization is conducted fairly, transparently and in a way most likely to ensure the success of the privatized enterprise. It can attempt to identify those who will lose most from the privatization and seek to provide them with adequate compensation and, in the case of labour, with training for new jobs. It can encourage best practice among the business community so that all firms, whether foreign or domestic, taking over the newly privatized industries try to achieve the standards of practice set by the most advanced firms. Finally, and perhaps most importantly for the success of the process, it must ensure that countries own the process of privatizationin other words, that they see it as one step among many in the construction of an economy that will serve citizens interests far better than did the previous economy. Privatization should be viewed not as just another condition imposed from outside, with targets being set for the number of firms to be privatized, since this can encourage only cynicism among the population. Rather, what is needed is a commitment to privatization as a programme that is perceived to be in the overall national interest.In , Thomas Malthus contended that global food supplies would not suffice to feed the worlds increasing population owing to the fact that the latter grew geometrically whereas agricultural production increased only arithmetically. However, over years later, Malthuss fears have not yet been realized because in making his projections, Malthus had not taken account of the technological revolution that was being created by the Industrial Revolution. As noted in chapter IV, the private sector in a free market may be seen as an innovation machine, continually improving its products and processes. This became the case not only in the manufacture of goods, but also in agriculture where foodstuffs were produced as commodities not for the consumption of the immediate market, but rather for sale to a larger market. Developments in transport after Malthus had published his work made it possible for distant countries to supply agricultural commodities to large conurbations that could not possibly have fed themselves from their own agricultural resources. Advances in agricultural practices enabled yields to rise to meet the requirements of a growing populationa phenomenon that had not occurred previously when the population and technological progress were largely static.Entrepreneurs and individual inventors in agriculture, as in any other industry, have had every incentive to undertake research and development (R&D) to effect the improvements in quality and efficiency through which the demand for their productin this case, foodmight be satisfied; and, on the whole, they have been highly successful. Contrary to Malthuss predictions, the real cost of food has decreased steadily over time and satisfying food demand takes up a smaller part of the household budget, at least on the world average basis. However, the private sector did not act alone. The State played a major role in the technological advances that occurred in agricultureestablishing much of the infrastructure that enabled goods to be delivered to markets, providing land and credit to farmers and setting up its own agricultural research institutes.Technological progress in the agricultural sector, especially in the second half of the twentieth century, has resulted in vastly increased production of foodstuffs, as well as of other agricultural products. Utilizing roughly the same cropland base, farmers are now feeding almost twice as many people: while the land used for crop production increased from . billion hectares in to . billion hectares in , the amount of grain and oilseeds doubled. Advances in agriculture have included the development of new hybrid high-yield varieties of corn, wheat and rice, and the development of new fertilizers, as well as innovations in agricultural machinery and farm practices. These factors contributed to the success of the green revolution during the s and s.Although the green revolution did reach Africa, the region, particularly subSaharan Africa, has not yet reversed the declining trend of agricultural production on a per capita basis (see figure V.). While countries in sub-Saharan Africa can, up to a certain level, import to maintain adequate food supply to their population, their limited export ability puts pressure on the balance of payments, thus calling in question the sustainability of food imports. Although there were some successful cases of applying more efficient technology, unfavourable climatic and socio-economic conditions in Africa make it difficult to increase agricultural output significantly: soils are not as rich as in other regions, many areas are drought-prone, and the irrigation and transportation systems necessary for the revolution to be successful are not well developed. Many farmers cannot afford to use fertilizers to correct for the overexploitation of their soil; and, as a consequence, the cost-benefit ratio of the required inputs does not favour their use, partly explaining why the agricultural productivity in the region has not increased as much as in other developing regions.When considering developments in respect of new agricultural technology and new types of crop seeds and the diffusion of their uses, a variety of factors that differentiate the present from the situation in the s must be taken into account. First, there have been changes in the way that technology is provided. In the early years of the green revolution, input distribution in developing countries was largely in the hands of government agencies, with State enterprises responsible for seed production. Increasing privatization and tight public funding have changed this picture, so that private companies, some of which are also heavily involved in plant breeding, carry out an increasing proportion of seed production. Second, in agriculture, as in many other areas, globalizaFigure V..AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION PER CAPITA, DEVELOPING REGIONS AND CHINA, -aChina latin_america and the CaribbeanAsiab Sub-Saharan Africation and trade liberalization are having an impact. Farmers today may be exposed to a wider range of inputs and their production must often meet the demands of distant markets, and both factors influence their choices of technology. Third, many rural households in growing economies have more opportunities for non-farm labour and employment. Such current realities need to be factored into the future development of appropriate agricultural technology as well as into policies designed to ensure its successful adoption.The present chapter therefore addresses the question what can be done to accelerate the growth of agricultural productivity by strengthening R&D activities undertaken by the public and private sectors and what role these sectors can play, independently or jointly, in such a new environment. The discussion will be set in the context of two major developmentsthe possibility of increasing yields from genetically modified foods and the patenting of agricultural inputs, in the context of the protection of intellectual property rights, which is increasingly taking place. Will these two developments advance or hinder the prospects of developing-country food producers for increasing their own agricultural output and supplying other markets?Agricultural R&D has always involved both public and private funding and activity. During the past years, however, the role of government has been increasingly reduced, mainly owing to tight public funding for such activities. The following concern persists: since agricultural research has the characteristics of public goods, it is not at all clear that the private sector, acting from motives of profit, will make the same choices that the public sector would have made.On the other hand, while scientific knowledge is a public good, the private sector, if it sees profit-making opportunities, will make significant investment in R&D activities and use the new knowledge created by such activities. Moreover, the private sector might be better equipped to provide the learning by doing needed to augment agricultural R&D. In addition, the public sector is often accused of inefficiency. There are thus intellectual grounds for the public and private sectors involvement in agricultural R&D.Agricultural development in general, and agricultural R&D activities in particular, are of crucial importance not only for eradicating extreme poverty and hunger in many developing countries, but also for promoting economic development through linkages with other sectors. Simply put, agriculture can act as an escape from the poverty trap.R&D activities are categorized in a variety of ways. A traditional classification, although its boundaries are somewhat blurred, is the fourfold one of basic, strategic, applied and adaptive research and/or development. According to this classification, basic research is theoretical or experimental work that is undertaken to acquire new knowledge without any particular commercial application or end use in mind. Strategic research addresses issues that influence the efficiency with which other research further downstream can be carried out. Applied R&D has specific commercial objectives with respect to either products or processes. Adaptive R&D is designed to adjust technology to specific environmental or socio-economic conditions. For the purpose at hand, it will be necessary to distinguish only between basic and applied research, and profit-oriented R&D further downstream.Who engages in agricultural research and development?Four major sets of actors engage in agricultural R&D. First, institutions and research councils or divisions of ministries are the domestic public sources of agricultural research. Second there are private firms, often referred to as agribusinesses, motivated by potential profit. Next, there are the national private and non-profit organizations, such as foundations, commodity boards, non-governmental organizations and universities. The research undertaken by these bodies is often channelled via the public extension system to what will be the final users of the technologies such as agricultural producers and processors. Finally, there are the national and international public institutes with a global focus. Examples of actors belonging to this set include specialized national agricultural research institutions (NARIs), as well as international, regional and national research agencies, such as the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), the Centre de cooperation internationale en recherche agronomique pour le developpement (CIRAD), the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) and the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR). These institutions engage in collaborative research and networking and the findings they generate are disseminated to various countries.Private sector participation in agricultural R&D depends on the potential profits from the R&D being undertaken, as well as on the firms ability to appropriate these returns for itself. In particular, large markets are attractive because they enable firms to take advantage of economies of scale. In turn, this means that private R&D tends to focus on commodities and technologies for which there is high potential demand on world markets. Conversely, the other commodities for which this is not the caseirrespective of their social value will fall by the wayside. Since profit is dependent on commercial applicability and size of the market, domestic and international public entities will always need to fill the gap between profitable private sector research activities and socially optimal levels.A variety of factors have conspired to focus attention on the role of the private sector in agricultural R&D. Public research systems in most countries faced stagnating or declining funding levels by the second half of the s and weak management and bureaucratic inefficiencies intensified the effects of reduced funding. At the same time, increasing attention was being paid to intellectual property rights owing to adherence to the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs). The implementation of the Agreement which emerged from the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations has made returns to private investment potentially more valuable by increasing the ability to capture all possible returns. There has also been an increasing focus on privatization in numerous countries and many sectors over the course of the s and s. Lastly, growing global commercialization of agriculture, together with increased competition in domestic and international markets, has resulted in the increased use of purchased inputs. In turn, this has raised the demand for such inputs to a level that could sustain greater private sector involvement.The distribution of R&D between the public sector and the private sector is determined by more than their respective concentrations on potential profit. There is evidence that public and private R&D have different impacts on proPUBLIC-PRIVATE INTERACTION IN AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY ductivity growth in agriculture, as well as different routes to that impact. Examining seven economies in Asia from the mid-s to the second half of the s bolsters the evidence for strong complementarities between public and private research. Public research provided important upstream science and technology for private firms to adapt into applied product innovations, as well as reduced the cost of research inputs for private companies. For example, public research provided basic technology, such as downy mildew-resistant corn in South-east_asia and downy mildew-resistant millet in India. These breakthroughs allowed the development of the hybrid seed industries in South and South-east_asia. A survey of Indian private plant breeders found that the Indian public research system had been a major source of breeding material for cotton and sorghum. In China, two local private research firms are evolving out of provincial hybrid rice and corn research programmes. Moreover, public research has provided technology for improving seed firms appropriability. Hybrid rice has been the focus of much private research in India and some private research in the Philippines, Pakistan and Thailand, owing to the work of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), as well as national government programmes that developed hybrid rice technology for the tropics. Finally, public research has also been an important source of scientists for the private sector.The notion of complementarity is yet further reinforced by examining the effects of cuts in federal science funding on the progress of science in the united_states of America over the period -. Data on government and private funding of science show that past public funding of science had not crowded out private funding of science: instead, there was crowding in, implying that they are likely to wax and wane together. Among the initiatives geared towards strengthening the complementarity between research undertaken by different sectors has been the principle of sharing costs, with industry providing half the funding and government providing the other half. This approach has been fostered in great_britain through the so-called LINK scheme, where a number of priority topics were identified and bids sought to address them through such joint funding. As of the late s, the united_kingdom experience suggested that while privatizing science R&D had resulted in a number of benefits in terms of customer responsiveness and cost-effectiveness, an excessive focus on cutting short-run costs as opposed to a focus on the longer-run benefits could have a long-run negative impact on science and technology. Therefore, there is a significant role for the government to play in fostering public-private programmes and alliances in R&D with the appropriate time-horizons.Trends in expenditure on agricultural R&DExpenditure on agricultural R&D in in developed and developing countries is estimated to have amounted to about $ billion, with per cent of this total being for R&D carried out in developing countries (see table V.). Roughly two thirds of expenditure on agricultural R&D in developed and developing countries was public. However, the differences between developed and developing countries were dramatic. In the developed countries, such research was divided fairly equally between public and private institutions, while in developing countries agricultural R&D was overwhelmingly a public undertaking.Table V..EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, of international dollarsPublicPrivateTotalDeveloping countries Developed countriesTotal. .. .. .Overall, only some per cent of such research is carried out by the private sector. This is why the issue of reduced public participation in agricultural research is so significant for developing countries. Reduced public involvement would have to be counterbalanced by greater participation by developing countries private sectors and/or by developed countries private institutions focusing more explicitly on areas of concern to the developing economies.Globally, public spending on agricultural R&D almost doubled from $. billion to $. billion over the period of -(see table V.). However, it grew more rapidly in developing countries than in developed. per cent per annum compared with . per cent per annum given the smaller base in the former. As is so frequently the case, disparities between developing regions were large. Growth of expenditure was robust in Asia and the Pacific, China and the Middle East and North Africa, but sluggish in sub-Saharan Africa. Notwithstanding this regions low expenditure, in for the first time, developing countries as a group spent a greater sum ($. billion) than the developed economies ($. billion) on public agricultural research.While the absolute amount spent by developing countries is now larger than that spent by developed countries, research effort in agriculture of the former group of countries is not as intensive as that of the latter group. This is simply because the share of the agricultural sector in gross domestic production in the developing region is larger than in the developed region, thus making the share of research-related expenditure in total agricultural activities smaller. In fact, developing countries spent less on research expenditure relative to the size of the agricultural sector, the population and employment in the sector (see table V.).In , the developed economies spent over four times what the developing countries spent on public agricultural research per agricultural outputand this despite the fact that agriculture is clearly of greater importance to the domestic economies of the latter group of countries as a whole. Indeed, the importance of agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa and in some countries in latin_america helps to explain the relatively high public expenditures in these two regions in absolute terms.It should be noted that sub-Saharan Africa is the only region with declining intensities. Up to the mid-s, the total number of researchers increased significantly and the dependency on expatriate researchers declined, while such increases were matched by growth in expenditure. Since then, resources have been spread increasingly thin, threatening the efficiency and effectiveness of public agricultural research in the continent. Furthermore, some experts cauPUBLIC-PRIVATE INTERACTION IN AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY Table V..PUBLIC AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH EXPENDITURE, AND of international dollarsDeveloping countriesSub-Saharan AfricaAsia and the Pacific (excluding China) Chinalatin_america and the Caribbean Middle East and North AfricaDeveloped countries Total. . . . . .. .. . . . . .. .Table V..THREE PUBLIC AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INTENSITY INDICATORS, AND Ratio of expenditure to agricultural GDP (percentage)Expenditure per capita (united_states dollars)Expenditure per economically active agricultural population (united_states dollars)Developing countriesSub-Saharan Africa ChinaOther Asialatin_america and the CaribbeanDeveloped countries Total. . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . .. . .tion that a large portion of research expenditure is spent on administrative overhead and the maintenance of an extensive network of research stations and farms, thus reducing further expenditure on purely scientific research.The structure of private R&D has changed over time. In the united_states, for example, where time-series data are available, agricultural machinery and post-harvest food processing research accounted for over per cent of total private agricultural R&D in . By , the contribution of these areas had fallen to per cent of the total. Growth areas in private agricultural R&D have been plant breeding and veterinary and pharmaceutical research, as well as spending on agricultural chemical research. The shift towards such research areas seems to be consistent with the recent surge in genetic modification (GM) technology in many parts of the world.A number of factors play a major role not only in how agricultural R&D is carried out, but in whether it is even carried out. There is the question how public and private R&D activities interact in terms of some form of cooperation, as well as some division of labour, between these two sets of actors.The public sector has to come to grips with the growing capacities of private research. The challenge will be for public sectors to fill the gaps, as regards, for example, identifying applied plant breeding priorities that neither domestic private sectors, nor transnationals, are willing to address. From this perspective, many crops and production issues will continue to fall into the national public sector domain, which, in turn, needs to make the best possible use of international public agricultural research centres, as well as of proprietary technology. The latter will require that public research bodies have sufficient intellectual property management skills to be able to interact productively with the private sector. The public sector must also take the lead in providing the information that allows farmers to make the best use of new technology. Meanwhile, private research can be expected to focus on products with large markets. A current concern is that for agricultural research in general, and for biotechnology in particular, most public sector organizations have yet to formulate a strategy to complement private sector research.At the same time, there is ample scope for both public and private involvement and joint participation by both sectors is common. A recent example is afforded by the decoding of the full genetic sequence of rice, announced in early April , thereby providing agricultural scientists with the opportunity of developing improved strains of rice and cereals such as barley, maize and wheat that are more nutritious, drought-resistant and less vulnerable to certain pests and diseases than are existing varieties. This work was undertaken by two separate research teamsone commercially funded and the other publicly funded. The former, a research team from Syngenta, a Swiss-based biotechnology company, worked on japonica, a rice strain that contains ,-, genes. Meanwhile, the Beijing Geonomics Institute decoded the genome of the indica rice strain, a variety common in China and other Asian-Pacific countries. A third groupthe International Rice Genome Sequencing Project, an international consortium led by the Government of Japanhas been working on a more complete mapping of the japonica rice genome since and expects to finish in late . Syngenta agreed to shares its rice genome draft sequence with this Japanese consortium in May , as did Monsanto, a transnational corporation, which in had developed a rough draft of the genetic make-up of japonica. The contribution from Syngenta and Monsanto is expected to accelerate the completion of the full sequence and to reduce the overall project costs.There have been co-mingled public and private inputs, including from private foundations, and collaborations in Africa, as well. At the end of March , the West Africa Rice Development Association (WARDA) announced that farmers in West Africa would receive a newly developed breed of rice, which increases harvests by up to per cent. WARDA, formed in by African countries with the assistance the united_nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UnitedNations (FAO) and the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), is an autonomous intergovernmental research association, currently consisting of member States. In turn, WARDA, which is currently supported by its member States, developed countries, international organizations, including development banks and research organizations, and private foundations, is a member of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a network of international research centres supported by over public and private donors. So-called Nericashort for New Rice for Africacombines the hardiness of traditional African strains with the productivity of Asian varieties. This new variety of rice, the result of more than years of research, has been developed to produce high yields without the need for irrigation; in addition, it matures about a month earlier than conventional varieties and is richer in protein. Early results have been encouraging, with increased rice production in Guinea, for instance, reducing its rice import bill by $ million in . The seeds will be distributed to farmers in Benin, Cote dIvoire, the Gambia, Guinea, Mali, Nigeria and Togo. The target is to produce million tons by , which could save those seven countries as much as $ million by reducing rice imports.Participatory research is at the heart of the Nerica success story. Through a mechanism called participatory varietal selection, thousands of farmers grew several varieties and provided feedback to WARDA. In this way, scientists in WARDA were able to learn about the traits that were most valuable to the farmers and to incorporate farmers preferences into the breeding strategies.Issues of public-private interaction are discussed in the context of two recent major developments. The first is genetically engineered technology that can increase crop yields and strengthen crop resistance to pests, drought and other natural calamities. The other is the issue of intellectual property rights (IPRs) which are central to the motivations of engaging in R&D in the private sector, thus affecting the types and ranges of R&D undertaken by the private and public sectors.Genetically engineered technologyOne area of agricultural research increasingly calling for interaction between the public and private sectors is genetically engineered technology. Genetic engineering allows the modification of a plant through gene transfer, rather than through the much lengthier process of conventional selective breeding. The material can come from other families, species and even kingdoms, and this is not possible with conventional breeding. Genetic engineering is thought to offer large potential benefits, both for the private sector entities directly involved and for society at large. At the same time, it embodies a number of broad risks, mostly unquantifiable in advance, and some with potentially large negative effects; in many cases, a large part of these consequences would not be borne by those developing or selling these technologies, but by society at large. While the potential rewards serve as large incentives for the private sector to develop these technologies, there is a critical role for the State in mitigating the risks associated with them and in continually conducting studies itself or through eminent scientific bodies that can form the basis for public discussion leading to the appropriate legislation.Application of modern biotechnology in food and agriculture has the potential of increasing productivity and reducing the costs of production. It is sometimes argued that the economic benefits of genetically modified crops accrue primarily to the companies that develop the new varieties and hold the patents, along with the seed companies that distribute them. However, they should also lead to higher incomes for innovative producers, reduced prices for consumers, or some combination of the two. Farmers may gain from reduced pest management costs and, in the case of herbicide-tolerant crops, from greater efficiency as regards pesticide use. The larger yield should mean increased supplies and reduced prices for consumers. Since agriculture is often a more significant segment of the economy in developing countries than in developed ones, the gains are likely to be relatively more important to developing countries. Similarly, since consumers in developing economies spend higher proportions of their budgets on food, they are therefore likely to benefit more from these advances than their counterparts in developed countries.On the negative side, genetically modified organisms give rise to environmental, food safety and broader development concerns. These include the danger of creating super-weeds that are resistant to pests and herbicides, the health risks for people with allergies, the risk that beneficial predators of crop pests could be harmed inadvertently, concerns about the possible impacts on organic farming, the possibility that antibiotic resistance in maize, for example, could spread to livestock and from livestock to humans, and potential dependence on bioengineered seeds and technology, especially given the development of so-called terminator genes in genetically enhanced seeds, which cannot be replanted. The publics concern over safety has been increased by some past caseslike that of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or mad cow diseasewhere assurances from official bodies that food supplies were not in danger proved to be incorrect. Additionally, there is concern that reducing the number of crop varieties increases the vulnerability of farmers, but also consumers, to a failure of the remaining varieties. Diversity is vital for smallholder farmers in developing countries. Because of these concerns, some degree of public regulation is widely deemed necessary.The nature and extent of regulations have different impacts on producers and consumers. Weaker regulations tend to make consumers more hesitant about accepting genetically modified products. Stricter regulations, on the other hand, tend to make consumers feel safer but smaller seed companies and biotechnology companies find it more difficult to compete in a highly regulated environment because of the increased costs such regulations usually entail. This restrains the supply of agricultural biotechnology not only in industrialized countries but also and especially in the developing economies where resources are scarcer.Since the late s, when the commercial potential of genetic modification (GM) became evident, many Governments have introduced regulations for research in and release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs). By early , more than genetically modified crops , including most of the important crops, had been approved for planting, feed or food use in at least individual countries, including Argentina, Australia, Canada and the united_states, and some countries in the European Union (EU). Successfully modified traits important for the major agricultural crops include delayed ripening, herbicidetolerance, and insect and virus resistance, as well as modified colour or oil content. Because of differences in national strategies for technological development, in ecosystems and crop production, in national attitudes towards environmental issues and food safety concerns and in regulatory capacity, such regulations have varied. For example, the Government of the united_states has kept regulations on GM technology at a minimum so as to encourage its development in the country. Its products are, however, tested by the united_states Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Western Europe, on the other hand, has adopted a more extensive regulatory framework, including the European Parliaments voting in July to introduce GM labelling and traceability rules. At present, there is no internationally agreed regulation on food safety and GM technology. However, in March , the Codex Alimentarius Commission, created by FAO and the World Health Organization (WHO) in , established an ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnologies to develop standards, guidelines or recommendations for foods in this area.This fragmented system of conflicting national food safety standards, and the absence of globally accepted standards, limit export opportunities, especially for poorer developing countries. For example, it has been estimated that adopting a worldwide standard for aflatoxin, based on current international guidelines, would increase the value of the nut and cereal trade from a set of countries ( of them developing) by about $ billion, or more than per cent, above levels. This suggests that it is not so much the existence of standards that serves as an export bottleneck, as the variability of import regulations among export markets. Similarly, the adoption of sanitary and phytosanitary requirements has been shown to be a major factor hampering the ability of developing countries to exploit export opportunities for agricultural and food products in developed-country markets. At the same time, consumer acceptance or distaste for genetically modified crops in the domestic market can also have an effect on a developing countrys agricultural trade. For example, because of their potential for reducing imports, technological advances in the agricultural sector were a political priority in Brazil, but consumer resistance has played a major role in slowing progress there.The ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology is considering the labelling of biotechnology-derived foods to allow the consumer to make an informed choice. In response to consumer reactions against genetically modified foods in Western Europe and also, to a certain extent, in Japan, separate production systems for genetically modified and non-genetically modified crops are emerging in the maize and soybean sectors in such countries as Argentina, Canada, China and the united_states. However, such an approach requires an elaborate (and therefore costly) monitoring and tracking system and this is likely to make the coexistence of two production systems non-viable in many developing countries. Particularly for developing countries that are reliant on agricultural exports, access to the new technologies is likely to mean that they will have to decide whether they wish to focus on the production and export of genetically modified foods or attempt to develop a market for exports of non-genetically modified foods to regions adverse to the genetically modified product. For example, Western Europe is Africas major export market for agricultural products and could be such a niche market for the regions exporters.If a country decides to produce genetically modified crops, it should adopt a precautionary approach to protect the environment. It should take into account such factors as the possibility of outcrossing, which could lead, for example, to the development of more aggressive weeds with increased resistance to diseases or environmental stresses, and the possible loss of biodiversity, as a result of the displacement of traditional cultivars. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention to Biological Diversity, adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on January , seeks to protect biodiversity from the potential risks posed by modified organisms resulting from biotechnology and establishes a procedure for ensuring that countries are provided with the information necessary to make informed decisions. In the context of the world_trade_organization, the united_states and Canada proposed the establishment of a working group to review the adequacy of existing rules concerning the use of GMOs. This was opposed by environmental non-governmental organizations and consumer groups in Europe who favoured an international conventionoutside the world_trade_organization that would permit the application of the precautionary principle. A final resolution of this matter has not yet been reached.Adopting genetically modified crops can provide farmers with productivity benefits that outweigh the additional costs of the modified seeds used and there may be large welfare gains for developing countries that are able to adopt such technology. Yet it is not assured that a technology that was primarily developed for crops in the developed countries can be readily transferred to the developing countries. Even if modifications to suit the local conditions are commercially viable, broader public safety and environmental considerations also have to be taken into account. In addition, it may be considered desirable that existing systems be preserved so that non-modified products can be made available to consumers averse to genetically modified foods. Such questions can be addressed by a society only collectively, so that there is going to be an increasing need for interaction between the public and private sectors in order to ensure that all the costs and benefits to society are taken into account when genetically modified crops are being developed and diffused.Intellectual property rightsIntellectual property rights (IPRs) are central to the private sectors motivation to engage in R&D because its involvement is usually contingent on firms ability to capture the returns that are forthcoming from such activities. Responsibility for administering IPRs within individual countries rests with national Governments but there are endeavours by the international community to harmonize laws regarding IPRs across countries. With the entry into force of the world_trade_organization Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) on January , developing countries agreed to bring their IPR laws in line with those of other members, though countries could have different periods of time within which to apply all the provisions of the TRIPs Agreement.In the case of agriculture, the costs of implementation of the world_trade_organization agreements could be large for developing countries. New legislation has to be drafted, for instance, in extending intellectual property right protection to plant varieties, and staff have to be trained. Implementing sanitaryand phytosanitary regulations for trade purposes can also require putting in place disease control measures, ensuring sanitary conditions in food processing and upgrading laboratories and quarantine facilities. It has been estimated that for a typical developing country, the cost of implementing the requirements under just three of the world_trade_organization agreementson customs valuation, on sanitary and phytosanitary measures and on intellectual property rights (TRIPS)could amount to $ million. This is equal to an entire years development budget for some of the least developed countries.Even if the appropriate IPR laws are passed, it will take some time and resources to build up a system of patent protection that will win the confidence of all concerned. Case law takes time to develop and each country will have to develop a body of expertise in this field.In relation to agricultural research, the TRIPs Agreement requires that plant varieties be protected. This can be done via patents or via plant breeders rights, as spelled out under the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants. This has three broad implications. First, agricultural inputs can no longer be excluded from patent protection. Second, some types of plant breeders rights will have to be accepted. Third, enforcement of IPRs will have to be improved because the right to appropriate the economic returns from research activities is an important precondition for private participation.Developed and developing countries are likely to have different priorities for agricultural innovation because of different climate and soil conditions, as well as differences in relative input endowments and prices. It has been argued that, with strong IPRs in developing countries, potential profits from innovation should be high and that intellectual property protection should therefore provide an incentive for firms from developed countries to undertake R&D activity that is appropriate to local needs. Other benefits of IPRs are said to include an advertising effect, a quality effect and a learning effect. The advertising effect stems from the incentive of a patent holder to increase the demand for the innovation, thus encouraging diffusion. The quality effect arises because patent holders have more motivation to achieve repeat sales to recover their R&D costs than do non-patent holders. The learning effect is a result of the fact that, because IPRs are likely to stimulate diffusion, the human capital of the recipient population will increase, enhancing developing countries capacity to generate and utilize additional R&D.On the other hand, there are concerns that intellectual property legislation at the domestic and international levelsmay, for a number of reasons, result in nationally and globally suboptimal levels of R&D. Actively enforced IPRs may reduce some firms ability to capture the potential returns from any R&D activities and may thus dampen their participation in such initiatives, particularly in developing countries. Where IPRs are operative, there is no incentive for private firms to disclose the results of any R&D that cannot be patented. Consequently, the pool of knowledge released into the public domain will be only a fraction of what has been generated privately. This, in turn, results in an inefficient use of R&D resources owing to the duplication of effort and additional costs incurred by other firms. Moreover, IPR-protected R&D will tend to be underutilized because of the charges imposed for its use. In addition, the rate of diffusion of knowledge may be slowed since IPRs raise the costs incurred byand thus reduce the profitability ofpotential adopters. It is therefore argued that strong and growing patent protection, together with the shift from public to private R&D that such protection encourages, could shrink the pool of technologies available to developing countries and thereby slow their rate of economic development.Partially because the strength of property protection varies a great deal across countries and over time, empirical evidence about the effects of IPRs for agriculture in developing countries is limited. However, an illustration of the policy dilemma inherent in IPRs is provided by India, which accounts for nearly one quarter of the land under cotton cultivation and is the worlds third largest cotton producer. India faces an IPR decision with respect to Bt cottoncotton that has been modified via biotechnology to produce a resistance to insects. The Indian Government has announced that such pest-resistant transgenic cotton will start to be grown on a commercial basis in the season beginning in October . However, stringent conditions are being imposed on the sole licensed producer of the seeds, Mahyco Monsanto Biotech India, a joint venture between Monsanto of the united_states and Indias Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds. As the use of Bt cotton seeds will provide a benefit of roughly $ per acre by eliminating pesticide use and improving productivity and quality, demand for the new seeds is booming. In mid-, Mahyco Monsanto enjoyed a monopoly on transgenic cotton seeds and was seeking to step up production. However, there was pressure on the Government to allow other companies to introduce the Bt gene construct. The Indian Government therefore had to weigh the argument of farmers organizations that competition should ensure that growers obtain Bt cotton seeds at an appropriate price (and thereby disseminate the new technology) against the IPRs of the venture that had developed the improved variety.The use of IPRs is an important form of interaction between the public and private sectors and, for many developing countries, is particularly pertinent in the agriculture sector. As the Indian example demonstrates, it is difficult to determine the correct balance between protecting innovators rights and maximizing the contribution of any innovation to a countrys development. At the same time, the fact that private sector R&D is dominated by the profit motive and will therefore be selective is the crux of the case for engaging non-private institutions in agricultural research that is deemed necessary for developmental purposes. Because it is difficult to exclude those who have not paid for R&D from using its results, some areas of agricultural R&D will not generate adequate economic incentives to pique private sector interest and, if deemed to be in societys interest, such R&D will therefore have to be undertaken in the public domain. Various options have been suggested to ensure that research that may seem not to be privately profitable is nonetheless undertaken. Public R&D may focus on so-called orphan commoditiesfor example, low-value vegetatively propagated crops such as cassava and sweet potatoes, which are important primarily as staples for poor people in the developing world. Another possibility is to directly subsidize private sector research activities so as to make the exploration of more expensive technology viable.Another possible way to encourage research is to put in place a purchaseguarantee mechanism, whereby those who developed the new seeds would be assured of a reasonable income from sales. This suggestion is similar to that advanced by the President of the world_bank to spur the development of newvaccines against diseases that are particularly prevalent in the developing countries: malaria, tuberculosis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The proposal was that a fund be set up to help countries purchase the vaccines if and when they were developed. Such a purchase-guarantee commitment has the advantage of allowing the private sector to pursue the projects it sees as the most promising and, in the case of agricultural products, of giving it an incentive for developing new seed varieties by assuring it that there will be a market for the new products.Global food production growth rates continue to surpass population growtha phenomenon to some extent attributable over the past four decades to agricultural R&D in general and the green revolution in particular. Further R&D activities are required to play an important role particularly in the context of African development because the growth rate of agricultural production in the continent has been on a par with its population growth rate, thus making per capita production stagnant.The private sector has become increasingly engaged and increasingly important in carrying out research activities in agriculture since the s, thus ensuring that a mix of public and private involvement will be the trend in the future. Such a blend of public-private activities has a great deal to offer inasmuch as the private sector is profit-oriented. For example, biotechnology and genetic engineeringpromising research areas with a high potential for increasing agricultural productivityas carried out in the future, are not going to be an all or nothing proposition, undertaken either by public or by private actors. There is ample scope for participation by both public and private actors, as exemplified by the participatory research selection shown in developing Nerica rice. Indeed, some division of labour is called for. In this context, the public sector should concentrate its research efforts increasingly on areas that are socially worthwhile, but have not yet been subject to undertakings by the private sector. From an efficiency standpoint, this is valid in developed and developing countries alike. Included here would be much pre-technology and general scientific research and certain areas of applied research in such fields as environment, food safety and human nutrition. Allowing private research to pursue areas of its own self-interest is only logical, especially since such a course frees up public funds that can then be focused elsewhere.Moreover, there is a reason why the private sector in developed countries accounts for roughly per cent of biotechnology research worldwide: the fact that this research requires sizeable physical and human capital investment makes it a difficult undertaking for developing countries. Furthermore, a critical mass of scientific research resources is of paramount importance in biotechnology, making consolidation of effort both more fruitful and more cost-effective. Several surveys by FAO, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) and the International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR) have shown that critical mass is a key element in the case of latin_america and the Caribbean (especially Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Cuba and Chile), where joint State, private and academic initiatives in genomics and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) recombinant technology are opening the road to R&D projects oriented to the agri-export market (citruses; salmon; fruits; sunflowers).As has recently been suggested, to unleash the true power of crop engineering, Governments have to pursue a long-term strategy because markets by themselves will not do the job. The challenge in responding to the biotechnology revolution is how to adapt existing rules (regarding IPRs and regulations on genetically modified foods, for example) to the new realities of crop engineering. Developed countries that embrace genetic engineering should recognize that the dissimilarity between engineered and regular crops is wide enough to necessitate new regulations. Developing countries, meanwhile, face problems becausewith a few exceptionstheir regulatory systems are not well established. Realizing the potential of agricultural biotechnology will require activist policy reform, not a laissez-faire approach.It is also imperative to recognize that, even if financing were unlimited, R&D alone would not suffice to increase agricultural output, nor would it allay hunger where it exists. Other complementary activities, such as extension services, are also necessary before returns from agricultural R&D can be realized. For example, comparing productivity growth and the sustainability of irrigated agriculture in Punjab of India and Punjab of Pakistan reveals that the former experienced much higher and more rapid growth of food crop yields from the s to the mid-s. The difference can be partly related to dissimilar nonprice policies that encouraged much faster growth of inputs in India than in Pakistan. More important, however, is the fact that the time lag between investment in infrastructure and improved productivity was shorter in India and this shorter time lag can be associated to learning by doing and investment in human capital. This suggests the need for policy makers to make a long-term commitment to creating complementarities between investments in technologies and supporting infrastructure.New and innovative approaches to agricultural R&D will have to be devised in order to maximize the returns on all resources. For example, because such R&D involves serendipity and requires certain threshold levels to be effective, a regional approach is logical. One approach, for example, would be to form consortia of public national research systems within a region. Regional collaboration is already occurring through programmes such as the Asian Rice Biotechnology Network (ARBN), and the Asian Maize Biotechnology Network (AMBIONET), as well as the Technical Cooperation Network on Plant Biotechnology in latin_america and the Caribbean (REDBIO); but, to be able to handle sensitive IPR matters and to negotiate with the private sector, such networks will need to be upgraded to the status of consortia, with a legal basis. In the case of REDBIO, a further institutional development has taken place with the transformation of the ongoing network into a private non-profit foundation (Foundation REDBIO International). Such a course makes particular sense in the agricultural field because of the similar geophysical properties within a region. Again, such novel partnerships are not to be restricted to developing countries. Owing to scarce resources, they are equally applicable to developed economies. One proposal to revitalize agricultural R&D, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, involves the use of so-called competitive agricultural technology funds (CATFs). The CATF model has been used to fund scientific research for many decades in developed countries and for at least years inlatin_america. A CATF is a pool of money designed to support the development of agricultural technology. When a CATF is established, a set of rules guiding its use, management and accountability arrangements are put in place in support of its objectives. CATFs relate funding more closely to performance, thus placing an activity that is being carried out in the public domain on the competitive market.A second proposal to spur agricultural R&D entails decentralizing biotechnological innovation, bringing it closer to the land. This is an objective of the Centre for the Application of Molecular Biology to International Agriculture (CAMBIA), based in Canberra, Australia. The Centres modus operandi is to support local plant breeders and growers in developing the foods they know best and value most highly. For example, CAMBIA researchers are working on new biotech relating to cassava, a starchy root that of people in subSaharan Africa rely on as their main meal.Approaches such as CATFs and increased grass-roots innovation may be as close to the cutting edge as one can come in the sphere of agricultural R&D. Agriculture and food security are far from purely economic concerns. On the supply side, agricultural output is the result of a host of political, social and institutional variables. On the demand side, access to adequate food is seen as a basic human need. Thus, not only must additional private resources be harnessed, but the case for increasing levels of public funding for agricultural research with public good characteristics remains strong. Both sets of actors have a contribution to make. The challenge is how to capitalize on their strengths and minimize their weaknesses.In many instances, a regional approach to agricultural R&D would be both cost-efficient and more productive. It is only through a public-private allianceat the national, regional and international levelsthat Malthusian concerns will continue to be allayed into the future.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY VIUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OFAn increasing number of developed, developing and transitional countries are reforming their utility sectors with a view to increasing private sector participation in the provision of basic services. Although the telecommunications sector accounted for a considerable share of privatization proceeds during the s, the energy sector has also played a leading role in the process of utility reform in many countries around the world. The main incentives for this worldwide trend of electricity reform include increasing operational efficiency, enhancing competition, tapping private investments for the improvement or expansion of services and reducing government debt.The electricity sector has produced some of the most interesting advances in new forms of competition that have been introduced in utility industries still reliant on a single network of pipes or cables. The present chapter focuses on pioneering experiences with public-private cooperation in electricity provision in Chile and the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland. The main aims of these two case studies are (a) to find out whether privatization has improved operational efficiency and quality of services; (b) to assess the impacts of increased competition (and regulation) on electricity prices and consumer welfare; and (c) to determine their usefulness for other countries. It is argued that the British experience with electricity reform, in particular, has produced some useful lessons for other countries.The chapter concludes that Governments still have an important role to play in public-private interaction for the provision of utility services. Effective regulation, in particular, is essential not only for dealing with monopoly power, price discrimination and other market failures, but also for promoting competition and enhancing consumer choice. While it is recognized that enhancing competition can help to reduce the need for utility regulation in general, industries such as electricity, gas and water contain natural monopoly segments for which the benefits of regulation potentially outweigh its costs.In addition, in order to assure a smooth privatization process and enough private investment in former public utilities, Governments also need to create a favourable investment environment and implement a broad market liberalization strategy. Another finding is that increased consumer choice and a certain degree of product differentiation can provide an incentive for product innovation or improved services by private electricity providers that did not exist under State-owned monopoly systems. Last but not least, it is shown that the combination of market liberalization, greater private sector involvement and increased competition, together with effective regulation, can lead not only to improved services but also to a significant fall in the real price of electricity and other utility services.In the past, the provision of utility services, such as electricity, gas, telephony, water and sewerage, were considered examples of natural monopolies because of technical and economic obstacles to their efficient provision by more than one producer. Economies of scope were thought to make it more efficient for producers to cover a range of different activitiessuch as electricity generation and distribution and local and long-distance telephone callsand thus seek vertical integration. Furthermore, the possibility of deriving economies of scale would make it uneconomic to have two sets of networks competing for the same customer. Large sunk costs of investments required for the construction of networks of pipes and cables also hinder competition by acting as a barrier against new producers entering the industry. As a result, the efficient provision of utility services has usually been accompanied by some form of spatial monopoly.Given their monopoly powertogether with the fact that their outputs are often regarded as essential public servicesutilities have frequently been subject to ownership or regulation by the State. Moreover, there has always been widespread political commitment to ensuring universal access to basic services, in particular water, sanitation and electricity. In addition to their contribution to improving living standards, utility networks are also a central component of the social overhead capital. They are thus critical for economic activity and are often seen as strategic for national development. As a result, Governments in many countries have been directly involved in their provision.Rationale for private sector involvement in utility provisionThe worldwide drive towards utility reform can be traced back to the increasingly poor performance of State-owned utilities during the s. Generally speaking, they tended to provide low-quality services at a high cost and were often overstaffed as governments used them to generate and maintain employment. The fact that, owing to widespread political interference and weak management, prices tended to be heavily subsidized often resulted in large financial losses and costs to taxpayers. At the same time, fiscal constraints prevented Governments from making adequate investments for proper maintenance, improvement and expansion of utility networks. By the late s, State-owned utilities in many countries were characterized by serious operational inefficiencies and became a source of considerable macroeconomic burden.It can be argued that, in spite of national and international commitments to universal access to basic services, large segments of the population, notably the poorest in developing countries, lack access to such services primarily because Governments have been unable to raise sufficient revenues to subsidize theUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY operation of their utilities. Furthermore, while utility subsidies are often justified on the grounds that lower-income groups cannot afford to pay for basic services, it is usually the wealthier and more influential groups that benefit disproportionately from such subsidies. Inadequate public investment frequently leads public utility networks in many developing countries to exclude the poorest households from services.For example, while energy subsidies are often advocated for the poor, in practice, subsidized electricity hardly reaches low-income groups. Given that only a small segment of them have access to electricity networks, notably in Africa and in rural areas of many developing countries, these low-income groups usually have to rely on more expensive and lower-quality forms of energy. Similarly, evidence shows that subsidized urban water supply and sanitation are often provided disproportionately to higher-income groups which, in effect, pre-empt scarce supplies in many metropolitan areas of developing countries. As a result, lower-income groups living in poor neighbourhoods depend on private water vendors who have charged between and over times the rate per cubic metre paid by wealthier residents with piped water supply.During the s, it became increasingly evident that government ownership itself was an obstacle to effective reform of the utility sector, notably because Governments faced strong social and political pressure to subsidize utility tariffs. As a result, there was a conceptual shift regarding private sector participation and the promotion of competition in the provision of utility services. While in some developed countries, such as France and the united_states of America, early forms of private sector involvement had been confined to management of utilities or subject to strict regulation, the new approach implied that privatization of State-owned utilities could be achieved through partial or full ownership of utility assets by the private sector.Governments of many countries have decided, for instance, to sell partial stakes in State-owned enterprises to private shareholders, sometimes retaining a minority stake or a golden share over a period of time in order to influence company policy. Some developed-country Governments have even sold whole utility companies through the stock market, whereas several developing countries have preferred to auction their State-owned utilities directly to other companies, often foreign ones. Other countries with less developed capital markets, particularly economies in transition, have used voucher schemes to transfer ownership of State enterprises to the private sector without cash exchanges.Greater private sector involvement in utility provision has sometimes taken place through alternative arrangements. For example, the past decade has witnessed a considerable increase in private sector management of public utilities through different types of lease contracts awarded by competitive bidding over various periods of time, along the lines of the French model of water privatization. In addition, it is estimated that about per cent of the investment in private infrastructure projects in all developing countries over the past decade has involved private financing of new enterprises, notably independent power projects (see box VI.).Regardless of the model used, during the second half of the s and the beginning of the s, private sector involvement in utilities gradually came to be seen as an effective tool for improving their performance and reducing the budgetary burden caused by their inefficient management. This ideologicalBox VI.It is estimated that about per cent of private spending in utilities and other infrastructure projects in developing countries during the s involved private funding of new assets, as opposed to purchasing of existing State-owned assets.a Independent power projects (IPPs) have played an increasingly prominent role in these greenfield investments, notably in Asian developing countries.b Asia became the most dynamic market for IPPs in the world during the s, particularly before the -financial crisis. In , for example, the Asia and Pacific region accounted for over half the number of IPPs in the world and almost per cent of total investment in these projects.c Although there are different types of IPPs, build-operatetransfer (BOT) projects tend to be the most popular in Asia.dIt is sometimes argued that for many developing countries, the Asian IPP model provides an alternative to the unbundled model of electricity privatization.e The Asian model usually involves a State-owned, vertically integrated electricity company purchasing additional power on contract from a small number of independent producers. Although the incumbent electricity company usually controls the monopoly segments (transmission and distribution) and even final delivery to customers, IPPs can compete with State companies in the generation segment. It is also argued that the Asian IPP model was intended to, and apparently succeeded in economizing on regulation.fSome Governments perceive these projects a free lunch since they allow countries to increase generating capacity without having to undertake more complex reform of the electricity sector. For example, in such countries as India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Pakistan, Governments or State-owned enterprises decided to increase generation capacity through IPPs without making at least parallel progress in improving the efficiency and financial self-sustainability of the State-owned power companies that had contracted to purchase the power.g In many cases, given the widespread practice of price subsidization, State-owned utilities became unable to pay for the amounts of electricity stipulated in power purchase agreements (PPAs),h leading to severe financial problems and legal disputes.i There are therefore risks and potential pitfalls with IPPs, particularly with regard to their reliance on PPAs. It is estimated that up to per cent of contracts involving PPAs are renegotiated within three years owing to a variety of disputes.jThe experience with IPPs in South-east_asia shows that the existence of clear contractual safeguards in long-term PPAs can, however, offer some protection againstIbid., p. .shift gave rise to path-breaking efforts to increase the private sectors role in the provision of utility services, notably in the united_kingdom (great_britain), as well as in other developed and even developing countries, such as Chile. Although there were many reasons for those early experiences of publicprivate cooperation, the most urgent priorities in most cases were to improve operational efficiency and services.It was estimated, for example, that in the early s, annual losses arising from technical inefficiencies in utility and transportation sectorssuch as leaking water pipes and electricity transmission lossesin developing countries were equivalent to over a quarter of annual investment in those sectors (see figure VI.). In addition, the widespread practice of setting average prices below long-run average costs produced additional losses of US$ billion a year. Given the growing scarcity of public funding, price subsidization of utility serUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY economic shocks or unexpected government behaviour. For example, private investors in the Philippines and Thailand have usually relied on enforceable legal safeguards to underwrite their agreement with the Government, whereas investors in Indonesia and Malaysia have opted for non-contractual safeguards. When the Asian financial crisis hit all four countries, the prospects for existing IPPs in these countries varied. There is evidence, for example, that IPP investors with contractual safeguards in Thailand and Philippines received better treatment after the crisis than investors in the other two countries.kNonetheless, it is increasingly recognized that relying on PPAs for regulation can be very risky, particularly in the event of a macroeconomic shock. The Asian financial crisis showed that the Asian IPP model lacked effective regulatory mechanisms for dealing with major economic shocks. The models PPAs proved particularly inadequate for coping with devaluations arising from the crisis. As indicated in the case study of electricity privatization in Western Africa (see box VI.), such contracts can never cover all potential issues of conflict. The existence of an independent, sector-specific regulatory agency is thus essential not only to resolve disputes, but also to deal with such shocks. Another underlying problem with the IPP model in most developing countries (both in Asia and elsewhere) is that the IPPs are often used to preserve an artificial monopoly over the wholesale trading of electricity even when the vertically integrated, State-owned utility is unbundled. In many developing countries, this singlebuyer model tends to weaken payment discipline and imposes considerable contingency liabilities on Governments.lWhile the Asian financial crisis slowed down the rapid growth of IPPs in the region and led to a temporary generation overcapacity in most affected countries, new IPPs are beginning to emerge as growth resumes. Several countries, such as Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand have learned the lessons from the flaws in the Asian IPP model and have begun to introduce further reforms of their electricity sector.m These reforms include vertical and horizontal unbundling, the privatization of non-monopoly segments, the enhancement of competition in wholesale markets (and eventually even in delivery services) and the creation of independent regulatory agencies to support electricity reforms. An increasing number of Governments of Asian developing countries agree that privatization and liberalization of the energy sector are essential for their future development.nBox VI. (continued)vices often led to insufficient investment in the modernization, expansion and even maintenance of utility networks. It is sometimes argued that such technical inefficiencies and price subsidization policies in developing countries have been partly responsible for the fact that nowadays billion people lack access to safe drinking water, billion people lack access to electricity and adequate sanitation, and half of the worlds population lack access to telephone services.This vicious circle of inefficient operation, subsidized tariffs, insufficient investment and inadequate service expansion led to greater private sector participation in the provision of utility servicesnotably electricity and telephonyin many developing countries during the s. During the last decade, for example, energy and telecommunications alone accounted for over half of the estimated US$ billion total privatization revenues in those countries (see figure VI.).UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Potential obstacles to greater private sector involvementPrivatizing public utilities raises complex issues that are not present in other sectors, such as their provision of basic services and their monopoly characteristics, as well as possible political opposition to a permanent transfer of ownership and control of strategic industries to private (and potentially foreign) investors. Private sector involvement in utility provision has thus often been opposed on socio-political as well as economic grounds, notably in developing countries. It is argued, for example, that private ownership per se does not necessarily lead to enhanced economic efficiency. With regard to natural monopolies, in particular, it is not clear whether public firms, subject to detailed price and profit regulation, will perform worse than privatized firms under similarly regulatory regimes. As far as distributional equity is concerned, there is a widespread perception that it tends to worsen income and wealth distribution, and concentrate benefits on a privileged fewnotably shareholders, managers, foreign business interests and those close to the political elitewhile its costs are primarily borne by taxpayers, consumers and laid-off employees.As the early efforts towards utility reform evolved during the s and early s, notably in Chile and great_britain, it became apparent that private ownership on its own was sufficient neither to enhance competition and efficiency nor to tackle major problems associated with the operation of State-owned utilities. It became increasingly accepted, however, that private enterprises would invariably outperform State-owned ones, provided that effective regulatory mechanisms were in place to deal with monopoly power, improve competition and efficiency, and ensure that consumers enjoyed the benefits of market liberalization.Regulation, competition and market liberalizationIt is now generally agreed that most utilities can be broken down into two types of activities: one naturally monopolistic and the other potentially competitive. For example, in the electricity sector, whereas transmission and distribution lean towards the former, generation and supply to large users are potentially competitive. This potential for competition has become even more evident in the telecommunications sector as technological progress, such as mobile telephony, has undermined the natural monopoly characteristics of fixed-line telephony. While regulation is clearly required to address monopoly power and other market failures, those new perspectives on the limited natural monopoly characteristics of utilities have helped to demonstrate that competition can be used to improve operational efficiency and service quality in privatized utilities.It is thus crucial to analyse the industry structure and the scope for competition to be promoted by the regulatory machinery before formulating and implementing a utility reform strategy. The success of efforts to attract private sector investment into public utilities depends largely on the establishment of transparent and reliable contract legislation and regulatory machinery. This has led Governments to develop new utility regulation models, often run by independent regulators, with clear price adjustment mechanisms. Innovative price-based mechanisms replacing rate-of-return regulation (used notably in Canada, Japan and the united_states) have created incentives to improve efficiency and reduce costs, a particularly serious problem with rate-of-return systems. Since the regulator allows the utility to set prices required to generate profits equal to an agreed rate of return on the value of the capital invested in the utility, when profits fall below the agreed rate, the utility can request the regulator to set higher tariffs. If on the one hand, this tends to encourage investment (and sometimes overinvestment), on the other hand, it gives the utility little incentive to improve efficiency and reduce costs, since the latter can be passed on to consumers in the form of price rises usually agreed by the regulator.Another innovative departure from previous utility regulation models involves new forms of competition. Because utility industries can be broken up geographically into regional entities, an industry yardstick, reflecting performance and prospect in the industry as a whole is recommended for some utility sectors. The regulator can thus make performance comparisons among different regional suppliers. In this way, each suppliers maximum allowed tariffs between two price reviews is determined in relation to the average of the industrys unit costs. Consequently, yardstick competition prevents a regulated utility from obtaining a more favourable price at the next price review by manipulating its costs, given that each firms regulated price is relatively independent of its own performance. The yardstick concept can thus be an important instrument for increasing competition and efficiency, particularly in utilities such as water and sewerage, where there is limited scope for other forms of competition.Competition can also be promoted through the liberalization of utility markets. Market-based regulatory reforms designed to offer choices to consumers can be introduced by reducing barriers to entry in utility markets and opening the way for private sector involvement, sometimes in competition with Stateowned utilities. It is sometimes argued that introducing competition into previously monopolized and regulated network utilities is more important for achieving the full benefits of reform than regulation itself.In sum, utility reform can encompass a number of policies, which do not necessarily have to be pursued simultaneously. These policies include: (a) partial or full transfer of State-owned assets to the private sector; (b) introduction of competition by separating the natural monopoly segments from the competitive parts of utility industries; (c) restructuring of the monopoly segments and encouraging new firms to enter the competitive parts; (d) establishment of laws and institutions to regulate the monopoly segments and to promote competition; and (e) market liberalization in order to allow or increase consumer choice.While the telecommunications sector accounted for a considerable share of privatization proceeds during the s, notably in developed countries, the energy sector has also played a leading role in the process of utility reform in many countries around the world. As figure VI. shows, privatization in developing countries has been driven to a great extent by the energy sector, followed by telecommunications, manufacturing and banking. It can also be argued that the electricity sector has produced some of the most interesting advances with regard to new forms of network competition introduced in utility sectors still reliant on a single network of pipes or cables.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Major goals of electricity reformLike other utility sectors, public electricity utilities in most countries have often been characterized by inefficient operation, weak management, inadequate investment and/or poor services. As a consequence, there has been an unprecedented expansion of electricity reform and market liberalization in developed and developing countries, as well as those with economies in transition, over the past years.In some countries, notably in Western Africa (see box VI.), private sector involvement has taken place through management concessions to run Stateowned electricity utilities. Other countries, notably developing countries in Asia, have given priority to increasing generation capacity through independent power projects (see box VI. above). Many developed and developing countries alike have, however, carried out more comprehensive reform of the sector, including market liberalization, selling off existing State enterprises to the private sector and enhancing competition in electricity-generation and retail markets. In several countries, Governments have gradually moved completely out of electricity provision and concentrated on the regulation of the private electricity industry. Three major aims of electricity reform and liberalization around the world are: (a) increasing operational efficiency; (b) enhancing competition; and (c) tapping private investments for improving or expanding electricity services.Separation of natural monopoly segmentsElectricity is generated from a variety of sources, in particular hydropower, fossil fuels, gas turbines, nuclear power and alternative sources of energy (such as wind and solar power). It flows along high-voltage transmission lines to distribution plants, where it is transformed into lower voltages for local distribution and final delivery to homes and businesses. Whereas transmission refers to the operation of the high-voltage network or grid, distribution is often used to mean the operation of the lower-voltage local/regional network that takes power from the (usually national) grid to final consumers. The transmission and distribution segments of the electricity industry are natural monopolies because they comprise the networks of highand low-voltage cables, respectively.The distribution segment is sometimes confused with electricity retail, that is to say, its sale to final consumers. In State-owned systems, most or all of the four segments of the industry (generation, transmission, distribution and retail) are run by a single public utility company. A crucial prerequisite of effective competition in the electricity sector is, however, its restructuring along separate subsectors. For example, in privatized systems, a separate company can be responsible for retail services, such as supplying households with electricity, billing, meter reading and home repairs, yet, without owning the distribution network.The main objective of such vertical unbundling is to separate the (monopoly) transmission and distribution segments from the potentially competitive ones, namely, generation and retail. It is now generally agreed that separation of ownership among these four subsectors has a considerable potential to promote competition. Many electricity reform programmes have initially targeted the generation subsector because it can more easily be separated from the rest of the network. Yet while enhancing competition in generation could proBox VI.LEASING AND CONCESSIONARY CONTRACTS IN WEST AFRICA: THE CASE OF COTE DIVOIRESeveral developing countries have promoted public-private partnerships in the electricity sector through leasing and concessionary contracts. Under leasing contracts (affermage), the Government leases utility assets to a private company for a period usually ranging from to years. Under this arrangement, the private company is responsible for operation and management, and operating costs (and profits) are covered by tariffs paid by consumers. Leasing contracts may be awarded by tendering or through bilateral negotiation with a selected operator. Under a concessionary contract (concession), the private company is responsible for operating, maintaining, financing and improving installations, including investments in fixed assets, which are amortized during the long period of the concession (usually -years). In both cases, the private company is required to return all assets to the State at the end of the contract.This model of electricity privatization is particularly popular in West African countries, such as Cote dIvoire, Gabon, Guinea and Mali.a Building on the success of an earlier private concession to provide water and sewerage to urban areas,b Cote dIvoire was one of the pioneers with respect to private management of electricity utilities in the developing world. In early , the Government decided to allow private sector participation in the management of the State-owned electricity company, Energie Electrique de Cote dIvoire (EECI). By then, EECI was virtually bankrupt and thus unable to invest in the expansion of services, following years of mounting losses and debts due to inefficient management, non-payment of bills, distribution losses and pilferage. The main aims of the Government were therefore to improve operational efficiency and to attract the substantial private investment needed to upgrade the network.Later in the same year, a -year lease to run the countrys vertically integrated electricity monopoly was granted to a newly created private company, Compagnie Ivoirienne dElectricite (CIE), owned by two major French utility companies.c CIE became responsible for operating and maintaining all generation, transmission and distribution facilities, as well as supplying electricity to final customers, including billing and repairs. State-owned EECI, however, retained ownership of all the assets and supervised CIE activities. In addition, the Government was responsible for investments in new fixed assets.Private management has improved operational efficiency, restored financial credibility and produced welfare benefits to consumers. Operational efficiency increased during the first half of the s, mainly as a result of various organizational innovations.d Productivity gains have been closely associated with several cost reduction measures that allowed CIE to generate a net profit after only two years of operation, compared with the annual losses of EECI for every year during the s.e While there was a small reduction (. per cent) in employment between and , achieved primarily through voluntary separations, there is evidence that the remaining labour force has also benefited from private management.f Other benefits included better customer service, more effective repairs and maintenance, and a reduction in both distribution losses and power outages from hours a year per customer in to hours in .g By , the customer base had increased by per cent and there had been a significant expansion of rural electrification.hFurthermore, most of the efficiency gains have been passed on to consumers through a significant tariff decrease, in real terms, despite the existence of a verticallyUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY integrated private monopoly and the absence of an effective regulatory machinery. This outcome is sometimes used to question the argument that efficient regulation and increased competition are essential for dealing with monopoly power.i It is also suggested, however, that the private contractor was determined to use this experience as a means of promoting similar arrangements elsewhere in Africa.j In any case, the Cote dIvoire experience does not rule out the possibility that even larger efficiency improvements and consumer benefits could be achieved if there were competition in and effective regulation of the industry.The case of Cote dIvoire shows that there are also problems with the leasing model of electricity privatization in developing countries.k First of all, the boundary between maintenance works (travaux dentretien) and replacement expenditures (travaux de renouvellement) is not always clear. The latter includes expenditure on replacement of equipment and machinery that can be depreciated during the period of the contract or that are required to maintain the operational performance of the system. Disputes can arise because leasing contracts do not always specify if such investment falls under the responsibility of the State or of the private operator. In addition, general budgetary constraints and, in particular, the difficulty of the State-owned EECI to fulfil its investment responsibilities have led to periodic modifications (avenants) in the original contract with CIE. These modifications have become a central feature of the Cote dIvoire model of electricity reform. CIE has thus carried out many replacement expenditures on behalf of the State and, as a result, CIE has become responsible for three quarters of ongoing investment in the State-owned electricity assets.EECI has also failed to carry out its supervisory role of the industry for various managerial, technical and financial reasons.l As a result, EECIs supervisory responsibilities l were shifted to several other State institutions, whose overlapping roles further complicated the regulation of the electricity sector. These problems led to an institutional overhaul of the sector in . This involved the close-down of EECI and the creation of three new institutions to oversee the whole sector: (a) a State holding company (Societe de Gestion du Patrimoine de lElectricite (SOGEPE)) to manage State assets and oversee financial flows; (b) an independent operator (Societe dOperation Ivoirienne dElectricite (SOPIE) to monitor all new public works in the sector (such as IPPs, transmission lines and rural electrification); and (c) an autonomous electricity regulatory body (Autorite Nationale de Regulation du Secteur de lElectricite (ANARE)) to deal with leasing contracts, dispute resolution and the protection of consumers interests.The creation of ANARE is particularly important because regulation by contract alone is usually complicated by the fact that not all potential issues of conflict can be foreseen and thus included in the contract. The existence of an independent, sectorspecific regulatory agency is thus essential for resolving such disputes. Problems with the conflicting roles of EECI have also helped to highlight the importance of separating the States regulatory functions from its ownership and policy responsibilities. It is worth also stressing that the creation of SOPIE is partly aimed at the vertical unbundling of the sector after the CEI concession ends in . Like many other countries, Cote dIvoire is moving towards the separation of the natural monopoly from the potentially competitive segments of the electricity industry with an ultimate objective of introducing competition in the sector. While there are obstacles to the introduction of competition in such a relatively small market,m private management should be seen as a step towards greater private sector participation in electricity provision.Plane, loc. cit., p. . Strong, loc. cit.Strong, loc. cit., also notes that, while most of the EECI staff were transferred to CIE, the fact that several senior EECI managers were not, created conflicts of interest and tension between the two companies.Box VI. (continued)duce some benefits on its own, such benefits are likely to be increased significantly if reform of the generation subsector is accompanied by market liberalization and private sector involvement in distribution and eventually in retailing. For example, franchising and licensing arrangements can be set up so that a dominant private distribution company runs the network but is obliged to lease the use of it to competing retailers.Such competition can play a crucial role in enhancing efficiency and reducing costs, as well as in ensuring that consumers share its benefits. Market liberalization involves not only the introduction of competition with respect to supplying customers in any market segment of the industry, but also the ability of end-users to choose an electricity retail company. This can act as an effective bargaining tool for consumers even if they choose not to exercise it, because indirect effects on prices, product diversity and service conditions are thought to be potentially significant.Regulation of the electricity industryAt the same time, given that there are inherent structural features in segments of the electricity industry that are inclined towards market concentration and price discrimination, effective regulation is required to address monopoly power and other market failures in these segments. While it is increasingly recognized that enhancing competition and market liberalization can help to reduce the need for utility regulation in general, industries such as electricity, gas and water contain natural monopoly segments for which the benefits of regulation potentially outweigh its costs. Effective regulatory mechanisms are thus essential for dealing with monopoly power and price discrimination.With regard to price discrimination, there has been a shift away from rateof-return regulation towards the adoption of price-cap regulation. As discussed earlier, rate-of-return regulation can promote investment but provides little incentive for improving operational efficiency, as costs arising from inefficient operation can often be passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. This helps to explain, for example, why performance assessments of American electricity utilities usually find little significant difference in efficiency between private utilities and public utilities that operate under rate-of-return regulation. Moreover, attempts to liberalize wholesale generation prices while maintaining rigid control of retail electricity prices have also proved problematic, as the recent experience with electricity reform in California has shown (see box VI.).An increasingly used alternative to rate-of-return regulation relies on the establishment of price caps or ceilings. These are usually set by an industry regulator according to a RPI minus X formula, where RPI refers to the retail price index and X is a measure of the reduction in costs that the company is expected to achieve within the period between two price reviews (the regulatory lag). For electricity utilities, the price-cap system has the benefit of providing economic incentives to innovate and reduce costs, as the company can keep any profits derived from improved efficiency during the regulatory lag. However, if costs rise, particularly at the beginning of the regulatory lag, the companys profits can fall significantly because it will be unable to raise prices until the next price review. Price caps can thus increase the risks faced by privatized utilities and may even reduce investment.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY For most of the last century, the bulk of Californias electricity sector was owned and operated by three private, vertically integrated monopolies: Pacific Gas and Electric (PGE), Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDGE).a Their costs, prices and rates of return were regulated at the State and federal levels by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), respectively. Although services were very reliable, Californias average electricity rates became among the highest in the united_states of America during the s.Electricity reform in the State followed pressure from industrial consumers in the mids to reduce electricity prices. The reform programme was shaped by a restructuring law (Assembly Bill ), which came into force in April and whose major provisions included:b(a) Competition in generation: the three incumbent private utilities were encouraged (and,in some cases, obliged) to sell their generating capacity in order to enhance competition. Forty per cent of the States generation capacity is now controlled by other companies, most of which are part of major multinational energy groupsc;(b) Creation of a wholesale market: two non-profit market institutions were set up: the California Power Exchange (PX), a wholesale market in which electricity was traded on a forward basis; and the California Independent System Operator (ISO), responsible for the operation of the high-voltage transmission network owned by the three major utilities.d The three incumbent utilities were obliged by the new law to place all output from their own generation plants into the PX market, and also to purchase all electricity required for delivery to their customers from the same market;(c) Open access to networks: the incumbent utilities were also obliged to provide non-discriminatory access to their transmission and distribution networks to independent power producers, energy traders and competing electricity service providers (ESPs);(d) Consumer choice: all retail customers were free to choose any ESP operating in their area, or to continue to receive the default service from the incumbent utility at regulated prices. It was expected that most retail customers would gradually switch from incumbent utilities to the ESPs;(e) Retail price freeze: retail electricity tariffs were frozen (until March ) at their levels so that the three incumbent utilities could recover their stranded costs.e In addition, the price ceiling for residential customers and small businesses was frozen for up to four years at per cent less (in nominal terms) than the retail tariffs in place in . It was assumed that, because of enhanced competition in generation, electricity wholesale prices would fall below regulated retail prices so that the difference between the two would help pay for the utilities stranded costs. The tariff freeze would cease if such stranded costs were recovered in less than four years, so that retail prices charged by the utilities could fall (sic) in line with lower generation prices. It was never envisaged that generation prices might rise after the reforms were in place.CALIFORNIAS ELECTRICITY REFORM: CHRONICLE OF A DEATH FORETOLDIt soon became apparent, however, that few ESPs could compete with the incumbent utilities, particularly in the residential and small business markets. Since these customers were receiving the automatic per cent bill reduction, very few were interested in experimenting with new ESPs. Of some ESPs that had originally entered the market, only a handful survived. By September , only per cent of all consumers, accounting for per cent of total demand, had switched to the new ESPs.f This not only frustrated efforts f to enhance retail competition, but would have become a great burden on the three incumbent utilities if prices in the wholesale markets had risen. Since the three utilities had been forced by law to sell a significant part of their generation capacity, they became dependent on the PX market to cover any shortfall in the total electricity required to supply their final customers. Because those consumers did not migrate to ESPs as expected, the incumbent utilities service obligation was much higher than expected.Joskow, loc. cit.Between January and August , average monthly electricity prices at the PX market roseBox VI.from $ per megawatt hour (MWh) to over $ per MWh.g It is estimated that average g prices were times higher than in and that, even during the cooler, lower-usage first four months of , average wholesale prices were times higher than in and .h Part of the problem arose from demand and supply imbalances.i Californias robust economic growth h during the second half of the s caused electricity demand in the State to rise much faster i than had been anticipated. The excess generation (and transmission) capacity that existed in the early s had gradually disappeared by the end of the decade, as practically no new capacity was added to the system during the second half of the decade.j jSince the rising wholesale prices could not be passed on to consumers, there was no incentive for demand to respond to these developments in the supply side. Faced with artificially low prices, consumers continued to use increasing amounts of electricity and, since there was little spare generation and transmission capacity in the system, energy rationing soon followed. Frequent blackouts in -affected not only residential and small business consumers but also large industrial and commercial consumers, including many energy-intensive technology firms in Silicon Valley. Power to PGE consumers was cut offSince retail prices were frozen for a four-year transition period, the two largest incumbent utilities (PGE and SCE) were able to collect from consumers a decreasing proportion of the increasing price they had to pay to purchase electricity from the PX market.l Both companies were declared insolvent in early .m Given the utilities increasing inability to pay for their purchases of electricity, most of the multinational energy groups that had come to dominate Californias generation subsector stopped selling power to them. From January , a public agency had to use State funds to buy electricity on their behalf in order to avoid extensive blackouts.n The PX market closed in the following month owing to lack of trading and filed for bankruptcy in March . Partly as a result of the State intervention to purchase power on m behalf of the utilities, retail prices were allowed to rise by -per cent in mid-.There were increasing moves to strengthen regulation of the sector, in particular to counteract potential price manipulation by the new independent generation owners and energy traders. The serious capacity constraints had allowed these companies to increase prices without engaging in collusion. For example, several leading independent producers and energy traders in California have acknowledged some round-trip trading in the States PX market.o Such fake energy trading artificially inflates trading volumes and revo enues, and could also raise electricity prices by artificially inflating demand. It has been argued that such activities could have been avoided if there had been effective regulation of the market.p FERC had been warned of questionable trading practices as early as mid but was slow to react. FERC, in turn, had expected CPUC to deal with many of the causes of the electricity crisis but State authorities took too long to respond and commitp ted costly errors in the process.q Californias electricity reform was thus doomed not onlyF. P. Sioshansi, Californias dysfunctional electricity market: policy lessons on market restructuring, Energy Policy, vol. (), pp. -.Weinstein and Hall, op. cit.; Joskow, loc. cit.Other factors include the reduction of exports from neighbouring States, rising prices for natural gas and market power problems.The reasons for this included uncertainty over the new rules introduced by the reform law and strict environmental regulations that added to the cost of generation from non-renewable sources. The first new plants did not come on-stream until the summer of .Sioshansi, loc. cit., p. . Although heavily regulated systems in the united_states generally aim to have a reserve capacity close to per cent in order to maintain supply during extraordinary circumstances, an excess capacity of about per cent is considered optimal for operational purposes (Weinstein and Hall, op. cit., p. ).By the end of , they had collected US$ billion less from consumer tariffs than they had to pay for purchasing power from the PX market (Sioshansi, loc. cit., p. ).PGE declared bankruptcy in April .by inadequate regulatory mechanisms but also by the overlapping (and even conflicting) roles of federal and State regulatory agencies.One of the main lessons is that an effective regulatory machinery is essential for dealing with monopoly/oligopoly power and other market failures. At the operational level, the California case also shows that electricity wholesale markets are likely to perform more satisfactorily in an environment of surplus generation capacitytogether with many competing sellers, easy market entry and adequate transmission networksthat will avoid price manipulation and the detrimental exercise of market power. Another lesson is that competitive electricity markets are unlikely to perform satisfactorily if there is no mechanism that ensures that consumer demand responds to wholesale market prices. As a recent analysis of this experiment concludes, the real surprise should not be that Californias electricity reform failed but that the market, as it was designed, took two years to self-destruct.rFinancial Times, May . Round-trip trading refers to cases in which two or more traders buy and sell energy among themselves for the same price and at the same time. Although illegal in securities markets, round-trip trading was not prohibited in the loosely regulated PX wholesale market.F. P. Sioshansi, Californias electricity market: finally turning the corner?, Energy Policy, vol. (), pp. -; Weinstein and Hall, op. cit.Box VI. (continued)UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY It is therefore worth taking a closer look at real-world examples of electricity reform in order to find out how the complex issues raised in the present section have been addressed and to assess the major outcomes of such reforms. The next two sections will thus focus on the relatively long experience of radical electricity reform in two countriesChile and great_britain. The choice of countries was determined not only by their diversity and extensive approach to reform of their electricity sector, but also by the length of time that has elapsed since privatization and liberalization. Most countries that privatized and reformed their electricity industry have done so too recently to allow a detailed assessment of the results. The three main aims of the following case studies are: (a) to determine whether privatization has improved operational efficiency and quality of services; (b) to assess the impacts of increased competition (and regulation) on electricity prices and consumer welfare; and (c) to identify any lessons for other countries.Chile was one of the first countries in the world to initiate radical reform of the electricity sector and many features of its pioneering model were introduced in several other Latin American countriessuch as Argentina, Peru, Bolivia and Colombiathroughout the s. Electricity privatization and liberalization in Chile date back to the early s and took place in the context of a broader utility privatization programme in the country. Before the sector was privatized during the s, particular efforts were made to develop a regulatory framework, defined by a law that eliminated differentiated treatment for State-owned and private electricity suppliers, and distinguished separate segments of the industry: generation, transmission and distribution/final delivery.Restructuring of the sectorThe countrys two major State-owned electricity utilities (Endesa and Chilectra) were broken up and privatized, mostly during the s. In , Endesa was divided into two separate generating companies (Endesa and Colbun), a transmission company (Transelec) and six distribution companies. Chilectra also split generation from distribution by creating a generation company and two distribution ones. Most of the shares in these companiesas well as those in several separate electricity utilities in the far northern region of the countrywere sold to private investors (both institutional and small shareholders) and employees between and . A second round of privatization in included the sale of shares in Colbun ( per cent) and Edelnor ( per cent), a major electricity utility serving the far northern region. In addition, between and , Spains leading electricity utility (also called Endesa) acquired almost two thirds of Enersisa leading local holding company that owned a quarter of Chilean Endesaand eventually took over Chilean Endesa itself.There are two major regional networks in the country: Sistema Interconectado Central (SIC) and Sistema Interconectado del Norte Grande (SING). These two networks are not connected to each other owing to the long distance between them, extending over a thinly populated desert. SIC is by far the biggest network,covering an area , kilometres long and currently accounting for over three quarters of the countrys consumption (in terms of peak demand), mostly from hydroelectric sources. An expansion of gas-fired generation capacity, however, is planned for the SIC area, where a recent drought provoked major power shortages. Endesa and its subsidiaries play a dominant role in generation, transmission and distribution in much of the SIC area.The much smaller generation capacity of SING used to be based on coalfuelled power stations but, following the introduction of an economic protocol for natural gas imports from Argentina, it now relies primarily on combinedcycle gas power stations. The cost of generating electricity in gas-fired combined-cycle plants has decreased over the past decade, owing to both reduced investment costs and improved efficiency for combined-cycle gas technology. Despite the rapid process of substitution from coal to gas, it is estimated that overinvestment in combined-cycle gas turbine power stations has led to a current overcapacity of about per cent in the SING area, which is dominated by two generators (Electroandina and Edelnor).Regulation and promotion of competitionAlthough there are only a few leading generation companies in each of these two regional networks, the regulatory framework encourages competition in the generation subsector. Each network has a wholesale pool coordinated by an Economic Load Dispatch Centre (CDEC), whose management tends to be dominated by the largest generation companies. These companies are allowed to sell any amount of power (up to their installed capacity) directly to large customers, defined as users with a peak demand above megawatts. The fact that these large consumers negotiate their tariffs directly with competing generation companies provides an incentive to generators to reduce costs in order to increase their share of the large consumer market. When generation companies are unable to fulfil their contractual obligations with large consumers from their own power plants, they are required to purchase shortfalls from the wholesale pool at market prices.Generation companies are paid the wholesale pool price for energy, when dispatched (that is to say, delivered), not the actual cost of generation. This wholesale pool price or spot price is based on the variable operating cost of the most expensive generating plant in each regional network. Plants are selected for dispatch by the CDEC on the basis of the variable costs posted with the CDEC. Because the price received by a given plant is not related to its posted price, there are no incentives to engage in price manipulation, assuming that there are enough generation companies to ensure effective competition in the pool market. This innovative concept of a private wholesale electricity pool was first introduced in Chile, rather than in great_britain as is often believed. Furthermore, spot prices in the original pool in England and Wales were determined on the basis of price offers made by generating firms which did not necessarily correspond to their variable costsand were thus open to price manipulation (see the British case study below).While large consumers are able to purchase energy directly from generators at freely negotiated prices, the law also entrusted the National Energy Commission (CNE)a regulatory agency linked to the Ministry of theUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Economyto regulate prices for small residential and business consumers. This regulated price has two components: node prices (precios de nudo) and distribution tariffs (tarifas de distribucion). Both components are reviewed by CNEthe former every six months and the latter every four yearswith a view to covering the operating costs of an efficient company and providing a per cent annual real rate of return on the replacement value of assets. The estimated replacement value of assets, as well as the operating costs of a model efficient company, is calculated as a weighted average of estimates made by CNE and industry representatives, with the weight of the CNE estimate accounting for two thirds of the average.Besides price-based regulation, the unbundling of the sector was accompanied by several rules on private sector activity in each subsector. Privately owned transmission companies must provide free access to their network to all generation companies. They can also deliver electricity from generation companies directly to large customers or to distribution companies. Distribution companies operate under concession and are also obliged to provide non-discriminatory access to their networks to third-party (retail) competitors. They can purchase electricity for sale to final customers through bilateral contracts with generators or spot market purchases. Generation and distribution companies can thus compete with each other to supply large consumers.The Chilean model of electricity reform and regulation pioneered (or developed) at least three innovative features, which were subsequently introduced in several other countries. First, the model separated three segments of the industry for regulatory or competition purposes: generation, transmission and distribution/final delivery. Second, it created a (cost-based) wholesale power pool with a view to using market mechanisms for setting energy generation prices. Third, the model allowed large consumers to purchase power directly from generation and distribution companies. This was aimed not only at enhancing competition in different market segments, including the large consumer market, but also at encouraging such companies to improve efficiency and reduce costs in order to increase their market share.In addition, it is sometimes argued that the Chilean model of electricity regulation has the advantage of including explicit mechanisms for settling disputes between regulatory agencies and the privatized utilities, with the judiciary as the final arbiter. There are, however, considerable costs in respect of relying on the courts to resolve disputes, particularly disputes that can be otherwise tackled by transparent and effective regulatory mechanisms. Finally, another innovation of the Chilean model of utility reform is that private concession contracts that mandate access to rural electricity and telephone services are awarded to the lowest bidders for public subsidies, so that significant rural expansion can be achieved by minimizing subsidies.An assessment of the reformFollowing almost two decades of gradual market reform, public-private interaction in the Chilean electricity industry has produced many benefits in terms of increased operational efficiency, lower prices and improved services. The unbundling of the sector has been accompanied, however, by some cases of market concentration and lack of competition. These problems should be tackled by more effective regulatory mechanisms and measures to enhance competition in both the generation and retailing subsectors.Operational efficiency, pricing and service expansionPrivate sector involvement in electricity provision has been responsible for significant improvements in operational efficiency. For example, electricity generation per employee increased by about two thirds on average between the late s and , while the number of consumers per employee rose from less than to almost during the same period. In addition, the largest distribution company cut energy losses (mainly due to leakages and pilferage) in its network from to per cent between and .Generation prices dropped by per cent between and , but this was owing primarily to the growing use of natural gas imported from Argentina and cannot be attributed directly to electricity privatization. While consumers have generally benefited from increased service coverage, improved service quality and lower retail prices, it is sometimes argued that opportunities for cross-shareholding and market concentration (see below) may have hindered the conversion of those efficiency improvements into even lower prices. For example, despite the large reductions in distribution losses and the per cent fall in generation prices, retail electricity prices fell by less than per cent between and .Electricity privatization was also responsible for a considerable increase in investment and in access to services. Installed generation capacity rose by per cent between and , and electricity consumption grew by an average of almost per cent a year during the same period. There is also strong evidence that the expansion of private electricity services has particularly benefited lower income groups in both urban and rural areas. As table VI. shows, between and , the proportion of national households in the lowest income per capita decile without access to an electricity network fell from almost to per cent, whereas the proportion of households without access in the second lowest decileTable VI..SHARE OF CHILEAN HOUSEHOLDS WITHOUT ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY AND TELEPHONE SERVICES, AND PercentageDecileHouseholds without electricityHouseholds without telephoneHighest Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Lowest. . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . .UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY dropped from to per cent. In addition, electricity coverage in rural areas increased from to per cent between and .Regulatory problems and market concentrationIt is generally agreed that the increased private sector investment required to achieve the necessary increase in generation capacity to match the countrys electricity needs was made possible only by, inter alia, macroeconomic stability and a stable legislative and regulatory environment that ensured adequate return on investment. On the other hand, there is some dispute whether the Chilean electricity regulator is sufficiently large and knowledgeable to regulate the sector effectively. It is often noted, for example, that the regulators limited information and technical capacity vis-a-vis the companies being regulated has prevented efficiency gains being fully passed on to consumers through price cuts. While regulators everywhere are unlikely to know as much as the firm about the latters microeconomic conditionsusually referred to as the problem of asymmetric informationregulatory agencies in many developing countries tend to be even more ill-prepared than their counterparts in developed countries to discuss complex technical and financial matters with powerful private utility companies with the best expertise in the field, and often a good deal of political influence. Asymmetric information has been particularly evident in recent reviews of regulated prices in Chile, as regulatory agencies have had difficulties in collecting relevant cost data from the privatized utility companies. As a result, price-setting has become complex and crisis-prone.Conflicts and disputes between regulatory agencies and regulated companies also arise from the overlap of institutional responsibilities, none of which is fully independent from the Government. Some of these regulatory problems were highlighted during the drought that led to the first compulsory electricity rationing since privatization. Since the prevailing law could not determine whether rationed consumers were entitled to compensation, the Government introduced a by-law obliging the private companies to maintain electricity supply in the event of future droughts. While a regulatory framework established by a primary law (such as the above-mentioned law) may help to reduce the scope for regulatory opportunism, it may also lead to an inflexible regulatory regime and to a significant number of costly legal disputes.Another potential difficulty with the Chilean model of electricity reform is that it does not forbid cross-ownership of generation, transmission and distribution companies. In the SIC system, for example, the three top firms account for the bulk of generating capacity, and Endesa (together with its affiliates) alone controls per cent of this capacity. Enersis, the holding company that has a controlling stake in Endesa, is the owner of the largest distribution company in the SIC area. Moreover, as noted above, both Enersis and Chilean Endesa have been taken over by Spanish Endesa, which intended to make these acquisitions a central platform for its expansion in latin_america. In addition, Chilean Endesa also owns the SIC transmission network through its ownership of Transelec, as well as the water rights on the most attractive future hydroelectricity projects in the country. This is important because, despite the growing use of natural gas in generation, hydroelectric power is still the most costeffective generation option and accounts for an overwhelming share of generation capacity in the SIC area.Market concentration has acted as a powerful barrier to entry and thus hindered the development of more competitive generation and distribution markets. In addition, information asymmetries in the operation of CDECs appear to have also been used to limit competition in generation and wholesale trade. Although both CDECs became operationally independent (from the leading generators) in , their board of directors is composed of representatives of leading generation and transmission companies. It is argued that these boards have both the ability and the incentive to interpret data in favour of the large generation companies, which are able to use their superior access to market information, and to the market itself, to the detriment of smaller competitors.These regulatory weaknesses in the Chilean model show that the existence of an independent regulatory agency is essential not only to promote competition and deal with monopoly power, but also to resolve disputes associated with electricity privatization. Many developing countries may lack the capacity to regulate the industry effectively, as was also shown in the case of Cote dIvoire (see box VI.). Such constraints need to be addressed before efforts to increase private sector provision of electricity services are implemented in countries with weak institutional and governance structures and limited human resource capabilities.Another lesson from the Chilean experience is that the complete vertical unbundling of the sectorincluding measures to prevent extensive cross-shareholding among the four different subsectors of the industryis crucial to ensuring that the benefits of privatization, including improved efficiency and lower tariffs, are enjoyed by consumers. Last but by no means least, electricity privatization should be accompanied by effective competition in both generation and retail. As will be seen in the British case study, market liberalization helps not only to maximize the benefits reaped by consumers but also to reduce the need for price regulation in the first place.The restructuring of the electricity industry in great_britain during the late s and early s was one of the earliest, largest and most radical transformations ever experienced by such an industry. Electricity privatization took place in the broader context of utility reform and redesign of the States role in the economy during the s and s. Prior to the transfer of both management and ownership of the industry to the private sector in , the electricity industry in England and Wales had been a classic case of a vertically integrated State monopoly. It consisted of a Central Electricity Generation Board (CEGB) that generated and transmitted all electricity and Area Boards responsible for distribution and delivery to final customers in designated geographical areas. In Scotland, the industry was even more vertically integrated in that two State-owned monopolies were responsible for all activitiesfrom generation to retailingin their respective geographical areas.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Restructuring of the sectorThe industry was restructured and initially broken up into three different segmentsgeneration, transmission and distribution/final delivery to customersin preparation for privatization, in . The new industry structure emerged in March , and sales of shares to private investors began to take place later that year. The non-nuclear generation assets of the CEGB in England and Wales were split into two separate companies (National Power and Powergen). All the nuclear power stations in England and Wales, and those in Scotland, were placed in two new State-owned companies, Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, respectively. Their modern nuclear reactors, however, were subsequently amalgamated into a new holding company (British Energy), which was also privatized in mid-. The national transmission grid of the former CEGB in England and Wales was hived off to a newly created transmission company (National Grid), which was initially fully owned and operated by newly privatized regional electricity companies (RECs).With regard to distribution and retail in England and Wales, the structure of the RECs remained largely unchanged from that of the previously Stateowned Area Boards. As a result, they continued to have responsibility for both electricity distribution and delivery to customers in their authorized geographical areas. The RECs were the first privatized electricity companies to be floated in the stock exchange, in December , although the Government retained a golden sharemainly in order to block mergers or takeovers until March . Later in that year, the link between distribution and transmission was severed as the RECs demerged their shareholdings in the National Grid, which was also floated in the stock exchange.Regulation and promotion of competitionOne of the major innovations of the British model of utility reform was the creation of ad hoc independent regulators for each utility industry. Prior to the establishment of the two regulatory agencies for the telecommunications and gas sectors in great_britain in the mid-s, the main institutional model of utility regulation was provided by the united_states experience with multisectoral public utility commissions, such as the California Public Utilities Commission (see box VI.). Besides their focus on rate-of-return regulation, major problems with such commissions include a lack of expertise about specific utility sectors and an accumulation of too much economic decision-making power, given that in many cases such commissions are responsible for several or all utility sectors.An independent regulatory agency can avoid these problems and still act as a safeguard against both regulatory failure and regulatory capture by either political authorities or the regulated industry. Electricity reform in great_britain was thus accompanied by the establishment of an Office of Electricity Regulation, in . Given the increasing convergence of the electricity and gas industries during the s, this office merged with the gas industry regulator to form the Office of Gas and Electricity Market Regulation (Ofgem), in . The broad goals of Ofgem are (a) to enhance operational efficiency, (b) to promote competition and (c) to protect consumer interest from monopoly power, notably through price-based regulation. However, it makes use of different instruments to deal with the four different segments of the electricity industry.Generation and transmissionSince it was generally assumed that competition would develop most quickly in the generation subsector, there was no formal price-based regulation of this subsector. Ofgem has, however, been able to exert pressure on the generation companies to sell off some generating capacity in order to enhance competition. It can also refer (or threaten to refer) disputes involving potential monopoly behaviour or pricing to a Competition Commission. At the same time, the privatized distribution companies (RECs) have been allowed to acquire generation assets in order to introduce more competition in generation. Allowing individual RECs to produce their own electric power led to a surge in REC investment in independent power projects (IPPs), although a regulatory rule allows them to meet only up to per cent of their demand from such IPPs.The only formal restrictions placed on National Power and Powergen after privatization was that they had to sell all their electricity to a national wholesale electricity pool. Independent power producers could also sell their output through the electricity pool if they chose to do so. It soon became apparent, however, that the operation of this market lacked effective competition to the dominance of the two generation companies. There was particular concern about the possibility that these two companies were behaving as a duopoly and about their ability to exploit their dominant position to manipulate pool prices. Since both companies were once part of the same State monopoly, they were likely to have a good knowledge of each others cost structures. Possible price manipulation was associated with the facts that pool prices fluctuated sharply and that prices occasionally rose even during times of low demand.Following many reviews of pool prices, Ofgem concluded that the generators could raise prices above marginal costs in several ways, inter alia, by declaring some plant unavailable and thus artificially reducing supply relative to demand. In , Ofgem launched an industry-wide review of the trading arrangements and, partly as a result, new electricity trading arrangements (NETA) were introduced in March to replace the pool. Under NETA, bulk electricity is traded between generation companies and electricity providers through bilateral contracts and on power exchanges, where buyers and sellers come together to trade different energy contracts. One of the key features of NETA is that the demand side is fully incorporated into the new arrangements to balance output with consumption.While it was assumed that competition would quickly develop in generation, it was also generally agreed that transmission (as well as distribution) contained natural monopoly characteristics that required regulation, including price controls. For this reason, the national transmission network operated by National Grid has been subject to price caps, along the lines of the RPI minus X formula. At the outset of privatization, the productivity factor (X) was set at zero, that is to say, there were no expected efficiency improvements until the following price review. The two following reviews, however, requested increasing productivity gains by setting tougher price caps for the transmission sector: RPI-for -and RPI-for -.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Distribution and retailSimilarly, the distribution businesses of the RECs are subject to indefinite price controls. Their price cap formula (RPI-X+Y), however, was originally different from the transmission one in that a Y factor was incorporated with the aim of providing the industry with sufficient cash flow to meet projected capital expenditure and operating costs. During the first four-year regulatory cycle, their X factor was also set at zero, whereas their Y factor ranged from zero to +., depending on the company. Partly because of these generous price caps, the distribution businesses of RECs recorded growth in profits that averaged up to per cent a year during the first years of privatization. As a result, the first price review in compelled the RECs to reduce their distribution prices by between and per cent in -and change their price-cap formula to the standard RPI-X, with the X productivity factor set at (RPI-) for the four-year period until .While all RECs were originally responsible for both distribution (for which they acted as regional monopolies) and retailing activities, subsequent legislation embodied in the Utilities Act has compelled them to separate their regional monopoly distribution and retail businesses into distinct companies. The Utilities Act also obliges all distribution network operators to facilitate competition, to develop and maintain a coordinated and cost-effective system of distribution and to be non-discriminatory in all practices. All British distribution companies must thus offer non-discriminatory access to competing retailing firms, under the same terms and conditions applied to their own retailing operations.Competing retailers are thus entitled to supply both household and industrial customers in any designated area through another companys distribution networks and pay a non-discriminatory fee to the distribution company for the use of the system. The regulators main priorities for the retail sector are to promote competition, ensure service quality and protect consumer interests, although Ofgem can also exert pressure on retailing prices. The retailing activities of dominant regional companies (that is to say, RECs in their original geographical areas) are subject to price controls, although they were originally supposed to have different X productivity factors and time lags than those for distribution and transmission. Following the introduction of full competition in the retailing market in (see below), these price controls became more of a safety net, given that there are generally lower prices available in the market.The introduction of competition was phased in over eight years because of the huge number of customers and the technical complexities involved. At the outset of privatization in , the first segment of the electricity market, covering about , large industrial and commercial consumers, was opened to competition. In , another segment of the market covering about , medium-sized consumers with a peak demand of more than kilowatts was also opened to competition. The last market segment covering the other million consumers, including small business and residential customers, with a peak demand below kilowatts was gradually opened up for competition between September and May .An assessment of the reformIn just over a decade, privatization and gradual market liberalization have drastically changed the structure and operation of the British electricity industry. Not only has the sector been dismembered into different generation, transmission, distribution and retailing segments, but barriers to entry into two of them (generation and retail) were virtually removed. The main question, therefore, is whether this transformation has also produced benefits with regard to enhancing competition, operational efficiency and service quality, as well as prices reductions.Competition in different market segmentsPrivate sector involvement has moved the industry away from three vertically integrated regional monopolies (one in England and Wales and two in Scotland) to a market consisting of many competing generating companies. There are currently over companies regarded as major electricity producers in great_britain, compared to seven State-owned ones in . This reduction in horizontal concentration has resulted in greater competition in the market and led to a significant reduction in the market shares held by the largest generators, particularly in England and Wales. Allowing individual RECs to produce part of their electricity has contributed to the expansion of IPPswhose preferred method of generation is based on more efficient and cost-effective combined-cycle gas turbinesand thus to greater competition in generation. As figure VI. shows, there has been a shift from relatively inefficient or costly coal and nuclear sources towards more cost-effective (and environmentally cleaner) natural gas-fired capacity. This increasing convergence between the electricity and gas industries is also highlighted by the fact that the privatized gas utility (formerly British GasFigure VI..SOURCES OF ELECTRICITY GENERATION IN THE united_kingdom, AND Coal GasNuclear OtherImportsPercentage of total source of electricityNote: Based on actual outputs in the respective fiscal years.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY and now called Centrica) has become a major player in the electricity-generation market. In addition, there has also been increasing foreign investment in both new power stations and the acquisition of existing capacity from National Power (now called Innogy) and Powergen. A leading (State-owned) French energy group Electricite de France (EdF), for example, has become a major player in the generation market with ownership of significant British capacity. These rapid changes in market conditions are illustrated by the recent takeovers of both Powergen and Innogy by two German utility conglomerates (EON and RheinischWestfalische Elektrizitatswerke (RWE), respectively).Transmission has remained the most concentrated industry segment, consisting of a monopoly in England and Wales and two regional monopolies in Scotland. The introduction of NETA, however, has resulted in the rapid development of a large and transparent wholesale market, similar to that in which other commodities are traded. Forwards, futures and spot markets are evolving in response to the requirements of participants and a number of power exchanges have been established. Participants, which include generators, aggregators, distributors and traders, now have much greater choice in respect of how, where and when to trade electricity.The high profitability of the distribution businesses of the RECs made them attractive targets for takeovers as soon as the Governments golden share ended in . An upsurge of proposed mergers and acquisitions in prompted the Government to intervene in order to prevent a growing vertical concentration, particularly between generation and distribution companies. Three of the countrys largest generation companies (Powergen and the two Scottish generators) subsequently took over three separate distribution companies in England and Wales. EdF of France, which owns significant generation capacity in England and Wales, has also taken over a distribution company.Privatization has encouraged a consolidation of the distribution segment in England and Wales, given the potential benefits of economies of scale, reduction of costs and increased operational efficiency. There are now distribution companies operating the authorized distribution areas of the original RECs in England and Wales, although these companies hold separate licences in respect of each area. Although further mergers are likely in the near future, Ofgem does not see this consolidation as a potential threat to consumer interests owing to the availability of effective price control mechanisms, as well as its ability to enforce the keeping of separate licences, in respect of each area, by the remaining companies, and to facilitate competition.Similarly, while the retailing activities of nine original RECs have been taken over by five major generating companies, effective regulation and the development of strong competition in the retailing market have prevented the use of local monopoly power in the original geographical areas of the RECs. The obligation to allow access to their regional distribution networks has ensured that competing retailersincluding other RECs outside their original geographical areashave made substantial inroads into what had originally been a captive local market for RECs. It can be argued that the concept of the regional electricity company as an exclusive regional monopoly was effectively abolished by the Utilities Act .Consolidation has also offered the remaining companies an opportunity to become more competitive as they intensify their search for new customers. There are now major retailing groups in England and Wales (see figure VI.),Figure VI..SHARE OF MAJOR COMPANIES IN THE RETAIL ELECTRICITY MARKET IN ENGLAND AND WALES, Others per centInnogy per centCentrica per centAmerican Electric Power (AEP)Powergen per centElectricite de France (EdF) per centScottishPower per centScottish and Southern Energy (SSE) per cent formed from the previous REC retail businesses through takeovers or mergers. Although most of them are part of powerful utility groups, the lack of a dominant national retailer is reflected by the well-balanced distribution of the national market. Besides the major English (Powergen and Innogy) and Scottish (Scottish and Southern Energy (SSE) and ScottishPower) generation companies, Centrica (formerly British Gas), and leading European (EdF) and American (TXU and American Electric Power (AEP)) utility groups, have become important electricity retailers. Conversely, the retail businesses of the ex-RECs have become major players in the gas market. The increasing convergence of electricity and gas has thus increased competition and consumer choice in both markets.Operational efficiencyThe operational efficiency of the British electricity industry has improved markedly since privatization. That most efficiency gains were achieved during the first years after privatization is an indication of how inefficient the industry was under State ownership. The most visible productivity gains were probably associated with labour reductions. As table VI. shows, employment in the privatized companies in England and Wales was cut almost by half in the first five years following privatization, during which electricity output, delivery and consumption rose significantly. The fact that Great Britains private electricity industry can be run with half of the people employed when it was State-owned has led to criticism that efficiency gains have been primarily achieved at the expense of its labour force. There is evidence, however, that remaining employees generally gain from privatization. For those that are laid off in the process, compensation, retraining schemes and social security mechanisms should be used and this has largely been the case in the British model.UTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY Table VI..EMPLOYMENT IN THE ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY IN ENGLAND AND WALES, -AND -Privatized companiesNational Power and Powergen National GridTotal, , ,, , ,Note: Fiscal year runs from April to March.Privatization has also led to other improvements in operating efficiency, such as more efficient use of equipment and reduced costs of fuel inputs. For example, during the first four years after privatization, National Power reduced its fuel costs per unit of electricity generated by no less than per cent, for various reasons, such as changing power plants fuel mix and improving fuel contracting. Other technical efficiency improvements have been associated with the growing use (and greater technical efficiency) of natural gas in electricity generation.Quality of serviceService quality has improved since privatization, partly as a result of increasing competition for customers. Retail competition and consumer choice, generally seen as unfeasible or uneconomic only years ago, have developed rapidly over the past few years, particularly since the liberalization of the retail market. An increasing number of customers have thus switched suppliers in order to obtain better-quality or cheaper services.In , years after competition had been introduced in the large commercial and industrial segment of the market, over per cent of these customers were being supplied by a company other than their local REC. Similarly, over two thirds of medium-sized consumers (with a peak demand of between and , kilowatts) switched to a non-local supplier between and . With regard to the largest market segment, despite its being opened for competition later than the telecommunications and gas sectors, the number of residential customers switching electricity providers has not only caught up with the figure for gas, but is much higher than that for telephones. During the first two years after the introduction of full competition in the residential market, about million residential customers (or per cent) switched to a non-local retailer at least once.Furthermore, a survey commissioned by Ofgem and conducted in September shows that lower-income groups have begun to close the gap with upperincome groups in terms of switching, although the switching rates for pensioners and rural dwellers are much lower. While lower prices are the main motive for switching retailers, better customer service and the ability to receive electricity and gas from the same company are also important reasons. Over per cent of customers who have switched now are served by a single company and about half of them have switched their gas supply to their electricity retailer. Generally speaking, there is a high degree of satisfaction with current retailers across different areas of England and Wales, with only per cent being dissatisfied.The opportunity to change electricity retailers has had a positive impact on the quality of services provided. One of the biggest advantages of electricity privatization and liberalization in great_britain is that they allow a degree of consumer choice that was impossible under public monopoly provision. There is now a degree of product differentiation in the electricity retail market, given the significant number of retailers in each region. Assuming that households would like to consume different types (or degrees of quality) of electricity services, these different consumer tastes can provide an important incentive for innovative services by private electricity retailers that did not exist under State-owned monopoly systems. The availability of information on different consumer tastes arising from private provision of electricity in a competitive market can thus lead to innovation aimed at introducing differentiated products (or services) into the market.PricingIt is generally agreed that privatization, regulation and market liberalization have had a beneficial effect on electricity prices over the past decade. The average price of electricity has declined since privatization, mainly as a result of increasing retail competition and effective price-cap regulation. The average annual household electricity bill dropped by per cent in real terms between April and April . Medium-sized and large industrial and commercial users have also enjoyed price falls since privatization. For example, between and , customers with a maximum demand of kilowatts experienced a drop of per cent (in real terms) in their average annual bill, whereas those with a peak demand between and , kilowatts experienced a real fall of almost per cent. Privatization and market liberalization have thus also contributed to improving the operational efficiency and competitiveness of other sectors of the British economy.Privatization and price-cap regulation have provided a strong incentive to increase operational efficiency and reduce costs, and thus increase profits within the price caps until the next price review. However, while it can be argued that the lower prices generated by price-cap regulation tend to benefit all consumers, changes within price structures can also be relatively more beneficial to specific groups of consumers with different consumption patterns. For example, a relative increase in the minimum basic tariff could harm consumers with lower levels of consumption, who often belong to low-income groups. Although it is possible for private companies to offer differentiated prices within the price caps, it is sometimes argued that profit maximization prevents them from being sensitive to the needs of vulnerable groups.A particularly sensitive socio-political issue is the link between private sector involvement and disconnections for non-payment, especially during the first years following privatization. Immediately after the privatization of British Gas in the mid-s, for example, disconnection rates for the non-payment of residential gas bills rose significantly. As a result, the regulator decided to intervene in order to prevent widespread disconnection, unless a prepayment meter had been offered as an alternative. Disconnection rates for electricity immediately after privatization were far lower than those for gas, and rates of prepayUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY ment are much higher. Moreover, the share of prepayment tends to be much higher for vulnerable and low-income groups (see table VI.).Since prepayment is the most expensive of the three methods of payment for the electricity retailing companies, as it involves frequent small cash payments, such companies have an incentive to reduce the cross-subsidy involved in charging a single price to all customers. Under State ownership, electricity prices included significant cross-subsidies, in that all customers paid the same price, with the result that high-cost consumers, such as, for instance, distant rural dwellers and prepaying consumers, were subsidized by low-cost ones. Economic pricing by private electricity companies tends to reflect these cost differences and thus to reduce or eliminate such cross-subsidies. There is evidence that, while all consumers have enjoyed lower prices for both electricity and gas as a result of price-cap regulation, prices tended to fall much faster for direct debit payers than for prepayment customers (see table VI.). Old age pensioners and disabled consumers appear to have gained less than the average household. This may be considered a socio-economic drawback of Great Britains electricity privatization.Table VI..METHODS OF PAYMENT FOR GAS AND ELECTRICITY IN THE united_kingdom IN THE MID-sPercentage in each household categoryHousehold categoryGasElectricityQuarterly billDirect debtPrepaymentQuarterly billDirect debtPrepaymentAll households PensionersOn disability benefit On income support Lowest income quintile Highest income quintileTable VI..MEAN GAINS FROM PRICE REBALANCING IN THE GAS AND ELECTRICITY INDUSTRIES SINCE PRIVATIZATION, In British poundsHousehold categoryElectricityGasAll householdsPensionersCustomers on disability benefit Customers on income support Prepayment customers Quarterly bill payersDirect debt payers. -. -.. -. -.. -. . -. -. -. .Price-cap regulation and economic pricing by privatized companies have therefore been criticized for their potentially detrimental effects on distributional equity, in particular in terms of the welfare of low-income and vulnerable consumers. It is further argued that the efficiency improvements arising from price-cap regulation in the gas and electricity industries have not been equitably distributed among major stakeholders, such as company shareholders, employees and, in particular, consumers. A consequence of the success of price-cap regulation and market competition in improving efficiency and reducing operating costs has also been that profits of the most efficient firms can diverge considerably from normal levels during regulatory lag.While such consequences of privatization may be troublesome from an equity perspective, State ownership and its associated inefficiencies and distortions would be a worse alternative. Stricter regulation of the industry has already gone some way towards addressing these problems and further refinement can be expected in the future. One of the main advantages of the British model is that it is flexible enough to respond to such problems without compromising the broadly beneficial shift towards greater economic efficiency in electricity provision.The case of Chile shows that it is feasible to privatize both the management and the ownership of the whole electricity sector in some developing countries. The benefits of greater private sector involvement can be increased with full market liberalization and enhanced competition in electricity provision. Nevertheless, as the case studies of public-private interaction in Asian and African developing countries also show, it may be preferable for some developing countries that are privatizing electricity to do so only partially. Private ownership of the generation subsector or private sector management of electricity utilities can thus be beneficial in terms of tapping private investments for infrastructural improvements and expansion, and providing incentives for private operators to improve performance and services. In any case, many problems with the Asian IPP and West African leasing models could be tackled by an effective regulatory machinery.The British model of electricity reform has been among the most advanced to be fully implemented anywhere the world. It is sometimes seen as an ultimate goal for electricity privatization, competition and market liberalization, although in many countries, only a gradual or even partial move towards that goal may be feasible. Its practical applicability to many developing countries, in particular, may be limited by a series of factors, including the small size of their electricity markets, weak institutional and governance systems, and their capacity for effective regulation of the sector. Regulatory constraints in many developing countriesnotably inadequate institutional and human resource capacitycan pose serious obstacles to the successful implementation of electricity reform.Several developing countries and those with economies in transition have used important features pioneered by the Chilean and British experiences as a policy guide in their own electricity reform, even though the features of their electricity markets may differ significantly, particularly from those existing in great_britain. Such differences affect features ranging from the quality andUTILITY REFORM: THE CASE OF ELECTRICITY coverage of electricity services to levels and distribution of income, as well as social security provision. Nonetheless, the Chilean and British experiences offer some lessons for other countries. The British model is particularly useful because of several innovative features, such as (a) widespread change in ownership and market structure, (b) separation of the transmission network from generators and distributors in order to ensure open access to the network, (c) price-based competition in segments of the industry that are not considered natural monopolies and (d) price-based regulation of naturally monopolistic transmission and distribution.Electricity privatization in both Chile and great_britain took place in the context of broader market liberalization, including a widespread utility reform programme. Political commitment can be crucial to the success of utility reform, particularly when unexpected problems arise during implementation, such as the lack of competition in the electricity-generation market and the emergence of abnormal profits by newly privatized generation and distribution companies. Such problems can usually be resolved by firm regulatory action undertaken to deal with monopoly practices, as opposed to yielding to pressures to revert to the pre-reform structure.Governments, therefore, still have an important role to play in respect of the achievement of societys goals through public-private interaction in the provision of utility services. The success of efforts to attract private sector investments into public utilities will depend largely on the establishment of transparent and reliable contract legislation and regulatory machinery that offer a minimum level of guarantee to private investment. The creation of a favourable investment environment, in the context of a broader economic liberalization strategy, is thus vital for the success of utility reform.The creation of genuine consumer choice for final consumers is also a key requirement for enhancing competition, improving efficiency and, ultimately, ensuring lower prices. One of the most important outcomes of the creation of the British model is that it allows an unprecedented degree of consumer choice, which is unfeasible under public monopoly provision. Greater information about consumer preferences and a certain degree of product differentiation in a competitive electricity retail market have provided incentives for both improved service and product innovation.At the same time, there is evidence that some groups of consumers have gained more than others from privatization. While this can be considered a socio-economic drawback of greater private sector involvement in electricity provision, such problems are best remedied by targeted government support to help the worse-off groups of consumers to adapt to new market conditions. Similarly, at a broader macrolevel, there is some concern that the gains from greater private sector involvement are unequally distributed among shareholders and managers, on the one hand, and consumers and laid-off employees, on the other.In several countries, socio-political resistance to greater private sector involvement in utility services is often explained on the grounds of the abovementioned social impacts, in isolation from the concrete benefits, which often outweigh the costs. There is, however, some legitimate concern that many developing countries have had little experience with private sector involvement in utility provision. The case studies of Africa, Asia and latin_america, as well as the relatively successful experience in great_britain, are thus intended to highlight the potential benefits of utility privatization, particularly against the background of inefficient State ownership and management.As discussed in wess, , with regard to greater private sector involvement in water supply, moving towards a more efficient provision of utility services may displace workers and even mean the contraction of some economic sectors. The central goal, however, must be to raise employment and production in the economy as a whole as achieved by the provision of more efficient and indeed cheaper utility services and thereby raise overall living standards. It should be axiomatic by now that public-private cooperation in utility provision brings about considerable efficiency gains, as well as some welfare losses. Although the latter are sometimes difficult to quantify, they tend to be much smaller than the gains to the economy as a whole, and can in any case be tackled by specific government action at much lower social costs than those incurred by State ownership and provision of utility services. Markets never provide a perfect structure of economic organization but recent economic history has shown that in most cases they perform much better than central planning.HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES: WORKING MORE EFFECTIVELY. Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same protection.Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by General Assembly resolution A (III) of December , article .(S)ocial security must be achieved by co-operation between the State and the individual.-Social Insurance and Allied Services report by Sir William Beveridge (London, His Majestys Stationery Office, ), article .Most countries in the world are simultaneously facing rising costs of health services, growing demands for such services and increasingly limited resources for the financing of these services. These stresses on healthcare systems have increased the concern of Governments and their citizens regarding the performance of their systems, and have given rise to pressures to redesign existing health systems, or design new ones, so as to meet social goals. In such reform attempts, policy makers throughout the world are increasingly recognizing the importance of incorporating private health providers into national health systems in order to enhance national health status. The present chapter examines the present roles of private health providers and examines ways to incorporate such providers more effectively into the overall national health systems in developing countries. It addresses some central issues arising from public and private interaction (or the lack of interaction) in health systems reforms, in general, and the delivery of essential health care, in particular, with the main focus on the roles of Governments and the private sector in improving the quality of and the accessibility to essential services offered within national health systems in developing countries.States have usually kept essential (or primary) health care in the public domain, mainly because Governments have determined that such services have large positive externalities and that without public interventions the market would provide less than socially optimal levels of health goods and services. However, experience suggests a more nuanced reality: the private sector is already an important contributor to health services for the populations in all countries and consequently better coordination between the public and private sectors has great potential to improve performance of national health systems. Greater interaction between the health authority and private providers is a key to strengthening the understanding of health needs of the population by the authority and thus to making health regulation and monitoring more effective.During the early s, there was great enthusiasm for health reform in many parts of the world. Some countries in Western Europethe Netherlands, Sweden and the united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland, for exampleintroduced new financing and delivery schemes and the united_states of America debated a significant proposal for reform of its health system. Economies in transition redesigned their health systems in the face of declining government revenues and deteriorating public health. Further, the world_bank advocated new health system strategies for developing countries; and some States, such as Chile, China, Colombia, South Africa and Zambia, implemented, or were soon to implement major health reforms.Such enthusiasm reflected the strong desires of Governments and the general public to better the health status of their populations through new, improved health systems. In developed countries, where rapid population ageing and skyrocketing medical expenses imposed large pressures on general government budgets, the greater involvement of the private sector (including individuals and households) in the financing and provision of health-care services was sought. Those developing countries undertaking reforms, in particular middle-income countries, where private health-care providers and the insurance industry had been reasonably well developed, pursued similar reforms to take advantage of the presence of such private actors. The hope of these developed and middle-income developing countries was that greater private sector involvement would help build more efficient and effective health systems and reduce the cost to the Government and the public in providing health services and financing them.In other developing countries, and in particular the least developed countries, the emerging concern was that health indicatorssuch as life expectancy, child mortality rates and immunization rateswere not improving as quickly as they had been, or, even worse that they were deteriorating. Given the tightened resource constraints in these States, primarily owing to economic stagnation during the s and resulting fiscal contraction, their Governments sought ways to increase the cost-effectiveness of health-care provision. At the same time, Governments and health experts increasingly recognized the comparatively larger presence of private actors in health-care provision in developing countries than in more developed countries. Examples of such private provision included clinical practitioners (both legal and illegal), community-based organizations, non-governmental organizations and an increasing reliance on out-of-pocket payments for medical services and drug purchases. This acknowledgement of the large role already played by the private sector in health delivery in these States, combined with the realities of sharply depleted Government resources, led States and health experts to reverse their almost four decade history of underestimating the importance of private sector activities in health systems, and embrace the potential of leveraging the private sector to improve the health of the population.Economies in transition similarly faced deteriorating health conditions and rapidly declining government revenues during the economic turmoil in the early to mid-s, factors which also led them to restructure their health systems. In all cases, the central challenge in designing new systems concerned to what extent Governments should or could be involved in financing and providing health-care services and what would be the appropriate roles for private actors in new systems. While the economic and social contexts of countries differ from one another, a common issue for almost all was, again, the question of greater involvement of the private sector.In tandem with the greater involvement of the private sector in health systems in the world, policy makers, health experts and social scientists have begun to place more emphasis on examining the nature and the extent of such private activities. Policy makers and experts have increasingly recognized the importance of understanding the interaction between the activities of the public sector and those of the private sector in the overall framework of existing national health systems or of their redesign. They began, in particular, by investigating whether these activities complement, substitute for or are largely independent of each other. This research and policy development is of vital importance to developing countries, where, as will be shown below, the presence of the private sector has been large and its activities can complement publichealth systems, which exhibit gaps or institutional weaknesses in providing health-care services to the population.The design and performance of health systems that incorporate the private sector effectively is thus one of the major issues of concerns for policy makers, experts and the general public throughout the world. Health systems policy, however, is intrinsically complex. In the words of one writer: The evidence is weak, no country has discovered an ideal model, and appropriate policies differ widely in different country settings. More evidence, more sharing of experience and information across countries, and constructive debates are required to build health systems policy appropriate to national conditions.The range of issues encompassed in discussions of a health system is wide, and the questions surrounding essential health service delivery cover only a portion of a broad spectrum. Other critical health system issues include, inter alia, production, distribution and pricing of pharmaceuticals, equipment and other inputs, health insurance and the financing of health systems. This chapter examines the areas of the health sector where private activities are more prevalent and thus the areas that could benefit most from broader cooperation and better coordination between the public and private sectors. It examines the role private activities play in essential health-care provision in developing countries, particularly least developed countries, and examines ways to improve national health status by properly understanding private demand and devising appropriate incentives for health-related workers. It concludes that Governments need to build their own capacity to form coalitions with the private sector in order to allocate resources effectively, enforce regulations and generate and disseminate information.A century ago, organized national health systems designed to provide health services to the population at large barely existed, even among industrialized countries in Europe and North America. Although hospitals were functioning, very few people visited them; and there was little available protection from the financial risk associated with illness for the large majority of the population. Economic, social and political events during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, together with the advances in medical knowledge, were slowly changing the situation. The Industrial Revolution transformed many aspects of society, compelling people to recognize the large economic toll exacted by illness, disability and death in the workforce. Because illness and death lowered the productivity of their workers, employers began to provide medical services to their employees. At the same time, the importance of clean water and sanitation for preventive health became better understood, driving employers to begin to improve their employees overall living conditions. Further, warssuch as the American Civil War and Crimean and Boer warscontributed to changes by showing that infectious diseases killed more soldiers than the enemy. Advance in the control and prevention of such ailments also led to increased concern for the wider provision of health care.The political ferment engendered by the Industrial Revolution also led to changes in health provision. The changing nature of production and employment created a large number of workers, some of whom became advocates of the socialist movement. To prevent such movements from gaining strength, Otto von Bismarck, Chancellor of Germany, proposed a government takeover (that is to say, nationalization) of labour unions sickness funds, on the grounds that, insofar as those funds were a source of workers support for the movement, by detaching the funds from the labour unions such support would weaken. In , Germany enacted a law requiring employers to contribute to health coverage for low-wage workers in certain occupations. The popularity of the law among workers convinced other Governments in Europe to adopt similar legislation and subsequently such regulations spread outside Western Europe.The two World Wars, which destroyed much health infrastructure in Europe, paved the way for the expansion of health systems for some countries and the introduction of new systems in others. The Beveridge report of had identified health-care provision as one of the basic prerequisites of a social security system and laid the conceptual foundation for national health systems that would flourish in the post-war era all over the world.Reforming health systems has been an ongoing process since the Second World War and current attempts build on the experience accumulated over the period. In a historical perspective, the current health reforms in the developing world have been deemed by the World Health Organization (WHO) as the third generation of reforms. Each generation of reform has been prompted by perceived failures in then prevailing health systems, by new attempts to achieve greater efficiency and fairness and/or by public demands for reforms. Advances in medical knowledge and technologies have also played an important role in generating support for reforms.The present section will briefly examine the development of health systems reforms since the Second World War in order to clarify the primary goal of the current reforms. The importance and expected roles of the private sector in the current reforms will be discussed in the following section.The first and second generations of reformThe first generation of health systems reforms were launched in the s and s in developed countries, and extended to middle-income developing countries. The main goal of these reforms was to establish national health systems with the promise of universal access (along with social insurance systems). By the late s, however, many national systems in developing (as well as developed) countries had started recognizing difficulties on two fronts: medical costs were rising as the volume and intensity of hospital-based care increased, and access by the poor to the national systems was not completely guaranteed, despite the explicit goal of universal access. The rising costs of hospital-based care were partly associated with large spending on inpatient treatments for conditions that could have been managed by ambulatory care. Inadequate access, meanwhile, was particularly acute in some developing countries in Africa and Asia where Governments or colonial powers excluded indigenous people from their national health systems unless they were employed in the public sector.The second generation of reforms were aimed at ameliorating these limitations, and thus strove to make health systems more cost-efficient, fairer and more accessible. During the era of these reforms, the term primary health care became a household expression, denoting the means to provide affordable universal access to health care. This generation of health reforms made great strides in improving health at relatively small cost in many developing countries. Life expectancy at birth increased by more than years in a matter of two decades in many developing countries (figure VII.). Child mortality rates declined and immunization rates increased significantly. Countries with great successes in these areas includedbut were not limited toBotswana, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Guatemala, Indonesia, Mauritius, the Niger, Sri Lanka, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe and some States in India. The power of public-health measures, and the emphasis of prevention over cure became widely recognized in the developing world, with many countries committing themselves to deliver not only adequate primary health care, but also a minimum level of education, food, safe water and sanitation. As a result, most developing countries have achieved within a half-century health advances that took nearly two centuries in the now developed countries.While the second generation of reforms delivered significant improvements in health outcomes in many countries, they proved relatively weak in providing affordable universal care: some countries made only slow progress in improving health status, particularly among the poor, while others experienced deteriorating health status of the population, reversing previous gains. These trends were particularly noticeable in Africa (figure VII.). Several weaknesses were identified, in addition to the devastating effects of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) on mortality. Many patients did not utilize the lower levels of the system (such as health posts and health centres) and sometimes bypassed the public system altogether; funding was not adequate, leading to insufficient health training and a shortage of equipment; health workers were not well motivated; the allocation of health resources continued to be inequitable or, sometimes misallocated, particularly to the detriment of the poor, and; demand for public-health services was low in response to the supply-side failures mentioned above.These weaknesses relate to the low quality of health-care services and falling demand, organizational aspects of health-care systems and delivery care services management, and a lack of funding. The third generation of health systems reforms came about to address these three primary shortcomings.Current health systems reforms: recognizing the presence of the private sectorThe issues surrounding the current health systems reforms are more complex than those the previous reforms sought to resolve. They require a careful examination of economic and social policies that goes beyond the traditional analysis of health-related technical issues. Such an examination necessitates that policy makers understand a host of issues. Policy makers and experts need to understand the reasons people demand or use some services provided at certain publicly managed health facilities but not others (factors influencing demand). They need to determine why medical staff do not perform their assignments as planned (workers incentives related to the quality of services). Additionally, in light of the first two requirements, policy makers and experts must determine the most cost-effective means to improve the performance of health-care services (efficiency and effectiveness). This requires identifying the obstacles that prevent health-care systems at the subnational and local levels from working as effectively and as efficiently as desired (organizational issues). Finally, policy makers need to determine how the entire health system should be monitored and supervised (governance and regulation at the national level). In addition to these operational issues, policy makers must address the issue of funding and its allocation among regions or social groups.These issues are interrelated. The low quality of services may result from insufficient funding, which triggers disruption of pharmaceutical and other medical supplies and works against health workers incentives through low pay. Weak coordination at various levels of health systems or among various health programmes may dilute the effectiveness of health care. Low utilization rates of publicly managed health entities may reflect not only the low quality of health services, but also the mismatch between what people demand and the needs perceived by the authorities.While supply-side considerations remain an integral part of reform schemes, the third generation of reforms have emphasized demand for health services as the primary means to address these issues. The new approach not only probes factors that affect demand for health-care services in response to medical fees, and the quality of, and the ease of access to, health services and human resources, but also tries to identify causes of mismatches between demand what people really desireand perceived needswhat people are believed to need. This focus marks a stark contrast with that of the second generation of health systems reforms.The emphasis in the second generation of reforms was on the supply side of health systems and, as mentioned, the goal was to make health service provisions more cost-efficient, fairer and more accessible. This gave rise to the concept of primary health care. However, demand for health-care services, which is derived from peoples desire for such services and reacts to the quality of health care as well as to the responsiveness of health systems, was given little consideration in these systems designs. Instead of measuring actual demand, the approach focused on presumed health needs when designing health provision and financing. This inadequate attention to peoples demand is apparent in the Alma-Ata Declaration (proclaiming the objective known as Health for All), adopted at the Joint WHO/united_nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF) International Conference on Primary Health Care in held in Alma-Ata, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (now Almaty, Kazakhstan)a landmark document in the era of the second-generation health reforms. The declaration is largely ignorant of demand-side factors, although it does state the importance of community participation in creating small-scale private financing.One aspect of demand issues is inadequate access of the poor to primary health care or, more specifically, the inability of the poor to express their demand for publicly offered health care. This not only encompasses an issue of financial constraint, but also involves organizational problems of health systems. For example, the poor in a remote area may opt not to register at a publicly managed health post in a distant town, but rather to visit a traditional medical practitioner, licensed or not, closer to home. In this case, demand of the poor is not officially observed and the utilization of the provided health post will be lower than expected. However, if the cause of the poors low utilization is high costs (including medical fees, time in travel and other non-medical payments), then lowering medical fees or building another health post close to the patients residence may make visits more affordable and accessible. On the other hand, if the cause is rooted in the low quality of medical services, the frequent absence of medical personnel or the lack of drugspossibly due to illegal diversions, corruption or theftthen lowering the costs associated with hospital visits or injecting more resources into the system may do little to resolve the situation.Current reforms address these organizational and governance issues, including the creation of proper incentives for health workers, the need to monitor the performance of workers and their behavioural responses to the structural changes of the health system and the public function of Governments stewardship. In previous reforms, local health authorities and international experts treated local government officials, and health professionals and workers, as well as patients, as passive agents who obeyed a set of regulations and guidelines mandated by the health authorities. In reality, however, they are active agents who respond and react to regulations, guidelines and the responsiveness of health systems. Health policies that do not accurately predict the reaction of participants may thus lead to unintended outcomes. When a health budget is cut or inflation erodes real wages, health workers may not report to a health post as regularly as their employment contracts specify, especially if there are opportunities outside the system in which to earn extra money: this lowers the overall quality of health care further. If the distribution of medical drugs is liberalized without effective regulation and supervision of prescription and usage, some drugs are likely to be diverted to the unofficial sector and unlicensed drug providers will mushroom, wasting official resources and permitting the spread of unsafe drug prescriptions.It is in the arena of organization and governance of health systems that the private sector has been making significant contributions in many developing countries. Where private involvement has not been strong, there is large scope for the improvement of health status by employing private entities properly. Where public-health systems were weak and underfunded, private health providers, including for-profit and non-profit organizations and organizations with religious affiliations, have emerged. While these private providers have various motivations, which may be different from public objectives, they often complement the public-health system and sometimes compete with the public sector, creating incentives for it to improve.Greater involvement of the private sector is also justified from a logistic standpoint. Implementing a new approach for health interventions in the current reformsWHO styles it the new universalismdoes not call for establishing a large number of full-fledged hospitals in poor countries; rather, it can be supported by smaller medical facilities run by private groups. While the basic technical understanding of primary health carethat health and nutrition interventions can make a substantial difference to the health of large populationsremains valid, it is undergoing continuous refinement, moving towards the new universalism. It calls for high-quality delivery of essential (rather than primary) health care, defined by cost-effectiveness for everyone, rather than all possible care for everyone, or only the simplest, most basic care for the poor. Essential care has been developed in several countries based on epidemiological evidence and the costs of interventions in specific localities, thus offering the potential for tailor-made systems specific to local realities. The cost-effectiveness of interventions is measured in terms of costs of the disability-adjusted life year (DALY) gainedthe smaller the costs for gaining one DALY, the more cost-effective a particular intervention is. The most costeffective interventions are preventive care of communicative diseases and prenatal and child care. Such cost-effective, location-specific essential interventions can be provided at small facilities with adequately trained staff.This approach does not deny the need for increasing health spending in developing countries and for further and stronger commitment by donor countries to assisting such increases. At the same time, the shift of focus away from comprehensive primary care provided by the public sector towards a public-private mix in public-health delivery, as now advocated by WHO and the world_bank, has caused concern among some health experts. For them, the public sectors retreat from the comprehensive primary care that was sought in the Alma-Ata Declaration is regrettable and such advocacy for the new typology of health care in the developing world is based more on faith than on evidence.The direct provision of free health service by the public sector can be justified as relieving the poor, in particular, from the financial burden associated with illness; however, widespread informal charges in many publicly run hospitals and clinics undermine this objective. At the economy-wide level, the present health situation in many developing countries is different from what it was at the onset of the second generation of health systems reforms which sought primary health care systems led by the Government. Most countries have a much larger population than before, and the pressure on health budgets is thus much greater, particularly if a proper tax system or a social security system is not in place. Providing medical services to the increasing number of patients with HIV/AIDS has placed added pressure on budgets. While many donor countries are doubling their efforts to convince politicians and the general public to increase assistance to developing countries, it will take some time to channel larger fiscal allocation to international assistance in health. It is therefore more pragmatic, at least in the short-to-medium term, to strengthen the tie between public-health authorities and private health providers in order to improve the effectiveness and fairness of the care system.Private providers are involved in many aspects of health service delivery in developing countries. Developing countries, in general, have health systems that are more dependent on private financing and private provisions than developed countries are. From the financing aspect, patients in developing countries, much more so than their counterparts in developed countries, purchase medical treatment out of pocket from health service providers (table VII.). While the Governments of Western Asian countries with large oil revenues finance a relatively larger portion of health expenditures, private expenditure on health in other developing countries is higher than in developed countries. In particular, the share of private expenditure in total health expenditure exceeds per cent in Eastern and Southern Asia. Private physicians account for per cent of the total physicians in developing countries, with the highest proportion in the sample countries in Asia (table VII.). The large share of private providers is due to patients demand, combined with a willingness to pay, or the lack of access to publicly run health systems, including public-health financing. At the same time, private providers are prominent in basic health-care provision and curative care, reflecting low capital requirements for performing such services.This high utilization of private health providers has direct implications for promoting essential health-care delivery. Health services offered by private providers include treatment of communicable diseasessuch as malaria and tuberculosisand prenatal and child care, the core of essential health services. No matter what the cause is of this high dependency on the private sector in health delivery, Governments and health experts must understand the nature and functioning of private health providers in order to devise and implement more effective national health policies.Theoretical and empirical bases for promoting public-private mixes in health service deliveryNormative arguments in favour of government control of or intervention in health service delivery, based on the concepts of efficiency (market failures) and equity, have been widely accepted. The arguments do not, however, necessarily imply that a provision of health services should be predominantly public. The empirical basis for such arguments is mixed.Table VII..INDICATORS OF NATIONAL EXPENDITURE ON HEALTH, BY REGION, Total expenditure on health as proportion of gross domestic productab (percentage)Private expenditure on health as proportion of total expenditure on healthc (percentage)Developing countries by region:latin_america and the Caribbean AfricaWestern AsiaEastern and Southern Asiaeast_asia excluding China South AsiaChinaEastern and Southern Asia excluding ChinaEconomies in transition Developed countries. . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . .. . .ital outlays of territorial government (central/federal authorities, regional/provincial/State authorities, and local/municipal authorities) plus social security schemes whose affiliation is compulsory for a sizeable share of the population and extrabudgetary funds earmarked for health services delivery or financing. They include grants and loans provided by international agencies, other national authorities and sometimes commercial banks". Private expenditure "comprises private insurance schemes and prepaid medical care plans, services delivered or financed by enterprises (other than contributions to social security and prepaid plans), mandated or not, outlays by non-governmental organizations and non-profit institutions serving mainly households, out-of-pocket payments, and other privatelyfundedschemesnotelsewhereclassified,includinginvestmentoutlays" (TheWorldHealthReport, ..., p. ).Efficiency criterionAccording to this criterion, the possibility of market failures (related to large externalities or public good aspects associated with consumption of health goods and services, the difficulties of obtaining appropriate information on the quality and contents of medical care, and the presence of monopoly or monopsony) justifies Governments intervention, because, if left to the market, resources devoted to the health sector would not be at a socially desirable level, and the failure to achieve an efficient allocation of resources would result.The theoretical justifications for government intervention based on the efficiency criterion provide guidelines as to neither the preferable method of intervention nor the optimal type of ownership of health services. Is it better for a society to have complete government control in delivery of health services, including public ownership of hospitals and health clinics, and the purchase of medical supplies as well as the recruitment of doctors and other medical staff? Or should the Government leave logistic decisions to the private sector and focus on strategic decisions that affect national standards of health service delivery? When combating communicable diseases, should the Government be involved in direct provision or should it contract out to private practising physicians? The answers to these questions depend, among other factors, on the ability of the Government in this regard and the availability and quality of private health sector services. However, it is important to note that this theory does not exclude the possibility of a public-private mix in health service delivery. The choice, therefore, should be based more on empirical than on solely theoretical considerations.No national-level studies, however, are available in developing countries to offer a definite answer to any of these questions. Perhaps owing to the success of primary health care systems based on public provision and advocated under the second generation of health systems reforms, health data remain exclusively focused on the public-health sector. Systematic efforts have yet to be undertaken to research public-private mixes in the health sector and the effects of such a mix on health outcomes in developing countries. Data on the extent and the impact of private health delivery on health outcomes at the national level are not widely available, except for very rough estimates such as those presented in tables VII. and VII.. One must therefore rely on national-level evidence from developed countries regarding the relative effectiveness of public health-dominant systems versus public-private mixed systems.As table VII. indicates, there appears to be no consistent difference between predominantly public delivery and public-private mixed delivery in respect of health outcomes. While every country listed in the table has anTable VII..Total number of physicians per million populationPrivate physicians as proportion of total physicians (percentage)Sub-Saharan AfricabAsiaclatin_america and the Caribbeand Middle East crescenteAveragefTable VII..PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FOR HEALTH SYSTEMS OF SELECTED DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, Type of health service delivery systemInfant mortality rate (per ,live births)Under-five mortality rate (per , live births)Life expectancy at birthHealth expenditure per capita(US dollars)Mixed deliveryAustria Belgium France Germany NetherlandsAverageaPredominantly public deliveryDenmark FinlandNorway Swedenunited_kingdomAverageaestablished public system of health service deliveryas theory dictatesthe degree to which the public sector dominates in health service delivery does not seem to significantly impact long-run outcomes of the delivery system.Equity criterionThe equity argument posits that individuals or families often fail to protect themselves against illness or disabilities owing to short-sighted planning and the limitations of private insurance markets. As a result, the establishment of national insurance schemes (including health systems) is called for and transfer of resources among different economic and social groups through various taxes and mandatory contributions to social security funds is recommended. Economics does not offer a general answer as to the appropriate levels of resource transfers, taxation and mandatory contributions for different income groups, nor can it persuasively describe the contours of an equitable after-tax income distribution.The argument in favour of income support (such as subsidies and free medical care) to the (relatively) poor does not, however, depend on the levels and schemes of resource transfers among income groups. The poor often do not have access to private insurance, nor the means to protect themselves from reduced income when they become ill. The equity criterion thus implies at minimum that the poor must receive more assistance than the rich, who have access to insurance or enough assets to survive difficult times, and that the public sector is consequently justified in undertaking such resource transfers to the poor. In public health, this notion translates into the highest incidence of public spending on health for the poor and a lower incidence of public spending on health for the rich.The question then is, whether higher spending on the health of the poor is in fact observed. From the equity point of view, the poorest quintile should receive the highest public spending per capita. However, the reality is the opposite in the majority of the sample countries. Data on public spending on health for different income groups in developing countries show that only countries Argentina, Malaysia and Uruguayfollow this pattern, although Chile approaches it (see table VII.). Other evidence also shows that many countries do not have policies that promote health service access for the poor and, even where such policies exist, providing subsidies to the poor is very difficult to implement. Part of the reason is the extreme difficulty of identifying who qualify as poor with weak tax systems, the authorities in many developing countries are not equipped with the means to differentiate levels of personal income. The Governments of these countries with lower public spending on the poor may have difficulties in reaching the poorest (once identified), owing to their physical locations, inadequate infrastructure and the lack of medical knowledge of the poor. However, the empirical evidence, at least in some developing countries, does not suggest that publicly funded health systems perform more equitably in reference to the provision of health service delivery to the poor.Table VII..CountryPoorest quintileSecond quintileThird quintileFourth quintileRichest quintileArgentinaa BrazilcChiled Ghanae Indonesiaf Kenyag Malaysiah Mongoliai South Africaj Uruguayh Viet Namj.b . .b . . . .b . .b . ..b . .b . . . .b . .b . ..b . .b . . . .b . .b . .. . . . . . . . . . .. .The normative and empirical discussions thus point out that there are no a priori reasons to deny working with the private sector to provide public-health services. Furthermore, given the fact that, under existing conditions, Governments in many developing countries have only limited financial and managerial ability, and that patients have to depend on private health delivery in any case when public support programmes are unavailable, one has to search out all options for improving health systems. The main focus in reforming health systems should thus be to examine the appropriate roles of Governments and the private sector in health service delivery and the proper actions to be undertaken by Governments to improve the accessibility and quality of health systems in both the public and private spheres, with a particular view towards serving the poor.Public and private mixes in national health systemsPrevious discussions have supported a public-private mix in health service delivery by challenging the notion of public delivery as the sole system of national health delivery in the conventional economic framework. The present section raises two practical questions. First, when private health service delivery is a norm in many developing countries, what actual roles do private health actors play in these countries national health systems? Second, when the normative arguments do not preclude the involvement of private health delivery to enhance national welfare in terms of both efficiency and equity, how should Governments use private forces to advance national health status, given the existing active participation of the private sector?The role of the private sector in health service deliveryThe role of private health service providers and their relation to public providers and health authorities can be understood in terms of the chain of decision-making by both types of providers and health clients. Decisions by public and private health providers and clients (actors) and interactions among them make up a national health system (figure VII.).The upper section of figure VII. illustrates decisions made at different levels (ranging from the national Government to hospitals, clinics and health centres) of the public sector. A national Government decides total public-health spending on health, possibly with the approval of the national legislature. Given the total spending on health, the central Government, or other levels of governments (depending on how fiscal transfers between two different levels of governments are mandated), allocate the total budget to capital and recurrent expenditure categories, including medical supplies, salaries to health personnel, building of health facilities, publicly funded health insurance and implementation of various health programmes. At this stage, the national Government might decide to give technical and financial assistance to private providers if such channels exist as part of a national health system. Public-health providerssuch as national and regional hospitals, clinics and health centresundertake logistic decisions on staffing, maintenance and repair of building and equipment, and procurement of health supplies, and offer medical services to clients.In the private sphere, consumers demand health services, pay taxes, make contributions to a social security fund (if such a fund exists) and buy private health insurance (if available). Consumer demand depends not only on indiFigure VII..(Health inputs)Allocation of budgetPublic-health service providers(Government)Public insurance Health-care facilities Health-care personnel Equipment/medical suppliesPrivate health service providersPrivate health insuranceTax and contribution to public health insurance fund (Consumers)Health marketNational health statusHealth demand vidual and community health status, but also on the quality of health care provided by public and private providers, effective pricesactual prices clients pay from their own pocketand insurance coverage. Private health providers consist of for-profit medical entities, non-profit organizations and traditional medical practitioners. The interaction of demand for, and supply of, health service in the combined public and private health market determines the national health status.The chain of decision-making in the public sector does not capture the various factors that permit the straightforward linkage from public-health spending to health status: higher spending does not necessarily translate into better national health status. Many factors along the chain of decision-making impact the effectiveness of health policies. Given total spending on health, its composition has a significant impact on effectiveness of health policies: for example, larger spending on preventive and curative care of communicable diseases will help the poor, but may compromise capital upgrading of major hospitals. If, on the other hand, a large number of inpatient treatments at hospitals are financed through public spending, the poorwho often do not have access to hospitalswill be adversely affected. Once the decision on spending is made, how public-health entities are run, together with the demand for health and private health supply, has a significant impact on national health status. Simultaneously, a choice of health production, by which different combinations of health inputsvaccines, drugs, micronutrients and hygieneimprove health in ways predicted by biological and medical facts, has a direct impact on the health of the population.The role of the private sector had been assumed to be supplementary in providing primary health care. This is because the second generation of health reforms were oriented towards the public sector in practice and justified by public economics in theory. Consequently, many empirical studies look exclusively at the private sector as a supplement to the public sector in providing primary (or essential, in the case of the third generation of health systems reforms) health care, even though the importance of the private sector turns out to be more significant than assumed.In many of these studies, researchers identified several factors that turn patients away from public-health providers and towards private health providers. These factors include better and more flexible access to private facilities, shorter waiting periods, greater trust in private health workers, and the greater sensitivity of private workers to patients needs. Patients appreciate better customer service at private facilities and, as a result, they tend to have more confidence in private providers.Patients are responsive to the quality of health service provided. While measuring the quality of care is always difficult, the phenomenon called bypassingwhereby patients do not visit a closest facility (public or private), but bypass it in favour of often more costly but better-equipped facilitieshighlights the relation between demand by patients and quality supplied by health providers. In Sri Lanka, for example, only per cent of all illness episodes were treated at the closest facility. Medical facilities called minor public western typical facilities designed to be the first contact points in the primary health care system were bypassed at the rate of per cent, meaning that, out of patients seeking medical treatments, patients would not visit this type of facility and would instead seek medical treatment in another place. Out of the patients who bypassed the minor public western, per cent of them went to private western-style facilities, with the remaining proportion visiting traditional sources of medical treatment (called Ayurvedic) and major public hospitals.Because of patients reliance on private providers, private medical workers play an important role even where the public-health sector is expected to be dominant. According to a study of five States in India, private (health) providers are the major source of initial consultation for those using public hospitals. Inpatient treatments are performed predominantly in public hospitals in both urban and rural areas. Public outpatient facilities, an important part of the State-wide referral system, are expected to offer clinical consultation prior to hospitalization. However, a third to a half of all hospitalization episodes (depending on the State) experienced no clinical referral and, when clinical consultations were provided, private providers were the major source of initial clinical consultations. Thus private providers are significant players in Indias health system. The same study also finds that private medical providers, including non-governmental organizations, treated -per cent of the total number of illness reported and per cent of children under age who visited medical facilities. A study in El Salvador shows similar results, demonstrating that patients had little use for the first public sector contact for medical information and referral based at the community level.Private health providers thus dominate the sphere of ambulatory care. This is because such care requires a relatively low cost of investing in facilities and medical training. As examined below, however, the predominance of the private sector in the first contact with a health system reflects, to some extent, the shortcoming of the public-health sector. Several empirical studies show that doctors in public hospitals are often absent from their offices and work in private facilities to earn extra income, and officially distributed drugs are sold illegally to patients or private distributors. Such practices adversely affect the daily operations of public facilities. Short and irregular business hours, unavailability of doctors, and a shortage of drugs have resulted in a low utilization of public facilities and encouraged a self-reinforcing demand switch to the private sector.Private health providers also affect the impact of policy changes For example, when a Government increases official drug prices or introduces user fees, or public providers levy informal charges, demand for public-health services not only declines (owing to own-price effects) but also shifts away from them to private services (through a substitution effect). In Nigeria, per cent of patients who are deterred by higher medical prices of public providers go to private practitioners. The corresponding rates for El Salvador and Ghana are per cent and per cent (with the remaining seeking self-care). The private sector provides an alternative for those who have become unwilling or unable to pay higher medical bills and, as a result, the role of the private sector has become more significant.A further example can be seen in the experiences of the United Republic of Tanzania. After the Government allowed private medical practice in , the number of private providers jumped from to , and the number of dispensaries (lower-level health facilities) rose from to ,. This strengthened the Governments efforts to improve the accessibility of the population to health facilities. Deregulating drug distribution systems (as seen in Viet Nam (box VII.)) however, have in some developing countries led to widespread, irrational use of drugs prescribed and sold by unqualified persons.Thus, in many developing countries, the private sector has a large presence in health service delivery, even in areas in which the public sector is advocated as the major provider in theory and policy debates. While no systematic attempt has yet been made to examine the reasons for such a large presence, the dominance of the private sector seems to reflect the historically strong tie/trust between the local community and private medical practitioners, certified or not; more flexible and reliable access to such services; and a better understanding by private practitioners of local health conditions and needs. For a Government that wishes to improve the performance of its national health system, the private health sector can consequently be a vital resource towards this end.New roles of the Government in managing private health service deliveryDespite the advantages and complementary roles of the private sector in public health, the private sector does not lead the health sector in a direction likely to maximize its (the private sectors) contribution to the health of the population. The Government, therefore, must take on the leading role. Owing to a lack of systematic evidence, beyond a few case studies, on how Governments interact with the private sector in practice, the examinations below are concerned with possible roles that Governments can be expected to play in the health market when the private sector is present, rather than the actual roles played by them.The possible roles of the Government as regulator will need to be more sophisticated, requiring multifaceted intervention and coordination among the Government, public and private providers and consumers, so as to maximize the contribution of a health system to the population. The expected roles of the Government to further harness private activities in strengthening national health performance can be categorized under four areas: (a) understanding theDespite the difficulties generally associated with measuring the magnitude of private activities in health service delivery, private pharmacy practice is relatively measurable in many developing countries. This is because services provided by private pharmacies or drug providers involve in many instances exchanges of tangible goodsdrugsand assessment of the quality of services can be approximated by examining types of drugs prescribed according to illness and the qualifications of providers. Where regulations exist, their effectiveness can be evaluated against the actual practice, making case studies on pharmacy practices comparatively easier to conduct.The private sector has become a dominant actor in the provision of pharmaceuticals, and tendencies by patients in developing countries to engage in self-carea traditional form of health carehave been increasingly associated with visits to pharmacies for advice. There are several reasons for this. First, freer flows of information about the availability of drugs and liberalization of drug distributions and Western drug imports have made drugs far more accessible to the citizen. Second, the introduction of user fees for public-health facilities necessitated by fiscal retrenchment in many developing countries since the late s has made primary health care less accessible for the poor, turning them to self-care instead. Finally, pharmacies and drug providers, many of whom are also health professionals (including doctors), have strong incentives to sell drugs to patients in order to supplement their incomes. For patients who are often misinformed about the effectiveness of drugs, acquiring drugs, even though unnecessary and sometimes unsafe from a medical point of view, can provide peace of mind in some instances.bViet Nam has experienced considerable changes in its health service delivery system in response to economic and institutional reforms since the s. The Government of Viet Nam introduced a market-based policy (known as Doi Moi) in and health sector reforms have been an integral part of its overall reform efforts.c Prior to , health facilities in the country had provided free services (although patients paid for drugs) and communes had financed the operational costs of commune health centres and the salaries of village health workers. The liberalization policy, however, changed all aspects of the system. Since , some health services have had to be paid for, and private practice, including drug vending, has been allowed (and has blossomed). Domestic production of pharmaceuticals also increased, from $. million in to $ million in .d The introduction of user fees affected the patterns of demand for health services and the country experienced a sharp increase in the uses of pharmacies and the number of drug venders (see table). During the period , the change in rates of contact with pharmacies and vendors explained the largest portion of the increased overall rates. Moreover, it is now estimated that over half of total health expenditure in rural areas are accounted for by drug expenditures.There are several reasons for this increased popularity of pharmacies and drug vendors. The real price of drugs is estimated to have declined by as much as per cent, owing to liberalization of the economy in general and of drug distribution in particular, and access to and the quality of medicines have improved relative to the alternatives.e There is no legislation restricting the importation of Western medicines, which are considered to be desirable, and the quality of services at comPRIVATE PHARMACY PRACTICE IN VIET NAMaBox VII.Box VII. (continued)ANNUAL HEALTH SERVICE CONTACT RATES PER CAPITA, BY PROVIDER, IN VIET NAM, AND Public hospitalCommune health centre Other government facility Private health facility Pharmacy or drug vendor Traditional practitioner Other providerTotal visits. . . . . . .. . . . . . .mune health centres are perceived to be declining.f Health-care workers who were in the public sector prior to and who have control over distribution of drugs have been allowed to privatize their activities; and citizens who have access to drug suppliesparticularly those who have contact with overseas Vietnamesehave become vendors.Because of the lack of effective regulation of registration and licensing requirements, however, health experts have seen a proliferation of unnecessary, and sometimes dangerous, prescribing of drugs by private vendorsa case of market failures owing to a lack of information. Such self-medication without formal medical consultation has been made possible by the private sellersg and such unnecessary or irrational use of drugs now threatens public health. Antibiotic resistance levels in the country have increased and it is becoming difficult to control and prevent the spread of infectious diseases.h The increased difficulty in the last few years of treating typhoid fever and containing its spread is an example of this problem.iThe pharmaceutical practice in Viet Nam is the result of liberalization without an adequate regulatory mechanismbe it legislation, monitoring or supervision. The Government of Viet Nam has recently formulated a National Drug Policy, whose pilot programmes are being set up in seven provinces and cities.j Initiatives include, inter alia, strengthening quality assurance and the control system, development of a drug information system for health providers including pharmacists and drug vendors, building the administrative capacity of the central drug management authority, and revising training for health workers.k However, effective regulation needs to be strengthened by communication between the public and private sectors. To supplement the current effort, the Government must educate the population through public campaigns on rational and safe use of drugsparticularly on the danger of misuse of antibioticsand encourage the formation of professional associations of pharmacists and drug vendors.role of the private sector in its own country and institutionalizing policy instruments, (b) expanding the effectiveness of health service regulation to assure the overall quality of care, (c) contracting out and (d) improving access of the poor to health care, including the exemption of fees.Understanding the role of the private sectorUnderstanding the role of the private sector in the national health system requires not only collecting information about the current status and capabilities of existing private health providers, but also strengthening the dialogue between the health authorities and the private sector and setting an institutional framework within which health policy instruments operate. While developed countries, such as France and the united_states, have established independent public or non-profit private organizations to collect information about health-care facilities and to often set medical standards, many developing countries do not have such organizations. To function properly, any market requires the collection and dissemination of information and the health market is no exception. The Government should take the leading role in funding and coordinating such efforts, but when financing or administrative capacity is limited, it can invite medical professional associations to initiate such efforts. Otherwise, there will be no opportunity to understand the existing condition of private medical practices and to advance coordination between the two sectors, and the health market will potentially become segregated by income groups or geographical areas.Inviting professional associations to participate in policy formulation can also be a means of strengthening dialogue with the private sector. Wider participation of the private sector in designing and implementing health policies should enable policy makers to anticipate the likely response from private providers when a new regulation is enacted. In some countries, the fact that private providers form the first contact points of the health system allows them to gauge demand for health-care services better than government health officials. From the private providers perspective, such dialogue will help them prepare for changes, and minimize the confusion often associated with them.Private providers prefer predictable government actions. Ad hoc policy changes, and poor dissemination of information about changes, as well as a lack of policy instruments dealing with the private sector, often constitute a major source of confusion and unpredictability regarding government actions. Ongoing dialogue with the private sector helps strengthen the predictability of policy changes through better communication. The Government needs, however, to establish effective channelsinstitutionsthrough which policy instruments can be exercised. The institutions include a framework for direct regulation, support for self-regulating bodies (for example, professional associations), and licensing and accreditation systems. Governments in many developing countries are involved in direct provision of health goods and services and often do not have enough administrative resources to extend their regulatory capacity beyond existing areas. As an overextended Government often weakens the performance of its key functions, the Government may need to contract out direct provision to the private sector and to focus its resources in regulatory capacity-building, if it wishes to utilize the private sector effectively in the health system (see sect. on Contracting out below).Expanding the effectiveness of health regulationsTraditionally, in the public-health sector, Governments have focused on the quality of inputs (health professionals, drugs, equipment and facilities), the quality, quantity, and price of health services, and the geographical distribution of these services in the public-health sector. Once the Government recognizes the presence of the private sector, however, it needs to introduce new types of regulation to ensure the quality of health services provided by the private sector.The most common types of regulation applied to private providers consist of legal requirements: if health providers do not abide by laws, they are liable to punishment. These restrictions include certification, accreditation and licensing to ensure the quality of services. In less liberal economic systems, the Government also imposes price and capacity regulations, and market entry and exit restrictions. The difficulty lies, however, in enforcing regulations.For example, in the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, liberalization of the economy in general and deregulation in health service delivery in particular, since the late s, has encouraged the expansion of health service delivery by private providers. While self-medication has become a dominant form of health care since the deregulation, the Government has been building its regulatory capacity within the framework of the National Drug Policy enacted in . It established a licensing system for pharmacies and set up a system of district-based drug inspectorates, each of which consists of a pharmacist, assistant pharmacists, nurses and other support staff. Owing to the lack of communication between the health authorities and private pharmacists, and inadequate enforcement of regulations, however, less than per cent of drug vendors interviewed knew about various regulatory documents and only per cent of them were aware of more than one regulatory document. While the drug inspectors inspected pharmacies and drug vendors on a regular basis, some of them were not familiar with the inspection system mandated by the Food and Drug Department of the Ministry of Public Health. While no other data are readily available on the impacts of inadequate enforcement on health practices other than data on drug usage, it is likely that weak enforcement of health regulation leads to inadequate treatment and advice, particularly from traditional healers and retail or street drug sellers not only in the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, but elsewhere as well.The importance of the Governments assuring high-quality health delivery cannot be overemphasized. Consumers have a disadvantage in respect of judging the quality and contents of health goods and services, relative to health providers, and the attempt to gain adequate information involves large costs, including timeall of which are a source of market failure (see box VII.). At the same time, enforcing regulationthrough ongoing dialogue and monitoring is itself a costly undertaking for the Government. Participation of health professional associations is of vital importance in this regard. Efforts to enforce regulation more effectively should be built on a mutual understanding between the regulator and the regulated and on outreach to private providers, including information dissemination, persuasion and education of the general population. Health professional associations can act as the bridge between the Government and the private sector, including consumers. The Government can also nurture the growth of associations by providing administrative assistance, and even subsidies or tax breaks by officially recognizing them as non-profit organizations.Contracting outContracting out has become a favourite mode for social services delivery. Contracting out in health service delivery is an administrative process in which the health authorities contract with a private provider for service delivery in exchange for financial remuneration. Contracting out not only releases the Government from direct production or provision of health goods and services, but also provides opportunities for the Government to learn ways to influence the behaviour of the private provider, an important step forward in capacity-building. While contracting out has many advantages in theory, there are many difficulties in practice.The Government must first examine costs and benefits of direct provision (currently the dominant mode in health service delivery) and weigh them against the costs and benefits of contracting out to a private provider. The objective of the health authorities is to minimize the costs of delivering goods or services of a given quantity and quality. The difficulty is that, while there is a potential for contracting out to cut expenditure for health inputs and service delivery, the costs associated with monitoring delivery may offset any anticipated savings. Additionally, the performance of clinical or hospital services is difficult to measure and, even if they are measurable, technical expertise is required. This is particularly so when, as is the case in many developing countries, the authorities do not have sufficient experience in dealing with the private sector.For these reasons, non-clinical services are often easier to contract out to the private sector. Such non-clinical services include public-health outreach programmes, delivery of nutritional supplements (such as vitamins and iodine/iodized salt), education programmes for health workers and auxiliary services in health facilities (such as cleaning and catering). By contracting out these services, the health authorities should be able to accumulate the necessary experience to move on to more sophisticated forms, and to monitor their implementation.Among clinical services, contracting out either to for-profit or to non-profit organizations to manage primary care facilities has great potential. Because many patients in developing countries rely on private providers (instead of public clinic centres) as the first contact to official referral systems, integrative arrangements through contracts should more effectively tie primary care facilities to hospitals. Private providers could be mandated, for example, to develop and manage facilities and the health authorities could standardize referral methods.Contracting out requires that the Government plan, negotiate with a private provider, implement the contract and monitor the service contracted for (see box VII.). These are new skills that the Government must acquire. Once a service is contracted out, the Government needs to develop a strategy within which the private provider manages delivery of goods or services. Because no contract can spell out in advance all possible contingencies and actions required of the private provider in all situations (a contract is said to be innately incomplete), the Government has to instruct or negotiate with the provider to take certain actions under an unforeseeable circumstance once it occurs. Such strategic considerations include payment methods, price-setting mechanisms, mechanisms for the monitoring arrangement, and the terms of the contract. All these elements determine the attractiveness of the contract for private providers and, if the contract is not attractive enough, competent providers may not be interested. Even for non-governmental organizations, whose prime motives for serviceBox VII.Contracting out has increasingly become a popular form of public-health provision, particularly in developed countries. The goal of contracting out is to create a market in which private providers compete for the Governments funding to provide health goods and services, with the hope that such a contract will save societal resources, in general, and alleviate fiscal difficulties, in particular.Owing to the complex nature of medical procedures, contracting out of medical services always involves difficulties in respect of writing the terms of the contract and monitoring compliance. Health authorities are thus required not only to have medical expertise, but also to be equipped with adequate regulatory machinery. Moreover, the Governments of developing countries in many cases have to face a lack of competition among medical providers. If a Government decides to contract out a large scale of medical operations (for example, management of a public hospital), it will most likely find only one or two potential contractors who are qualified to perform such services. In this case, the market structure in which private contractors compete is monopolistic or duopolistic and does not automatically ensure the efficient outcome that the Government hoped for.In Zimbabwe, a long-standing contract exists between the Ministry of Health and a private general hospital with beds run since the s by the countrys leading coal producer, Wankie Colliery, pursuant to which the hospital provides clinical services as a district-level institution in Hwange.a The hospital is an operating department of Colliery and was originally founded in to provide health care to company employees and their families.b Under the contract with the Government, it has been providing treatment of government responsibility patients on a fee-forservice basis.c At a government office located in the hospital, a government officer certifies applicants as eligible for government responsibility status. Patients are treated according to the medical recommendations made by hospital staff and the bill for services rendered is sent to the Ministry of Health. In theory, patients with government responsibility status are exempted from users fees. The hospital also admits private patients, who are charged separately and pay for services out of pocket.d While the stipulations made at the time of the signing of the original contract during the s are no longer clear, the lack of a public hospital in the district is considered to be the major rationale for the contract-out by the Government to this private hospital which is the largest in the district of Hwange. The region now has another Government-run hospital with beds which provides clinical services to the population of the district, albeit with a limited range of facilities compared with those of the Colliery hospital.The contract between the Ministry of Health and the Wankie Colliery hospital specifies departmental charges for outpatient attendance, inpatient days, X-ray and other laboratory tests per investigation, dental services per consultation and use of the operating theatre per minute. The Ministry of Health financed the capital costs of the rehabilitation of the hospital during the s as well. The cost of the contract was . million Zimbabwe dollars (Z$) in , while the recurrent budget for the whole district (excluding the contract payment and salaries of health workers in Government-run facilities) was Z$ million. A health team from the provincial government visits the hospital on a regular basis.Because of the absence of a formal monitoring and quality evaluation, a sensible way to evaluate the quality of services provided by the Colliery hospital under the contract would be to compare its performance relative to the Government-run hospital in the same district. The financial costs of inputs (unit costs of providing four types of clinical services) and labour inputs (staffing levels) show that the public hospital has more staff per bed (. versus . in the private hospital), which reflects higher unit costs, except for outpatient services (see table).There are two possible interpretations of these results. One is that the Colliery hospital is more efficient and the public hospital is overstaffed. At the same time, the public hospital is considerably smaller than the private one, preventing it from effectively exploiting economies of scale: for example, the larger the number of Xray films taken, the lower the average fixed cost of operating the X-ray. The other interpretation is that the public hospital provides more secondary treatments, which are more expensive to administer. Unfortunately, the lack of case-mix informationtypes and numbers of various clinical treatments providedmakes it impossible to draw a clear conclusion. While it appears that the Colliery hospital treats more primary care patients, the hospital is sometimes used as a referral centre by the public hospital. The public hospital is at a disadvantage in terms of unitRESOURCE COSTS OF A PUBLIC AND A PRIVATE HOSPITAL IN ZIMBABWE, Public hospitalPrivate hospitalRecurrent costTotal costaTotal costaUnit costb (Zimbabwe dollars)ServiceInpatient day Outpatient visit Laboratory (per test) X-ray (per film)Staffing levels(number of persons)CategoryMedicalNursingLaboratory staffc Administrative staff General staff pital is estimated based on charges levied by the hospital plus drug costs ( per cent of the charges) while the two unit costs reported under the public hospital are based on expenditure allocated to departments and the number of patients receiving the services.Box VII. (continued)Box VII. (continued)efficiency but it has only a limited range of procedures. Furthermore, one can argue that the lack of competitive pressure on the private hospital in the local health market makes it difficult to believe that the virtuous influence of competitive market forces is at work.Nevertheless, the cost of the contract has come under scrutiny and a number of issues have been raised. They include, inter alia, the eligibility of patients for government responsibility status and the introduction of standardized accounting methods to calculate costs incurred by the hospital. The Government would like to exclude certain types of patients from government-responsibility status, based on income levels, access to insurance and possession of government health facility referral letters (which can be obtained only at Government-run primary care facilities). It proposes that, when those excluded fail to pay the bill, it would be the hospitals responsibility to cover the costs. The hospital insists, however, that provision of health service to the population is the Governments responsibility and costs must be covered by the Government.On the issue of the standardized accounting methods, cost information incurred by the hospital is not available at present. The Government hopes that the introduction of the new methods would make billings more transparent. Such billing methods, however, have been known to create incentives for health providers to overperform clinical services and prescribe high-cost drugs, thus necessitating a new way to monitor providers.Under the existing contract, either party can terminate the contract within a three-month notice period. This option, however, is not realistic, given the relative size of the Colliery hospital in meeting health needs. Furthermore, the contract states that the Government will not develop competing health facilities in the region, thus tying the Governments hands.The case of Zimbabwe demonstrates the difficulties of evaluating how a private provider complies with the terms of a contract. There are several lessons to be learned from this case study for those Governments seeking contracting out of clinical services to the private sector. First, if the Government does not have a viable alternative to the contracted party to deliver the services, the Government is in a vulnerable position when negotiating the contract. It may lock itself into the existing relationship and may need to commit itself to providing resources demanded by the contractor (the hold-up probleme). Second, the lack of qualified government officials contributes to problems experienced under the contract. If contracting out is seen as a way to alleviate the inadequacy of skill levels in the Government, these problems are likely to be aggravated by the contracting out process. Third, the lack of adequate information on the operations of public and private hospitals makes it difficult (if not impossible) to identify the advantage or disadvantage of contracting out. If there are a number of potential contractors, such an information deficiency can be corrected to some extent through a competitive bidding process (tendering). However, the absence of such conditionstypical in many developing countries does not encourage information-generation through the bidding process.f delivery are not profit, pricing mechanisms must cover average costs because a private provider that accepts a contract with unreasonably low costs of provision may not perform what the contract specifies must be done. Improving access for the poorThis is perhaps the most challenging area for Governments. The poor spend a larger portion of their incomes on health care and face greater chances of further impoverishment from health payments. Without a public scheme, the poor are pushed further into poverty by out-of-pocket health payments, and even some of the non-poor may be pushed below the poverty line by unexpected health-care expenses.Lack of access to health facilities by the poor and the unavailability of financial schemes to the poor constitute only two aspects of the multidimensional nature of poverty: the goal of poverty reduction extends beyond improved access to health facilities and public financing schemes. In this regard, developing countries and development partners are required to pay attention to critical cross-cutting issues such as sustainable development, gender equality, HIV/AIDS and problems of the urban poor. These problems, however, are, beyond the scope of this chapter which solely examines the two above-mentioned specifically health-related problems concerning improving access for the poor within the framework of public-private interaction.The targeting of free health care to particular groups, including the poor, is difficult to implement, owing to administrative shortcomings. Even if it is successfully implemented in a region, such a model is costly to scale to the national level. One method that has shown some success is the establishment under the auspices of the Government of local committees that bring together local leaders and health workers to determine the eligibility for exemptions in terms of income or types of medical treatment. The method has an advantage over a nationwide programme because the administrative costs of identifying the poor in the community are less than those of a nationally administered method, and the involvement of local leaders is likely to help in understanding local needs. Non-governmental organizations based outside a community or country have also proved to be effective in assisting actual health delivery and reaching the poor because some communities display prejudice against the poor and tend to exclude them from community-based programmes.The role of the Government in this schema is to show leadership, to develop clear goals for the committee, to mobilize local support and to provide technical assistance. Within clear guidelines, local committees can develop their capacity by learning through implementation. At the same time, the Government needs to monitor and evaluate the impact of such programmes on the poor. While such programmes have not yet been widely attempted, this is one area in which greater participation of local communities and non-governmental organizations, with the leadership and stewardship of the Government, can very likely expand public-health programmes to the poor.Increasing reliance on private health care delivery through expanded private insurance coverage to employees in the wage sector can indirectly help the poor, through the freeing up of public funding. This is owing to the fact that employees in the wage sector belong to an upper part of income distribution in developing countries and tend to utilize private health providers more often than the poor. If insurance is extended to such employees, they will use private services more than before, thus freeing up public funds that go to public providers (see box VII.).Box VII.PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE TO THE POOR: A SIMULATION STUDY OF JAMAICAaGovernments in developing countries are looking for ways to reduce their overall fiscal burden while improving the access of the poor to social services. Public-health expenditure is a targeted area, and one means that many health planners have come upon to alleviate financial pressure and channel more health resources to the poor is private health insurance.The economic benefits of health insurance are based on an analysis of demand for health by different sectors of the populationfor example, the rich and the poor.b The rich are more willing to pay for the higher-quality services offered by private health providers. Because public care is free or less costly to the consumer than private services in most countries, health insurance reduces the cost differential between the public and private sectors, shifting demand for health services by the rich away from the public to the private sector. Expanding or mandating private health insurance to richer people is thus likely to reduce total public expenditure on health care and help health authorities better target public-health resources to the poor.Jamaica, a middle-income developing country, has a universal health-care system and a private sector that offers higher quality of health care and health insurance.c Based on the Jamaican Survey of Living Conditions conducted by the Statistical and Planning Institute of Jamaica in and , researchers estimated the effects of health insurance on the demand for public and private health care. After adjusting for several factors that affect demand for health care (such as income, age, sex and education), they found that health insurance was associated with a significant drop in the number of visits to public-health providers and with a significant increase in visits to private providers. Insurance was associated with a per cent reduction in preventive visits to public providers and a per cent increase in preventive visits to private providers, leading to an overall per cent increase in preventive visits. For curative visits, insurance simply shifted demand for care away from the public to the private sectorthere was a per cent reduction in visits to public providers and a per cent increase in visits to private providers. When preventive and curative visits were combined, insurance was associated with an increase in total visits to private health providers and a decrease in visits to public providers.These results allowed the researchers to simulate the effect of expanding or mandating private health insurance on public-health expenditures and on fiscal expenditures to the poor. They considered two scenarios. First, they expanded insurance to everyone in the wealthiest income quartile (top per cent) and second, they extended insurance to everyone in the top half of the income distribution. It was estimated that expanding insurance to the top quartile would save about per cent of total public-health expenditure, mostly achieved owing to a reduction in public curative care, while the share of the poor in total public visits would be per cent higher, thus channelling more public resources to them. For the other scenario, it was estimated that total public-health savings would be per cent, again mostly through reductions in curative visits, and the share of the poor in total public visits would rise by per cent.dThis analysis does not take into account possible effects of expanded insurance on the supply side of health care: increased demand for private care may increase service charges in the private sector, exercising downward pressures on demand for private care. Furthermore, once the rich are less associated with public care, they may no longer support the universal health system. Despite such shortcomings, the analysis here shows how demand-side considerations can lead to potentially counter-intuitive results.While some may argue that such an approach will widen the gap between the rich and the poor in respect of receiving quality care, it is politically attractive because the reallocation of fiscal resources among different expenditure items is minimal and a greater involvement of the private sectorprivate health providers and insurersin a national health system would be expected.There is a changing and often expanding role for the private sector in health service delivery and a new and enhanced role for the Government, particularly the Ministry of Health, in ensuring that the population is provided with health services. Most countriesdeveloping and developed countries and economies in transition alikehave health systems with providers from both the public and private sectors, with the role of the private sector in many developing countries being larger than in transition and developed countries. The larger presence of the private sector in developing countries often challenges the principles and nature of public provision of health services envisaged by their Governments.The strong presence of private health services in the developing world arises because of the weakness of public-health systems in many developing countries, peoples increasing desire for better medical services and the growing ability of many people to pay for them (even in the poorest countries). A lack of financial and human resources and administrative capacity makes it difficult for many Governments to ensure that everyonepoor and rich people, rural and urban residents, and women and menhas fair access to a level of publichealth service that is commensurate with the countrys level of development. In many instances, the more affluent segments of society have better access to public-health facilities than the poor, with the result that private health facilities (including pharmaceutical vendors) may be the only places where the poor can seek medical advice and treatment. Patients demand for private health services also reflects not only the advantages of private health facilities, which usually include better service and more flexible access, but also a general perception in many countries that the quality of private medical services is superior. In future, the demand for private health services in developing countries can be expected to increase along with disposable income since demand for quality health services is income-elastic.The importance of the private sector in health provision in developing countries requires an examination of national economic and social policies beyond the conventional analysis of health-related technical issues. If a health authority fails to understand the factors affecting health demand and to take into account private demand and incentives, health policy will not be effective. In order to manage public health care effectively, policy makers are now required to devise a mixed package of controls and incentives: they need to monitor and regulate the quality and quantity of health services supplied by the private sector and, at the same time, to use private incentives so that they serve the public goal of providing essential health care as widely and as cost-effectively as possible.Taking advantage of private activities requires novel legislation and regulations, which, in turn, require new thinking regarding mechanisms and institutions for their implementation. At present, there are only a few developing countries that have in place models of legislation and regulation that take into account the complex interrelations between private and public health provision. The absence of such a system can have wide-ranging negative consequences. In Viet Nam, for example, because of the role assigned to the private sector, the unsafe use of antibiotics has become widespread. The Government has therefore formulated pilot plans that aim to strengthen drug-quality assurance and the drug control system through a drug information system for health providers. Such policy initiatives constitute, however, only an initial step towards promoting the safe use of pharmaceuticals: they need to be further strengthened by increasing dialogue and information exchange between the health authorities and private providers. In another example, the contract between the Government of Zimbabwe and a private hospital that has been servicing a local population for almost years shows the benefits of integrating private providers into a government-organized national health system. This is a case of beneficial public-private cooperation but, at the same time, it demonstrates the pitfalls associated with private incentives and the difficulties created by an absence of alternative health providers who could, at least in theory, compete with the incumbent private provider for the contract.The foregoing examples are illustrative, but the issues of health systems in general and public-private interaction in particular are products of a countrys history and its economic and social environments. In large measure, the domestic economic and social environment determines the current level and form of the health system. For this reason, drawing general policy implications from worldwide cross-country studies on health systems, which combine developing and developed countries, can sometimes misguide the policy choices for particular countries. Developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, face health challenges that differ from those of more developed countries.International and regional cooperation, in particular among developing countries, can play a useful role. This is because there is often a similarity among some, or sometimes many, developing countries in the same region or across regions. This can be a basis for a common platform on which comparable cost-effective health interventions and the regulatory institutions that are required for such interventions can be built. Countries can, through technical cooperation and dialogue, share their experiences in health system reforms, avoid common pitfalls and learn from each others best practices in health systems. South-South or regional cooperation should contribute to a sense of ownership of the process of health reforms: dialogue among developing countries should maximize the extent to which local conditions can be incorporated without developing a sense of external imposition.The New Partnership for Africas Development (NEPAD) (see box III.) is a prime example of a step towards creating a sense of ownership and a sharing of common development experiences in health development among African countries. In the health area, its objectives include, inter alia, to empower the people of Africa to act to improve their own health and to achieve health literacy and to encourage cooperation between medical doctors and traditional practitioners. These are both areas in which Governments can strengthen cooperation between the public and private sectors and among private health providers. In practical terms, empowering the people requires education on the rational use of drugs (in addition to such matters as safety of drinking water,hygiene and nutrition), to be provided in schools and public-health campaigns. Establishing domestic and regional health sector-wide organizations should encourage cooperation between doctors and traditional practitioners and could contribute to the development of a drug information system for all health providersboth modern and traditional practitionersunder the supervision of a domestic or regional authority.Health authorities are required to understand the health needs of their populations and to evaluate the status of their national health system, including the functions of the private health sector. In a situation where private health-care services are predominant, but appropriate regulations are not in place, a Government must undertake multifaceted interventions and ensure coordination among the health authorities, public and private health providers and consumers. Encouraging the formation of professional associations can be a first step. Once experience of dialogue and coordination with a particular segment of health providers has been gained, such experiences can be applied to other priority areas in health care. Regulation should be not a matter of top-down direction from the Government, but an ongoing interaction between the authority and private providers.Public-private cooperation in education offers promising new avenues for achieving economic and social development through the nurturing of human capital.In many countries, the private educational sector pre-dated the Staterun sector and the attempt by the State to provide universal primary and, later, secondary education. This was often supplied by religious bodies, self-help institutions or the for-profit private sector. As shown by the prominent position in all walks of societysuch as politics, the military, the arts and industryoccupied by many of the products of prestigious and costly fee-paying educational institutes, the investment by an individual in a high-quality education can be readily justified on economic grounds.Parents are often making a wise investment decision when they purchase from the private sector a higher-quality education at the primary and secondary levels than is available in public institutions, for they increase the likelihood that their children will earn a greater income over the course of their lives. Similarly, a students entry into a private fee-paying university to obtain a high-class education from this institution can also be viewed as reflecting a rational investment decision in terms of time and money. The for-profit private sector has an incentive to provide a higher-quality education than could be obtained, at no direct cost to the student or his parent, from a non fee paying public institution.Issues of equity arise: the rich are able to purchase for themselves and their children a higher-quality education than that offered to poorer members of society. Yet education is but one of the many goods and services access to health, to food and to all the amenities of life, including education-enhancing expenditures, such as on foreign travel or on private tuitionthat the wealthy can purchase in greater quantities and of a higher quality than the poor. Such goods and services can improve their human capital and, to this extent, contribute to widening inequality. Similarly, when individuals unite together in self-improvement schemes to raise their educational status, the aim is often to give themselves a better chance of well-paid employment. The challenge for society is to ensure that the poorer members of society are not denied access to a high-quality education. In many countries with a strong private sector, public funds are used to subsidize the attendance of poor and gifted children at private institutions, as in the Programa de Ampliacion de Cobertura de la Educacion Secundaria (PACES) in Colombia.Given that there will always be a demand for a private education, whether from a for-profit institution, or, as with much religious-based education, from a not-for-profit institution, the case for encouraging its provision is strong. Moreover, as noted in the wess, , a development strategy that increases the demand for skilled workers encourages them to invest in their own education. Private education provides an alternative for parents and a yardstick against which to measure the performance of State-run institutions, and it enables some children to be educated at little cost to the State. The State has a regulatory and supervisory role in this sector to ensure that the children in private schools receive a quality education and are not, for instance, imbued with values incompatible with respect for human rights.Howeverespecially in the last years during which some, and ultimately all, States tried to ensure the access of every child to at least the primary level of educationthe private sector has never been expected to supply, without any assistance from government, all the education that is in the interests of the State as a whole. Many parents are too poor to afford such an education for their children and the recipients, while perhaps able to judge the private monetary returns, cannot be expected to calculate the other benefits, in terms of health and nutrition, scientific advance and overall literacy, that come to society at large from education. These are some of the principal reasons why, as shown in the wess, , the State has perceived the provision of universal highquality education, at least at the primary level, and progressively at the secondary level, to be one of its responsibilities.The present chapter looks at new ways in which the State is involving the private sector or using market mechanisms to ensure the provision of high-quality education. Some innovative experiments in developing countries indicate that, despite problems, public-private alliances may provide both alternative solutions and new understanding regarding how to design and implement effective educational policies. Key issues, concerns and challenges regarding the provision of education are examined at each of three levels: primary, secondary (technical and vocational) and tertiary.Of the three levels of education, quality basic education is widely acknowledged to yield the greatest social and economic returns through its positive effect on human capital development and economic growth. The need for government participation in this sector is firmly established. Reliance on the private sector, without any subsidy, would lead to the exclusion of the poor from this level of education and so has not been attempted. In many developing countries, universal primary education has still not been achieved, as shown by the gross enrolment rates (see table VIII.).The benefits of private sector involvement suggest that some demand for primary education can be efficiently met by the private sector, freeing resources for others who cannot afford to pay. In some developing countries, private schools are less costly than public schools and more effective in improving student performance. This raises the question why public sector spending on eduPUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN EDUCATION Table VIII..GROSS ENROLMENT RATIOS, BY LEVEL, -PrimarySecondaryTertiaryWorld totalDeveloped countriesDeveloping countries:Sub-Saharan Africa Arab Stateslatin_america/Caribbean east_asia/Oceania South AsiaLeast developed countries. . .. . .. .. . .. . .. .. . .. . .. .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . . .cation has not yielded the desired outcomes of improved literacy rates, increased participation of girls, and a reduction in dropout rates; and highlights the fact that a focus on spending without systematic attention to institutional factors that improve the quality of education and enhance learning is likely to prove unproductive.Cost recovery at public schoolsWhat has been attempted, though, is the recovery from the parents of the children of some of the costs of providing education in public schools. Often the imposition of school fees is advocated when other direct costs such as the construction of school buildings and sports facilities have already been passed on to the community. However, the case for fees for primary and secondary schooling is largely based upon excess demandthe notion that, as the returns to education are high, there is a large unmet demand that people would pay to see satisfied. Yet it is the richer households that wish to consume more education even when the total cost of schooling rises. As rich households are likely to have a higher demand for education than poor ones, they would gain the most from some relaxation of the rationing ceiling that would occur if charges were to be imposed or increased.When demand is deficient, these implications of imposing fees do not follow: increases in costs of education to the individual family would simply lead to a decline in enrolment. In periods of recession when household incomes are falling and when expected returns to schooling also decline, the demand for education is likely to fall, particularly among the poor. Evidence on differences in elasticity of demand for high-versus low-income groups, though scanty, suggests that elasticity is higher for the latter, implying that charges would be a greater disincentive to the poor. Enrolment rates have been seen to fall during recessions, as occurred in the United Republic of Tanzania where the primary gross enrolment ratio (GER) fell from to per cent during -, a period of steep economic decline during which fees remained unchanged.Nevertheless, even if there was evidence of parents willingness to pay for their childrens primary education, it might not be feasible to implement costrecovery policies throughout the whole school system, particularly in the poorest schools where fees incurred by the parents absorb more of their income than in richer communities. Moreover, those who are less aware of the beneficial effects of education are likely to drop out more frequently in response to increases in fees than those who are cognizant of those beneficial effects. Finally, when secondary rather than primary schooling is linked with employment opportunities, the perceived probability of gaining entry to secondary schooling has an increasingly important influence upon the decision to send children to primary school. Policies that reduce access may then reduce demand for both primary and secondary schooling.Experience has shown that in many countries the poor are incapable of paying the costs involved. Estimates for a sample of nine West African countries for the mid-s suggest that the public costs of primary schooling for families in the lowest per cent of the income distribution who had two children at primary school would have meant their spending between and per cent of family income on their childrens education. In many parts of the world, such additional costs would be insupportable and reduce enrolment. This happened in Nigeria where primary enrolments had increased from . million in to . million in but had declined to . million by following the introduction of school fees in .The removal of fees in by the new Government in Malawi led to the increasing of enrolments from . million to million during the course of the year. Malawi also increased public expenditures on education between and : from . to almost per cent of gross national product (GNP). Furthermore, public spending on primary schooling increased from to per cent of the education budget over the same period.These examples show that, even where fees are very low, small changes in the size of the burden, whether brought about through an increase in fees or a reduction in the income with which to pay them, can have a large impact upon total enrolments. User charges reduce the income available to meet other basic needs and could force the withdrawal of children from school when incomes shrink. Thus, the impact of cost-recovery policies on welfare is a function of changes in household consumption as a whole.Non-governmental and private sector involvementThe for-profit and not-for profit private sector is involved in the provision of some educational services at the primary level in the developing countries. The achievements of non-governmental organizations such as the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC), a national private development organization, suggest that local capability and entrepreneurship in education can flourish even in the rural communities of the poorest countries. BRAC has a regular staff of approximately , and more than , part-time teachers covering , villages. The majority of its clients are women. For the past years, it has been making loans to the rural poor and marginalizedcommunities, and . million poor children now receive primary education through its education programme. Its annual budget, per cent of which is self-generated, is now more than $ million. Among its latest initiatives has been to set up a new liberal arts university to meet local needs and aspirations.Particularly in developing countries, private sector involvement can help meet educational needs when government budgets and capacity to deliver are severely constrained. The Philippines, for example, has a long tradition of private education: per cent of all students are in the private sector: per cent at the elementary level, per cent at the secondary level; and per cent at the tertiary level. This sector is often associated with efficiency and higher levels of achievement. However, increasing public or private school enrolment may not have an immediate one-to-one effect on overall enrolment, particularly if students have simply been attracted by the move from one sector to the other. Thus, in countries where the private sector is active and provides a viable alternative to the public sector, substitutability between the private and public sectors is important in evaluating the net benefits of government expansion.Chiles experiments with educational decentralization, de-linking financing from the provision of education through the use of vouchers, and the introduction of technology-based educational networks, suggest that partnerships with the private sector can help to extend the reach of educational services (see box VIII.). The implications for equity have been less clear: the wealthy continued to take better advantage of the school system and to obtain a higher-quality education than many poorer people. If schools operate for profit, or even as non-profit private organizations, it is almost impossible to prevent them from deciding on location and the types of students they select. It would appear unrealistic, however, to expect any educational system to provide the same quality of education to all students and to remove all the advantages that accrue from having wealthy parents. The meaning of equity in the context of education is by no means simple. However, the Chilean case indicates that private sector involvement can help increase the availability and quality of the education provided to a large number of students, including poor students.The continuing need for public sector interventionThe involvement of the private sector has not removed the need for continued and expanding public sector participation through the funding and building of capacity in the poorest countries, especially those where universal primary education has not been achieved. Reforms are also necessary to ensure that spending is more productive, that incentive systems for teacher performance are revised, and that educational attainments are improved.Nevertheless, private participation in providing primary schooling may be a useful strategy, particularly in countries where private sector involvement has long been accepted. In such cases, school reform measures at the primary level must include building linkages between private and public schools in addition to organizational changes within schools in order to improve quality and productivity and to raise the performance of students. Experiments in community-building, such as the Enlaces programme, which links schools across Chile through a computerized network, and the educational programme of the Bangladesh RuralBox VIII.Chiles experiments with educational decentralization and privatization to remedy the problems of governance demonstrate the advantages of greater autonomy for schools in allocating resources, managing personnel, and increasing accountability to sponsors or clients.a The Chilean system allocates resources to schools on the basis of the number of students who attend and it allows non-governmental schools to compete for students and public funds. Although . per cent of students still attend schools that are privately funded and run, Chile has a large and growing number of schools that are privately managed but financed from taxes, and hence are accessible to students from a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds. Publicly funded private schools operating with similar amounts of money were found to have higher test scores than the municipal schools even after controlling for the socio-economic background of students and selection effects. The advantage in test scores ( per cent for privately operated schools and only per cent for municipal schools) is partly a result of more motivated or more capable students seeking private schooling. Yet, even after controlling for these factors, a test score advantage remainsranging from about points for the private non-religious schools to more than points for Catholic schools. Better test scores are associated with greater autonomy and clearer incentives in the non-municipal schools.The organization of schools, financial autonomy, the introduction of innovations such as parent-teacher councils as a forum for monitoring, judging and holding schools accountable to parents, and the election of school directors were also found to improve school performance in Chile, Brazil and Venezuela.b Education systems that enhanced incentives, rewarded outputs, increased accountability, and used contests between providers to generate information about the value of their services were found to be effective providers.However, for the successful implementation of a decentralization strategy, the central government needs to develop new roles that support decentralization because local institutions generally lack the technical ability and the funds necessary to perform their new functions.c Education decentralization in Chile began with the devolution of the administration of education from officials in the central government ministries to regional secretaries, and eventually led to the devolution to provincial departments of education. The successful implementation of these devolution policies helped to raise receptivity to decentralization and the devolution of responsibility to the local level of government. In addition, since school choice and public support of private education were already institutionalized features of Chiles education system, the reforms were built on a supportive foundation. Central government also adopted new roles to assist the transition and became responsible for providing funds on a perstudent basis, giving support in kind such as food, textbooks and technical support to rural schools or schools with greater need, funding school improvements, administering national achievement tests and supervising schools on a regular basis.Some questions have been raised about the effectiveness of policies of devolution and of encouraging the private sector. They appear not to have had the expected positive impact on education quality and have had a negative effect on equity. Improved monitorPUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN EDUCATION ing of school inputs and student performance and consistent financial support from the central government are needed to improve equity and raise the quality of education.One study found that, despite educational decentralization and the rapid expansion of private schooling and increase in enrolments over the past decade, in practice, central control and monitoring by the Government had increased and there had not been a real devolution of power to local municipalities.d Moreover, public choice and decentralization had not contributed to better information since local municipalities were too weak and were lacking in authority. Nor had students invariably gained equality of educational opportunity or better schooling. A survey of households in Greater Santiago found evidence for social and economic stratification, indicating that market forces might exacerbate inequalities without necessarily generating clear gains in academic achievement. Parents continued to be ill-informed about differences in schools, non-academic factors played a major role in school selection, schools used entrance examinations to practice a form of selection of the best candidates, and parental wealth was a strong determinant of whether families were able to take advantage of choice programmes.Another study found that marketizing education had increased school choice for a certain fraction of parents, but was unlikely to improve educational delivery for more than a small fraction of the school population.e Moreover, even in the best of cases, years of intense competition had improved the achievements recorded in public schools by only a small amount. Marketizing had not removed the gap in achievement between lowand high-income children, nor the gap in access to high-quality schools. The study thought that the quality problem in low-performing public schools was most effectively addressed not by competition, but by Ministry of Education intervention in building capacity.These studies at the microlevel showed that the gap in access to quality education between the lowand high-income classes persisted. However, the overall picture of educational reform in Chile was one of greater availability of high-quality education. In the mid-s, million students were attending over , schools, million were enrolled in primary school, , in secondary school and , in highereducation institutions distributed between universities, technological centres and professional institutes.Other experiments in Chile to overcome inequality in access to education and resources include Enlaces, a pilot project started in to create a computer-learning network linking primary and secondary schools, train teachers, and supply educational software.f Enlaces was converted into a national programme by the Government with political and financial support for incorporating all secondary schools and half of all primary schools by . New partners such as the universities and industry have also been introduced. The major challenges it faces are scaling up, getting teachers to use the network effectively, and incorporating schools in rural communities lacking telecommunications facilities. Yet, Enlaces promises the benefits of learning networks like those in the united_states of America for teaching mathematics, Globalnet, the European School Project (ESP) operated out of the University of Amsterdam, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Spacelink.Box VIII. (continued)Advancement Committee, indicate that, in addition to resources, both public and private initiatives to include communities traditionally isolated from education require commitment and innovation. Finally, public sector support in accessing resources, teacher training, and monitoring of output quality is essential to improving educational performance at the primary level.THE SECONDARY LEVEL: VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL EDUCATIONThe present section focuses on vocational and technical education rather than on general secondary schooling. Vocational and technical education is the secondary level of education that would appear most suited for public-private interaction, as it is the private sector that is interested in obtaining the specific skills that it needs for its operations to be profitable which vocational and technical schools can supply. The private sector can identify the skills that it needs and offer graduates of the programmes employment after they acquire them. As the costs of imparting specific technical skills are usually higher than the cost of a general education programme, private sector involvement in meeting some of the costs is also helpful. Furthermore, as the skills imparted can result in the students achieving higher earnings, the for-profit educational sector has an incentive to supply the needs of students who are prepared to pay to acquire the skills that they cannot obtain from the public sector. Forprofit institutes in developing and transition economies have supplied educational services not only to their own nationals, but even to students in developed countries (see box VIII.).The liberalization of economic activities on a global scale, together with a high rate of youth unemployment in developed, transition and developing countries, has led to a growing concern over how to meet the demand for new skills that the market requires. Diversified secondary school programmes have been introduced in many developing countries in Africa and latin_america to increase the relevance of graduates skills to market needs, to broaden the academic curriculum, and to teach at the secondary level skills that were otherwise obtainable only at the higher level of education.In practice, in most developing countries, and in many developed countries, vocational education has been a residual form of education and is often perceived as leading to lower-status jobs, while standard secondary education leads to university. In addition, vocational education can be expensive for students because the costs are usually borne by them and their families while tertiary or higher education is usually subsidized. Finally, there has often been a mismatch between the supply of graduates and demand for labour at the secondary and tertiary levels. Thus, when a large supply of general high school and university graduates is available, employers are reluctant to employ workers with vocational training, since those with a general and broad education are often considered to have the academic training that would enable them to be more easily instructed. The need for flexibility in adapting to changes in technology and markets also makes employers more reluctant to employ those with vocational training. They are concerned that the latter are equipped with more traditional types of technical skills, not with the new skills that advances in the computer industry and in information and communication technologies (ICT) demand.In many developing and transition countries, the for-profit provision of education has grown rapidly, catering for the needs of students who were discouraged by inadequate public provision and long waiting lines. These institutions are supplying a highquality education not just to their own nationals but even to students in developed countries. Their services are promoted through advertising, including on the Internet.Objetivo Universidade Paulista (UNIP), based in Sao Paulo, Brazil, began as a coaching class for pre-university courses in with students and became the largest education company in the world in with over , students in almost campuses around Brazil. The Centre for Open Distance Education for Civil Society (CODECS), Romania, was started by students on a united_kingdom of great_britain and Northern Ireland open University Business School course, while a third company, Education Investment Corporation, Ltd (Educor), began in South Africa in as a cramming college for white students in Johannesburg and grew through the development of distance learning materials for teachers without high school diplomas. The company, which now has over , students in campuses, has expanded into the North American market and funds itself almost entirely from fee income from students. Finally, the National Institute for Information Technology (NIIT) of India, which began as a computer training company in , now has centres in India and has moved into edutainment in centres based in family homes and schools. Through franchising, NIIT has expanded into countries, including the united_states of America. This is a for-profit company even though for-profit education is illegal in India.These institutes can be analysed as businesses that seek to attract clients and deliver a high-quality good at a low cost in a competitive market. To build up a client base, the promotion of the institutes name was extremely important and many companies spent per cent of their revenues on marketing and promoting their name. In Zimbabwe, Speciss College sponsored national athletes, and a national basketball team, and ran competitions to promote its brand name.b The promotion by NIIT of its name has been so successful that people talk about doing a NIIT when they mean doing a computer course.Research and development (R&D) expenditures were focused on developing and promoting innovatory methods of teaching, learning, and course development to beat the competition. For instance, NIIT spent . per cent of turnover on pure R&D or about $ million. Both product and process innovations were sought, including the development of cost-cutting technologies and adjustments to the educational product. Similarly, quality control was promoted through standardization of the curriculum, total quality management and evaluation of faculty. Most of the companies started on a low budget, grew through internal investments and were able to fund later expansion and acquisition through rights issues.Although they are for-profit institutions, private education companies have pursued several methods to promote equity. NIIT developed student loan schemes, as did Asociacion Promotora de Institutos Tecnologicos Superiores (TECSUP) of Peru, and the University of Colombia. Richer students subsidized poorer ones through cross-subsidization of courses and campuses. Other methods employed to promote equity include strong social responsibility programmes, linking in with poorer schools, and offering free tuition to various disadvantaged groups and free legal and medical services to the poor.The evidence, then, suggests that educational entrepreneurs do cater for a demand and are able to operate at a profit while still charging moderate fees and being accessible to many socio-economic groups. They also create educational chains that are efficient because they benefit from economies of scale, invest in R&D and provide consumers with the informational benefits of brand names. A strong argument can be made for modifying, if necessary, the regulatory environment to ensure that such educational companies can emerge and grow, and for extending the sources of finance so that more students can benefit from private educational opportunities.Box VIII.Such shortcomings in the vocational and technical programmes are leading Governments to make new attempts to provide a relevant and useful education at this level. Experience has shown that high-quality vocational and technical programmes can be developed in partnership with the private sector and that they should link schooling with subsequent employment. Germany and Japan have well-developed systems that provide an ample supply of semi-professionals and skilled technicians for economic activity. The Japanese vocational system consists of company-sponsored training programmes as well as public and private kosen or vocational schools. The German apprenticeship system, a partnership between government and business to align the stratified educational system with needs anticipated by the market, is often considered an exemplary model for those youth not planning on a university education. Vocational education for German youth not holding a university degree was more important for obtaining initial high wages in than in .Technical and vocational education in developing countriesEvidence from studies on vocational education in a wide range of countries suggests that vocational and technical education at the secondary level may offer a promising way to provide skills for labour-market requirements. There is both a willingness to pay and a demand for technical and vocational skills when it is linked with obtaining a job. Vocational schooling has produced higher wages in Brazil and Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, and better returns on investment in Israel, than has general education. An examination of the performance of informal microentrepreneurs in Jamaica found that vocational training is strongly associated with the profitability of the business along with factors such as high socio-economic status and years of experience in the business. In Indonesia, after controlling for observable personal characteristics and school selection, it was found that graduates of private secondary schools performed better in the labour market than did graduates of public schools.Public-private partnerships can be essential in determining the demand for the different skills and in ensuring that graduates are subsequently employed. Private participation in the provision and financing of vocational education services can be very helpful, particularly when the skills and training provided are linked with the demands of rapidly growing industries such as software development.Mexico: reorganizing vocational education attracts private sector supportOne vocational and technical education programme that has been successful and has attracted funding from the private sector is the Colegio Nacional de Educacion Profesional Tecnica (CONALEP) programme in Mexico. The Mexican Government launched this new vocational and technical education system in December to address the problems its diversified technical programmes had been experiencing. The country had a shortage of mid-level technical manpower which was attributed to the perception that technical and manual jobs were inferior to professional jobs which required an academic education. Completion rates in its vocational programmes were low (ranging from to per cent), largely because the programmes were used as a waitPUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN EDUCATION ing bay prior to the retaking of entrance examinations for transfer to other education programmes. Moreover, about per cent of graduates from the diversified technical education programme proceeded to higher education, where tuition and fees were negligible. In addition, the fragmentation of programmes and the division of responsibility among many different authorities made effective management difficult.CONALEP is semi-autonomous with a decentralized administration that enables it to respond to the changing needs of its clients (entrepreneurs in manufacturing and service sectors) and encourages their participation. Operational decisions, including curriculum adaptation, are delegated to local training centres. In addition, the programme emphasizes a practical and job market-oriented curriculum ( per cent general theory, per cent technical theory and per cent technical practice) with a strong emphasis on evaluation, hands on experience, follow-up, and feedback leading to final degrees. Multimedia promotional activities also helped to attract qualified students and encourage significant financial support from the private sector ($ million in or about per cent of total recurrent expenditures). Despite high tuition fees (as much as per cent of direct recurrent training costs in ), students are motivated to work hard and remain in the programme. Finally, technical instructors for the programme with experience in industry were recruited and paid to teach on a part-time basis.CONALEP has been successful, as seen by the higher labour-force participation rate of its graduates (. per cent), when measured against a comparison group of students from upper-secondary diversified programmes (. per cent). CONALEP graduates found jobs faster than the comparison group. Placement rates compared favorably with those of the comparison group: per cent of the graduates reported that they were working in the occupational category congruent with their field of training. This high rate of congruency is comparable with the figure of per cent among apprentices in Germany, but significantly higher than the figure of per cent for upper-secondary technical school graduates in Japan. In , average earnings of CONALEP graduates were higher than both lower secondary school graduates and upper secondary school graduates, aged -years.The challenge CONALEP faces is that of adjusting to future needs. General subjects have been introduced recently to reduce narrow specialization and provide graduates with the option of either proceeding to higher education or entering the labour market.While Mexicos system of technical education can be applied in other developing countries, understanding the Mexican context is essential for successful replication. Mexico is a middle-income developing country with an adequate level of basic education and a large and dynamic industrial services base which generates substantial demand for technical skills and furnishes a sufficient number of proficient technicians and engineers to serve as instructors of practical skills.The Philippines: the private sector plays a major role in providing skillsAs previously mentioned, private education has traditionally played an important role in the Philippines and is crucial at the secondary, technical, vocational and higher education levels. These sectors in the Philippines are responding to the need for world-class education and are competing in the world market through international certification. For example, in the field of maritime education, four private institutions have been certified by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), series, a distinction not achieved by any other public maritime school in the country.The costs per capita of private secondary education are lower than those for public schools and private secondary schools also have a higher achievement rate than secondary schools in the public sector. Consequently, through the Fund for Assistance to Private Education, called the Service Contracting Scheme, pupils are channelled to private secondary schools, with the Government paying their tuition fees. More than , students throughout the Philippines participate in this scheme. Thus, private education is a major sector in respect of producing highly qualified manpower for the Philippines.China: preparing students for the new economySince , when its programme of economic reform began, China has made great efforts to introduce vocational education at the senior secondary level to prepare young people with skills for employment in industry. It hoped that its vocational education programme would raise the efficiency of investment in education. Over this period, problems have been encountered and solutions attempted, as shown by the example of Shenzhen Special Economic Zone.Compared with general education, vocational and technical education received one and a half times more government funding in terms of average recurrent expenditure per student, while those in specialized secondary technical schools received three times as much, as of . The Government encouraged school-business partnership and the enlisting of sponsors from all trades that might employ graduates. However, the response from companies was lukewarm and coordination mechanisms to link schools with employers were not established. Moreover, a high-quality education was difficult to achieve because of the lack of training equipment, teacher training, and resources for curriculum development. To raise quality, a higher vocational and technical education institute was introduced in which attracted per cent of the students from the academic track along with per cent from the vocational and technical track. This increased the motivation of vocational students and their teachers and reduced dropout rates. However, other vocational and technical schools found it more difficult to recruit students for their programmes.Other problems arose from the difficulties of staying abreast of the requirements of newly emerging jobs in a constantly changing market environment. Vocational and technical schools in rural areas experienced difficulties teaching technical skills to students who lacked a general education. In the face of high worker mobility and lack of long-term job commitments, most employers found that their own training could prepare workers for whatever skills were needed. Therefore, graduates of vocational schools often did not work in the fields for which they had been educated. In the meantime, business and industry have built up a non-formal system to develop the human resources of their own staff.New directions in vocational and technical educationChina illustrates how the effectiveness of vocational education in terms of its quality and ability to lead to employment is linked with the ability of institutions, whether private or public, to coordinate with the private sector and to provide training that is relevant to its needs. In some of the transition economies and the poorest countries of sub-Saharan Africa, access to secondary and vocational education prevents students from dropping out at the primary level.However, in the fast-moving economy, where demands for different skills are constantly changing, the old model of providing a vocational training for life is out of date. General skills must also be provided to ensure that students can adapt to suit labour-market requirements. For instance, computer literacy is prized by employers regardless of whether it has been obtained in general secondary rather than vocational schools, or whether the institution providing it was private or public. Moreover, to increase flexibility for students, vocational education can be strengthened through enrolments from the general track and by providing avenues for higher education so as to alter the perception that vocational education is a dead-end track. In addition, establishing successful general and vocational tracks requires attention to how these interface with each other and with primary and higher education.The increasing importance of higher educationJust as secondary education, and in particular vocational and technical education, is changing to adapt to the new economy, so has tertiary education, once the preserve of the privileged elite or a small minority of very gifted students, undergone a radical transformation in terms of the quantity and nature of the educational services it provides.In developed countries, high participation in tertiary education is fast becoming the norm as a result of rising aspirations, mass secondary education, awareness of the need for lifelong learning and of the returns to investment in skills, increased attention to extending access to previously underrepresented groups, and ease of access to flexible forms of study. Universities may be converging towards a uniform function characterized as the entrepreneurial university, a structure based on complex knowledge-producing and knowledgeusing networks and constituencies that cut across the boundaries of academia, industry and government and focus on new missions of research and economic development. Moreover, the shift towards the market as a means of steering higher education is associated with an ideological shift, in which higher education is viewed as a private rather than a public good. According to this reasoning, although higher education is a private good with positive externalities for society as a whole, the private returns are so great as to justify on economic grounds alone the individuals making some or all of the investment needed to acquire it. To assist students in paying for their studies, Governments have arranged for loans to be extended to them.Reforms have been introduced in many developed countries to promote market orientation and to make them better attuned to the new global economy.Japanese universities have introduced major reforms since , following the deregulation of higher education. These have included curriculum reshaping, the introduction of self-monitoring, and a non-tenure track faculty system to transform research-oriented organizations into teaching-centered universities and to develop a knowledge base to deal with global competition.The wide access to tertiary education for those who feel they can benefit from it stands in stark contrast to the situation in the developing countries, most of which are still striving to provide universal access to secondary education, and many of which have not yet achieved universal provision of primary education (see table VIII.). Thus, the difference between the enrolment rates at the tertiary level are much greater than at the earlier levelswith an enrolment rate of over per cent being the norm in the developed countries as against an average of about per cent in the developing countries and per cent in the least developed countries. The absolute number of the teaching staff in tertiary education in the developed countries exceeds that in all the developing countries.The expansion of tertiary education in the developed countries has enabled them to maintain their position as the prime generators of research in the world. For instance, in , per cent of the new , research papers in the sciences, including the social sciences, were published in high-income countries. Their extensive and high-quality tertiary education institutes can be seen as an important part of their economic systems and a major explanation of their economic success in steadily producing new and improved products. Many of these institutes are private and students must pay high fees for attendance.For many developing countries, expanding access, increasing the efficiency of the provision of educational services and making what is taught more relevant to development objectives, are among the objectives for the tertiary sector.An expanding tertiary sector can help the developing countries achieve sustained growth in the way that the tertiary sector has assisted the growth of the developed countries. Higher education improves peoples ability to acquire and use information, deepens their understanding of the world, enriches their minds by broadening their experience, and improves the choices they make as consumers, producers and citizens. It increases their productivity and potential to achieve higher standards of living, improves their ability to create and to innovate and also fosters values necessary for civil society. Given the importance of knowledge-generation, countries will benefit from encouraging the presence of an active intellectual community and establishing links that extend beyond national boundaries to allow information to flow freely.Moreover, globalization and the internationalization of industry and R&Dhave further emphasized the need for strong systems of education that foster innovation and attract foreign direct investment (FDI). The acceleration of knowledge-creation in developing countries can be seen from the doubling of the publication rate in China, Hong Kong SAR, Singapore, the Republic of Korea, and Taiwan Province of China, and rising patent applications from such countries as Brazil and India, where and per cent more patent applications, respectively, were filed in than in .Developing countries have relied on non-State, and sometimes for-profit institutions, to expand the provision of higher education. Increasing participation by the private sector in higher education in developing countries presents the challenges of maintaining equity and quality, of diversifying into scienceand technology-based courses, and of nurturing sustained institutional growth. Administrative reforms are critical to eliminating inefficiencies, reducing dependence on public sector financing, and improving accountability. Many of the changes have included devolving power to and strengthening the autonomous capability of institutions. In some cases, monitoring and standardsetting by the public sector along with reforms to decentralize and strengthen the private sector may be required to ensure higher overall quality. Given the rising costs of higher education, small countries may find it imperative to strengthen institutions of higher education through reforms to promote innovation and use new technologies creatively so as to link with other countries.Expansion of private higher education in selected developing countriesThe private sector has been involved in the expansion and modernization of tertiary education in the developing countries. From the s onwards, private sector participation in tertiary education has risen. Sixty per cent of Brazilian students are enrolled in private institutions which constitute nearly per cent of the countrys higher education system; Indonesia has public universities and more than , private ones and more than per cent of students are enrolled in private institutions; and half of South Africas students are enrolled in private institutions. Private universities have introduced innovations in the form of the semester system, standardized examinations and credit systems. Distance learning has expanded rapidly and the five largest programmes based in developing countries account for per cent of enrolment growth in developing countries in the last two decades; with an enrolment of million students in .However, the rapid expansion of private sector involvement has still not met the demand. In Turkey, for instance, private higher education grew rapidly with the establishment of the first non-profit private university in and eight more universities in . Yet, public and private funding has not kept pace with the growth in student numbers: the number tripled between and , but one third of all applicants were still not admitted to any type of programme.Similarly, in Africa, many students who are qualified to attend a public higher education institute did not obtain a place, and this has been one factor accounting for the growth of private institutions. Another factor has been the demand for a religious education. In East Africa and Nigeria, the number of Islamic institutions has increased. The private universities have also been able to satisfy their students demand for linking university education with the needs of firms and employers. Students at private institutions tend to specialize in fields that have a greater rate of employability such as business administration, commercial design, hotel management and tourism. Some private universities have entered joint ventures with corporations/businesses to ease the financial difficulties of students.With the economic problems they have been confronting, it has been difficult for African countries to maintain the quality of higher education. However, Makerere University in Uganda has been able to address the problem of providing good-quality education equitably without undue dependence on public resources. It implemented new financing strategies, installed new management structures and introduced demand-driven courses. More than per cent of its students pay fees and more than per cent of revenue is internally generated. One major use of the funds has been for staff salary structures and incentive schemes, with professors salaries being raised. Makerere Universitys accomplishment is attributed, among other factors, to macroeconomic reforms that led to economic growth and increased disposable income, and thus to the ability to pay for an education. Furthermore, the Government respected the universitys autonomy.China: using market principles in higher educationChinas growing economy and the need for a more highly educated labour force have brought about changes in the tertiary sector. Its reforms tried to keep pace with the demand for higher education and rapidly changing labourmarket requirements. Although for-profit institutions have not been used to supply higher education, China is relying on quasi markets to introduce internal competition and allowing non-State actors a greater role in the provision of higher education. Market orientation has also entailed the adoption of fees in education, the reduction in State provision, subsidies and regulations, increased attention to revenue-generation activities, the introduction of market-driven courses and curricula, more emphasis on parental choice, and a managerial approach to educational administration.The shift to a policy of decentralization in education began in the mid-s and, by the s, economic reforms had devolved responsibilities for engaging in educational development to other non-State sectors. To mobilize local communities, enterprises, individuals and the market, the State promoted sponsorship at three levels (village, township, and county) and reduced State financing of teachers salaries to no more than one third of the expenditure on school infrastructure, such as school buildings and furniture. However, not all teachers in China are employed by the State. Teachers working for minban (peoplerun) schools are paid by local school authorities, whose chief sources of funding are educational surcharges, tuition fees and local government taxes allocated to education.User charges in education were introduced in the late s and early s and were legitimized by . In Shanghai, the percentage of fee-paying students in higher educational institutions increased from . per cent in to . per cent in . All students enrolled in higher education were expected to pay tuition fees by , although those from poor families could apply for scholarships or subsidies from their universities/institutions.Non-State institutions differentiate themselves from State-funded higher education institutions by specializing in courses geared to newly emerging market needs and are committed to serving the local communities in which they are located. Minban and publicly assisted education has been established to create more educational opportunities. Such colleges are partially supported by the State and fill the gap between existing demand and supply. Although the State has not granted minban colleges university status, the role of minban education was formally recognized in .The Government also attempted to enhance quality at the tertiary level by selecting institutions of higher education to promote development in selected disciplines through the introduction of competition and rewards. Universities are assessed by quantifiable, objective criteria covering such matPUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN EDUCATION ters as staffing, buildings, libraries, laboratories, research conducted, funds raised etc. to determine whether they are qualified to be included as top institutions and eligible for government funding and encouraged to share resources and facilities. Thus, local institutions can pool resources to create a University City to provide better facilities to students. In addition, a customer-oriented approach has been adopted. For example, departments with declining enrolments have repackaged their courses to make them more marketable. Quality control systems have been introduced. Finally, the Government is encouraging administrators, principals and presidents of schools and universities to search for additional funding for teachers salaries and to improve teaching and research facilities through commercial activities such as conferences, training courses, charging foreign participants, organizing tours to Chinese archaeological sites, assisting businesses in computerization, and offering preparatory courses for those who wish to pursue advanced degrees.However, China has not effected a complete shift from centralized authority to markets in education. The private sector is still not allowed to engage in profit-making arrangements. Nevertheless, the Chinese experience suggests that public-private boundaries are merging and that the public-private debate is essentially related to the question how people chose between public and private provision and how they establish the proper balance between them.Political and economic conditions and the inability of the public sector to meet the ever-increasing demand for education in many countries have led to the private sectors assuming a greater share of the burden of education at all levels. The private sector cannot be expected to provide high-quality education and access to all students. Private sector participation at all levels, however, may help to reveal the preferences of students and can point to new and more efficient ways of delivering a quality education. Innovations like the open school, computer learning networks, and experiments in funding by some private organizations like NIIT in India and Educor in South Africa, and by nongovernmental organizations, indicate that private participation in providing services to less privileged members of society may offer new ways of enlarging access.Yet increasing rates of enrolment at the national level are not necessarily associated with higher-quality education or matching the education supplied with labour-market requirements. Therefore, government policies must be aimed at raising quality through standard-setting and training at all levels. Organization and management of education are critical and merely increasing spending will not necessarily enhance educational achievement.The distinction between public and private institutions is becoming more blurred, and processes and practices adopted by both to achieve performance objectives point to convergence. The same kind of changes are being made by many different countries in their attempt to adapt to a global knowledge-based society. This is resulting in a degree of internationalization of education. Congruent with the growth of the private sector as an important provider of education at all levels is the commoditization of knowledge, and a rise in the importance of higher education and certification for entry into the formal sector. Employers demand more flexibility and more general skills. Therefore, public sector policies must focus on encouraging diversification through hybrid forms of education that include both general and specialized technical skills at the secondary and tertiary levels, in public and private organizations.To achieve the objective of building an innovative and highly skilled labour force, education policy cannot be viewed in isolation from other national policies. The creation of employment opportunities is essential to providing capabilities for local problem-solving, particularly in poor and rural communities, so that the benefits of universal education can be realized. Public policy for education must be coordinated with overall strategies for development, including investments in infrastructure, communications, transportation, and credit markets, so as to enable entrepreneurship and industry to flourish, and to stem the migration of the most highly trained. In addition, for decentralization to be successful, competent leadership is required at all levels, to ensure that institutional links are established and accurate information is available for effective decision-making. Finally, given the importance of a strong national foundation in education for participation in international markets, the newly evolving role for the public sector in developing countries may resemble that of a venture capitalist and incubator, providing incentives to finance and building next-generation educational service institutions in previously undersupplied markets, either on its own, or in coordination with the private sector.