WESS 2013: Development Strategies Post-2015Chapter I: Global Trends and Challenges to Sustainable Development Post-2015Main messages- The global community has made great strides in addressing the multidimensional deprivations of the poor, but a mere continuation of current development strategies will not suffice to achieve sustainable development beyond 2015. Progress remains uneven, the global financial crisis has revealed the fragility of progress, and accelerating environmental degradation inflicts increasing costs on societies.- There are a number of economic, social, technological, demographic and environmental megatrends underlying these challengesa deeper globalization, persistent inequalities, demographic diversity and environmental degradationto which a post-2015 agenda will have to respond. - These trends are interconnected and the challenges they pose reinforce each other in myriad ways. Urbanization is proceeding rapidly in developing countries, globalization and financialization are perpetuating inequalities, while exposing countries to greater risks of contagion from crises, and food and nutrition as well as energy security are threatened by competing demands on land and water, as well as environmental degradation. - Most important, a number of planetary boundaries are being transgressed, endangering the stability of the Earths biosphere. Business as usual is therefore not an option, and development strategies in the post-2015 agenda will have to achieve transformative change at the local, national and global levels. IntroductionCommitment to the Millennium Development Goals has lead to the successful forging of a global consensus centred around the importance of poverty reduction and human development. Distilled from a broader list of development goals agreed upon at several global summits in the 1990s, the Goals were adopted by world leaders in September 2000 in the United Nations Millennium Declaration. Since then, the global community has made great strides in addressing the multidimensional deprivations of the poor, and key targets set in this global development agenda will be reached by their 2015 deadline.       Yet, as discussions about a post-2015 development agenda are taking shape, there is also a recognition that much more work remains to be done. Progress, uneven between and within countries, has been far from universal, while economic growth, accompanied as it has been by rising inequalities, has left many behind. The food and fuel crises and the 20082009 global financial crisis have endangeredand indeed reversedsome of the development gains made in previous years, revealing the fragility of progress. Last, environmental degradation inflicts increasing costs on societies. A mere continuation of current development strategies will therefore not suffice to achieve sustainable development beyond 2015.      These challenges to sustainable development are driven by broad underlying economic, social, technological, demographic and environmental megatrends. Both the progress that has been achieved in recent decades and its uneven nature are tied intrinsically to changes in the global economy, and to deepening globalization in particular. Facilitated by major advances in transportation and information and communications technologies, globalization has greatly benefited some economies. Yet, a partial convergence in living standards stands side by side with persistent inequalities, both between developed and emerging and numerous developing countries, and within countries. Extremely diverse population dynamics have the potential to further exacerbate inequalities in the years ahead, both in developing and in developed countries, and at the global level. Most important, the Earths environment is rapidly reaching the limits of its capacity to respond to the demands imposed on it and those limits may in fact have already been exceeded in some dimensions, endangering the material foundations of modern life.      Taken together, these broad trends pose daunting challenges for sustainable development. Unsustainable consumption patterns in developed countries, rising incomes and consumption in emerging economies and, to a much smaller extent, in developing countries, and environmental degradation raise the spectre of scarcities, where access to natural resources, and land and water in particular, become contested, challenging food and energy security. In combination with a less benign global economy, characterized by consolidated and more impenetrable global value chains and high risks of contagion from financial crises, these trends may well reinforce existing inequalities in many dimensions, leading to a world where more heterogeneous populations risk drifting apart even further. In the long run, the breaching of planetary boundaries will endanger the integrity of the planets biosphere more fundamentally, and thus raise a strong sustainability challenge. The main challenge to achieving sustainable development within the framework of a post-2015 development agenda thus lies in reconciling its environmental dimension, which calls for limiting the material impact of human activity globally, with its social and economic dimensions, where the goals remain unrealized for many and further improvements in material welfare are required.      Building on the values and principles affirmed in the Millennium Declaration, the post-2015 development agenda will have to be based on the fundamental principles of human rights, equality and sustainability (United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2515 UN Development Agenda, 2012). In light of the dramatic challenges, realizing these principles and achieving sustainable development in its four dimensionsinclusive social development, inclusive economic development, environmental sustainability, and effective governance, peace and securitywill require transformative change. Such change must target production of goods and services, global consumption patterns, the management of natural resources and, last but by no means least, mechanisms of governance, which are currently inadequate to their task, particularly at the global level. Development strategies will have to be coherent both across policy areas, as many of the challenges are interconnected and reinforce each other, and at the local, national and global levels, which are becoming increasingly interdependent. Those strategies will therefore have to expand beyond an approach focused only on achieving the specific targets that lie at the heart of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals agenda, and define themselves on the basis of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, reflecting both the interdependencies and the heterogeneities that characterize life around the globe. A more challenging context for global development Significant progress has been made in the new millennium in achieving global development goals. Poverty was decreasing in all regions of the world, at least until the onset of the global financial crisis, underpinned by strong economic growth in developing countries and emerging economies. As a result, the first target of the Millennium Development Goalshalving the proportion of people living in extreme poverty globallyhas already been met. Improvements in school enrolment rates and health outcomes demonstrate similar progress in the dimension of social development.       Nonetheless, a mere continuation of current strategies will not suffice to meet all the Millennium Development Goals by their 2015 deadline and to achieve sustainable development after 2015. In important areas, development is falling short and targets will be missed, including the reduction of hunger, vulnerable employment and maternal mortality, and improvements in the lives of slum dwellers, among others. Even where global goals have been reached, there are wide disparities between and within countries. Thanks in part to the remarkable growth rates in Asia, the region has made an outsized contribution to the achievement of global goals. Other regions, and particularly the least developed countries within them, have been less successful. Within countries, economic growth was frequently accompanied by rising income inequality, and the very poor and those discriminated against owing to their sex, age, ethnicity or disability have benefited least from overall progress (United Nations, 2011). Income inequality is mirrored by very unequal social development and access to health services and education. Such intragenerational inequalities pose an equally important challenge to sustainable development, which is primarily associated with intergenerational equity.       The fragility of progress became apparent during the food, fuel and financial crises in 2008 and 2009. The global recession of 2009 was triggered by a global financial crisis engendered by the financial systems of developed countries, engulfing their financial and banking sectors. The resulting shock to economic activity passed through the global economy quickly, with international trade, investment and other financial flows collapsing. The recession and the slow subsequent recovery have increased unemployment worldwide and have slowed or partly reversed the decline in poverty. The fact that the global financial crisis coincided with a peak in food and energy prices aggravated its impacts in many countries. Food prices had risen rapidly since 2003, largely driven by rising energy prices and the increased production of biofuels, which became competitive owing to very high oil prices. Exacerbating factors such as extreme weather events in Australia, Ukraine and countries in other regions of the world, as well as increased speculative activity in commodity markets, highlight the close interactions between the three crises and the multidimensional nature of the challenges they posed (Headey, Malaiyandi and Fan, 2010).      Last, the breaching of planetary boundaries in a number of dimensions (Rockstroem and others, 2009) indicates that the world is facing a strong sustainability challenge, that is to say, there are limits to the substitutability of certain forms of natural capital, and thus to the extent to which technologies will be available to overcome environmental and planetary challenges in future (Ayres, 2007). As many forms of this natural capital are absolutely essential to human survival in the long run, its preservation is critical, and the breaching of planetary boundaries poses a fundamental threat to humanity. A future global agenda has to address this strong sustainability challenge and facilitate transformative change at all levelslocal, national and global. Underlying global megatrends These challenges to sustainable development are driven by broad underlying economic, social, technological, demographic and environmental megatrends. Megatrends are understood in this context as major shifts in economic, social and environmental conditions which change societies and substantially impact people at all levels.       Both the progress in development that has been achieved in recent decades and its uneven nature are tied intrinsically to changes in the global economy and globalization. Many countries have benefited from access to global markets and the spread of knowledge and technology, but others remain marginalized. Tighter trade, investment and financial links have also increased interdependence between countries and led, particularly in combination with financialization, to greater risks of contagion in times of crisis. At the same time, economic growth has been accompanied by rising income inequalities in many countries.         In the years ahead, extremely diverse population dynamics have the potential to further exacerbate inequalities, both in developing and developed countries, and at the global level. With countries at different stages of the demographic transition, further population growth, urbanization and rapid ageing put major stresses on the national infrastructure and health and education systems. If necessary investments are not made, such demographic changes will also heighten the vulnerability of countries and populations to economic, social and environmental crises.             In addition to globalization, inequalities and major demographic changes, there is a fourth megatrend, accelerating environmental degradation, which introduces critical challenges for sustainable development. This megatrend is driven by unsustainable production and consumption patterns, and already impacts development at all levels. Extreme weather events contributed to the food crisis, and environmental problems often affect the poor disproportionally, since they are the least well equipped to deal with them. In the long run, a continuation of current trends and the breaching of planetary boundaries in particular would undermine all efforts to achieve sustainable development. A more tightly integrated, but multipolar and heterogeneous global economyA deeper globalizationGlobalization is not a new phenomenon. In the nineteenth century, the world economy underwent its first process of globalization, driven by technological progress in the form of lower transportation and communication costs. World trade expanded at close to 4 per cent annually on average throughout the century, much faster than in centuries previous (ORourke and Williamson, 2004). In addition, capital flows boomed and migration between continents occurred on a large scale. Todays globalization is therefore not entirely unprecedented in terms of trade levels, but it is qualitatively different. Beyond the mere expansion of trade and investment flows, underlying global production patterns have changed in recent decades, in particular since the turn of the millennium, driven by the rise of transnational corporations and global value chains. Instead of shallow integration, characterized by trade in goods and services between independent corporations and portfolio investments, this new phase of globalization has brought deep integration, organized by transnational corporations which link the production of goods and services in cross-border value adding networks (Gereffi, 2005).       Assembly-oriented export production in newly industrializing economies in East Asia marked the beginning of this geographical fragmentation of production. The movement of labour-intensive operations of manufactures production to low-wage locations upended the traditional international division of labour, creating opportunities for industrialization in developing countries. Successful insertion into global value chains contributed to rapid and sustained growth in numerous countries, accounting for much of the overall progress in the global fight against poverty.       The fragmentation of production was made possible by a favourable global political environment which gradually reduced barriers to trade and investment, and by major advances in transportation and in information and communication technology. The latter in particular is widely seen as the key general-purpose technology of the globalization age, driving technological progress in a wide range of sectors (Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2005). Those advances enabled corporations to manage complex global supply chains and was thus a precondition for the outsourcing and offshoring of production tasks, initially in manufacturing sectors such as apparel and simple electronics, but gradually in more and more sectors including, most recently, services and knowledge work (see, for example, Sturgeon and Florida, 2000, for the automotive industry; and Gereffi, 2005, for an overview).       Information and communications technologies have also made the diffusion of information easier, and have facilitated better access by developing countries to the global knowledge pool. Because of the critical role of science and technology in addressing the social, economic and environmental challenges faced by countries, this wider diffusion is contributing to the progress of development in a wide range of areas. At the same time, innovative activity and technology development continue to be concentrated in a small number of advanced economies. Only very few countries such as Brazil, China and India, have entered this segment in recent decades, owing to the fact, that core research and development activities are very rarely outsourced and remain overwhelmingly centred at corporate headquarters in developed countries (Castaldi and others, 2009).       The changes in global production are reflected in changing global trade patterns. Overall trade has grown at rates much faster than those of world domestic product, and not only did developing countries expand their share in world trade, but they were able to diversify and increasingly export manufactured products (United Nations, 2010). However, these patterns are far from uniformdiversification is largely limited to developing and emerging economies in Asia, whereas traditional trade patterns based on commodity exports and imports of manufactures and capital goods prevail in Africa and, to a lesser extent, in Latin America. The rise of China in particular has contributed to this trend, both directly owing to Chinas large demand for commodities and the traditional sectoral patterns exhibited by rising South-South trade, and indirectly by contributing to high commodity prices, particularly for oil and minerals (Erten and Ocampo, 2012).        The disintegration of production, and its acceleration since the turn of the millennium, are visible also in a rapid increase of trade in intermediate goods (see figure I.1). As a result, the income elasticity of trade has increased as lead firms react to changes in demand and pass shocks on to suppliers more quickly (Milberg and Winkler, 2010), thus further increasing interdependence in the global economy. However, since their collapse during the 2008 and 2009 crisis, trade flows have recovered but slowly, and trade expansion remainsand in the years ahead is projected to remainsignificantly slower than before the crisis, indicating a potential weakening of globalization of trade (United Nations, 2013).       Increasing foreign direct investment (FDI) and financial flows are two further characteristics of deep globalization. FDI is a reflection of the transnationalization of production, and growth in FDI has outpaced even the rapid growth in world trade. Global FDI inflows reached $ 1.5 trillion in 2011, although they have yet to reach the pre-crisis peak of 2007 (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2012b). Fifty-one per cent of total FDI was destined for developing countries and transition economies, which have steadily and rapidly increased their share of overall FDI owing to their dynamic development. Yet, not all developing countries benefit from this trend. The least developed countries in particular remain marginalized, having attracted only $15 billion, or less than 1 per cent of global FDI. Financial globalization and financializationGlobalization has progressed furthest, perhaps, in finance, where the liberalization of capital markets and short-term capital flows has been promoted since the 1980s, most prominently by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The rationale was to enable global savings to be allocated to their most productive use, and thus to provide developing countries in particular with access to scarce savings. The actual outcome of financial liberalization was quite different, however. The increased volatility of capital flows, global macroeconomic imbalances, and multiple financial crisestypically followed by severe recessions, most recently on a global levelhave highlighted both the large risks and the very uncertain gains of financial globalization for development.       Capital controls and restrictions to short-term capital flows were an essential part of the post-war Bretton Woods regime. With the Great Depression and the financial crisis that had preceded it in mind, policymakers agreed to restrict international capital mobility and thus prioritize trade and production over finance and give countries greater macroeconomic policy space. However, this essentially Keynesian vision was undermined by the ascendancy of financial interests in key developed countries, a broader move towards deregulation and liberalization, and growing trade links between countries, which made it more difficult to administer capital controls (Rodrik, 2011).       Capital market liberalization proceeded first in developed economies and then in developing countries, and international capital flows did increase significantly subsequently, from an average of below 5 per cent of global gross domestic product (GDP) between 1980 and 1999 to a peak of about 20 per cent in 2007. At the same time, short-term flowsportfolio and bank-related investmentshave become a much more prominent part of total capital flows, particularly in the period between 2003 and 2007 (International Monetary Fund, 2012).       Developing countries that opened their capital accounts and relied more heavily on foreign finance did not promote growth and investment, however; in fact, they grew more slowly than their peers (Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian, 2007). At the same time, the volatility of capital flows increased, their pro-cyclical nature exacerbated macroeconomic instability, and financial crises became much more frequent. These crises generally follow a similar pattern. Capital inflows based on market optimism fuel credit bubbles, leading to increases in the values of real estate and the currency; but over-indebtedness soon undermines the capacity to repay. Once the bubble bursts, capital inflows stop and the ensuing credit crunch leads to economic contraction (Kindleberger and Aliber, 2011). The social costs of such crises are extremely high. Laeven and Valencia (2012) find that since the onset of the global financial crisis, the median output loss from systemic banking crises, which often coincide with currency crises, has amounted to 25 per cent of GDP.       Financial market liberalization has also increased macroeconomic instability, at both the national and the global level. Capital flows are pro-cyclical and thus exacerbate the business cycle. At the same time, they limit policymakers ability to use macroeconomic policies to smooth out the business cycle (Ocampo, Spiegel and Stiglitz, 2006). Consequently, many countries have built up their international reserves to protect themselves against the risks associated with volatile capital flows. Absent an international reserve currency, however, the massive increase in reserves held by developing and emerging countrieswhich amounted to $7 trillion in 2011 (United Nations, 2012)leads to global macroeconomic imbalances, since the issuers of reserve currency have to run large current-account deficits to ensure global liquidity. At the same time, this arrangement leads to a perverse resource transfer from developing countries to reserve currency issuing countries.       Tightly related to capital market liberalization is the process of financialization. Broadly described, financialization entails the increasing role of financial motives, actors, markets and institutions in the economy, as evidenced in the increase in profits of financial institutions relative to non-financial corporations and the overall increase in renters share of national income (Epstein, 2005). In the 1970s, starting in the United States of America followed by other advanced economies, financialization was driven by financial interests that sought profitable investments in the context of slowing economies. It led to changes in corporate behaviour in line with principles of shareholder value and shorter time horizons of corporations in their investment decisions, changes in financial markets which facilitated increased indebtedness and asset-price bubbles, and changes made in economic policy, not least of all to facilitate financial globalization (Palley, 2007).       More recently, and in parallel to the recent slowdown in trade globalization, the global crisis may have ushered in an era of weakening financial globalization. In fact, cross-border financial flows have declined by more than 60 per cent from their peak in 2007 (Lund and others, 2013). Financial regulation is being strengthened worldwide, both in major developed and emerging economies and at the international level, and major advocates of financial globalization have modified their position. Most prominently, IMF adopted a new institutional view on capital controls, highlighting the risks associated with rapid capital inflows and outflows, and embracing capital flow management measures under specific circumstances (International Monetary Fund, 2012). Convergence, but greater vulnerability and heterogeneity in the global economyOverall, globalization has provided opportunities for emerging economies and developing countries, and in recent years their growth rates have been consistently higher than growth rates in the developed world. There are two critical caveats with respect to this broad trend of convergence, however. It has not made developing countries immune to cyclical shocks: indeed, globalization has increased countries vulnerabilities; and it is far from uniform, with some developing countries not only excluded from this convergence process but falling further behind. Average per capita growth also hides increasing inequalities within countries, which are also partly related to globalization. A significant part of the global population therefore does not benefit from convergence (Dervis, 2012).       Since the 1990s, per capita incomes in emerging economies have grown consistently faster than in the developed world. Since the turn of the millennium, growth in developing countries has accelerated as well, leading an overall trend of convergence in the global economy (see figure I.2). Convergence is partly driven by globalization, which has facilitated access to technology and know-how through tighter trade and investment links and thus higher productivity growth in manufacturing. In fact, manufacturing sectors have experienced an unconditional convergence in labour productivity, that is to say, a convergence independent of geography or policies (Rodrik, 2012). Since this does not hold for other sectors of the economy, structural transformationa decreasing reliance on the primary sector and a shift of resources to higher value adding manufacturing and modern services activitieswill remain a necessary condition of sustained economic growth.        As a result of rapid growth in developing and emerging economies, the world economy is becoming more multipolar, which inevitably leads to the creation of a world that is more multipolar politically. These changes will have to be accommodated within a global governance regime. The expansion of global trade associated with the fragmentation of production also adds to global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, with the transport sector a significant source of those emissions. On average, internationally traded goods generate emissions that are 50 per cent higher than those generated by locally traded goods (United Nations, 2013). Relatedly, the vast expansion of global consumption and of changing consumption patterns in emerging economies will add to the strong environmental sustainability challenge driven originally by unsustainable consumption patterns in developed countries (see further below). Economically, continued growth in emerging economies in particular can be an engine of growth for the world economy and provides opportunities for other developing countries, but the gravity shift to China and India, the major drivers of this process, will also change the nature of end markets and is likely to pose new challenges for economic development.       Deepening globalization has also increased the cyclical interdependence of national economies. Owing to tighter links, they are more vulnerable to external shocks, and crises like the 2008-2009 global financial crisis spread quickly. Global value chains are partly responsible for this, as demand shocks in one region are passed on much more quickly through tightly integrated global value chains (see, for example, Cattaneo, Gereffi and Staritz, 2010). Reductions in consumer demand in end markets are transmitted in real time to producers, often with large and immediate effects on employment in exporting countries (Keane, 2012).       Perhaps even more important is the fact that financial globalization has increased countries vulnerability to financial crises, as evidenced by the frequency of financial crises in recent years and the contagion effects arising from such crises. Many countries have taken the lessons learned from the crisis to heartmost notably developed economies such as the United Statesand have taken steps to strengthen financial regulation. Interdependence in the global economy, however, also implies that the externalities of national economic policies are increasing and thus require better management and coordination at the global level. Again, notable first steps in this regard have been taken since the crisis, for example, through the establishment of the Financial Stability Board, and through the issuance of new rules by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.         There are concerns not only about external shocks, but also about heterogeneity in growth experiences, i.e., about the fact that progress is not uniform. Growth in many countries is not sufficient to enable them to be part of the overall convergence process, or they remain dependent on low value adding resource exports for growth. Yet, development strategies based on industrialization and structural transformation following the example of East Asia have become more challenging as rents for simple manufacturing and assembly procedures within global value chains have eroded and as prices for manufacturing goods typically exported by low-income countries have fallen more rapidly with the entry of China into global markets (Kaplinsky, 2006). In future, shifting end markets will also lead to shifting patterns of global import demand, with a heavier emphasis on demand for commodities and raw materials as well as unprocessed goods, likely rendering upgrading strategies within value chains more difficult (Kaplinsky and Farooki, 2010).       The 2008-2009 crisis has also accelerated the consolidation of global value chains, which began as early as the 1990s in some sectors, but can now be observed across sectors (Cattaneo, Gereffi and Staritz, 2010). Many lead firms used the crisis to end relations with marginal suppliers, relying on globally operating suppliers instead. This may preclude, or at least render significantly more difficult, the future entry of new firms, in particular those based in marginal countries, into global value chains. In combination with continuing global macroeconomic imbalances and the related pressure on countries with current-account deficits to rebalance their external positions, as well as the slowdown in trade expansion already observed, these changes will render development strategies based on export-led growth, so successfully implemented in many of the best performing developing countries in recent decades, much more difficult in the years ahead. Persistent inequalitiesThe heterogeneity among countries exists side by side with persistent inequalities, of which income inequality is only one, if the most visible, dimension. While global income inequality has receded slightly in recent years, inequalities within many countries have been rising. These trends are complex and driven by many, often structural and country-specific factors, and they are tightly linked to social, environmental and political inequalities. Nonetheless, globalization has important direct and indirect impacts on inequality. Left unaddressed, these inequalities threaten sustainable development prospects in multiple ways.       Owing to the convergence of mean incomes of developing and developed economies, global income inequality has been falling in recent years, albeit to a very small degree, and from a very high level. In the wake of the great global divergence in incomes that started with the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, location rather than socioeconomic status or class is still responsible for the overwhelming share of overall income inequality. More than two thirds of global inequality is explained by differences in income between countries, and only one third by the distribution patterns within countries (Milanovic, 2011).       The more recent stabilization and slight narrowing of global income inequality largely reflect economic growth in China since the 1990s, and growth in India, other emerging economies and developing economies since the turn of the millennium (Milanovic, 2012). At the same time, income inequalities are increasing at the national level in most regions of the world (figure I.3; see also Vieira, 2012).  While national income inequalities had for the most part decreased after the Second World War, this trend was reversed in the 1980s, when inequality started to rise sharply again, particularly in developed and emerging economies, with the largest gains going to the top 1 per cent of households. The extent of within-country inequalities, while growing in most countries, varies widely between them. In several countries in Latin America, the major exceptions to the overall trend, social programmes and improvements in labour productivity have played a major role in reducing income inequality since 2000. Distributional diversity, however, applies to the developed world as well as to developing countries, which suggests that in addition to global economic forces, institutional factors play an important role in explaining it (Palma, 2011).       Changes in the global economywhile not the only driver of trends in inequalityplay an important role in the context of many of its underlying causes. In developed countries, the outsourcing and offshoring of jobs requiring mid-level skillsfacilitated by changes in global production patterns and technological changeshave led to a hollowing out of labour markets from the middle and may be partly responsible for stagnating wages for low-skilled workers (Abel and Deitz, 2012). At the same time, financialization has increased executive compensation and wages at the very top of the income distribution (for the United States, see Piketty and Saez, 2003). A significant decline in the share of wages in the functional income distribution, reflecting lower bargaining power of immobile labour versus mobile capital, exacerbates these trends, as capital ownership is typically highly concentrated (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2012a). For this reason, the collapse in stock prices during the global financial crisis led to a temporary fall in the share of the top percentile in total income in the United States. However, during the uneven recovery from 2009 to 2011, incomes in the top percentile bounced back and grew by 11.2 per cent, while the average incomes of the bottom 99 per cent of households fell by 0.4 per cent (Saez, 2013).       In developing countries, income inequality is often due to insufficient employment generation, if, for example, growth is based on commodity exports, as was the case in some regions in Africa. In East and South-East Asia, structural change from a primarily agricultural to a modern economyas famously described by Kuznetsis an important driver of inequality. In addition, global economic developments such as financialization and rapidly rising capital flows, as well as a global policy agenda with very different priorities, had long constrained national policymakers in their use of macroeconomic, tax and redistributive, labour-market and other policies to directly tackle inequalities (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2012a).       Not only are rising income inequalities at the national level undesirable in their own right, but they may also undermine prospects for sustained growth and broader sustainable development. Empirically, higher levels of inequality are associated with a shorter duration of growth spells. Many developing countries have been able to initiate and sustain high growth for several years, but sustaining steady growth over a longer period has proved to be much more challenging. Such longer growth spells are robustly associated with more equality in income distribution (Berg and Ostry, 2011). Potential reasons for this are inequalitys negative impact on the composition of aggregate demand, investments in social services and education, and sociopolitical and economic stability.       In terms of social development, large inequalities constrain life choices for individuals and perpetuate unequal economic and social opportunities, i.e., inequality of outcome translates into inequality of opportunity. Several studies have emphasized that increasing inequalities are detrimental to child development. Beyond the psychosocial and cognitive consequences for children (Hoff and Pandey, 2004), persistent inequalities increase the chances of lower development outcomes in health, including under-nutrition and stunting, and in education, including in school enrolment and learning outcomes. These inequalities may solidify over time, as the political influence of wealthier groups increases, leading to institutional arrangements that favour their interests (World Bank, 2005). Such economic and social inequalities are strongly intertwined with and often exacerbated by horizontal inequalities, i.e., inequalities based on disability, gender, ethnicity, caste or other hereditary characteristics. Conversely, in more equal societies, better social outcomes can be expected: people are more likely to live longer and to achieve higher grades at school, and less likely to suffer from obesity and violence (Pickett and Wilkinson, 2009). For instance, there is evidence that the proportion of the population with obesity is higher in developed countries with higher income inequality (Pickett and others, 2005).       Last, income inequality can threaten economic stability (see, for example, Rajan, 2010; and Stiglitz, 2012). In the United States, stagnating real wages for the middle class lowered the purchasing power of households. Low interest rate policies were introduced to spur consumption, which contributed to the mounting of household debt beyond sustainable levels (Rajan, 2010). The increase in debt in turn generated profitable activities in the financial sector, widening wealth and income gaps, while contributing to asset-price bubbles and ultimately to the financial crisis. Demographic changesThe global population reached 7 billion in 2011 and will continue to grow, albeit at a decelerating rate, to reach a projected 9 billion in 2050 (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011a). Beyond aggregate global population growth, demographic development is characterized by heterogeneity, as countries are at different stages of their demographic transition. While global population growth is slowing, it is still high in some developing countries, and while the world population as a whole is ageing rapidly, some countries are witnessing an increase in the proportion of youth in their overall population. Such diversity, combined with persistent inequalities, in turn creates migratory pressures both within countries and internationally. These demographic trends pose major challenges for future development strategies at all levels: local development will be shaped by further urbanization, national development strategies will have to adapt to evolving demographic structures, and migratory pressures will have to be addressed at the global level.       Population dynamics are driven by fertility rates and mortality rateschanges in which are often described as jointly constituting the demographic transitionand migration patterns. Historical patterns in developed countries suggest a demographic transition from an initial state of high fertility and high mortality to a state of low fertility and low mortality, where mortality typically declines first followed at a later stage by a more abrupt decline in fertility. At the global level, fertility rates have long been falling from their peak and the global fertility rate currently stands at 2.52 children per woman. It is expected to fall further, to 2.17 children per woman, in 2045-2050. However, these averages mask great heterogeneity between countries. Fertility is below replacement level in countries that account for almost half of the global population, namely, most developed countries, but also China. It has fallen rapidly in many developing countries as well, whereas it remains at 4.41 for least developed countries, and is projected to stay significantly above replacement level in coming decades (ibid.). The empowerment of women, better access to birth control and the postponement of marriage are immediate drivers of fertility declines, but fertility rates are also dependent on economic development, mortality declines and improvements in education levels.        Owing to improvements in nutrition and public health and social development more broadly, mortality is declining throughout the world.  Life expectancy at birth is currently at 67.9 years, and is expected to increase to 75.6 years by 2045-2050, based on increases in all regions and development groups. Even though mortality trends have been more uniform, there is regional diversity nonetheless, with the impact of HIV/AIDS on life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa particularly visible.       Migration is the third driver of population dynamics. Net migration from less developed to more developed regions has been increasing steadily from 1960 onward. Between 2000 and 2010, developed regions attracted 3.4 million migrants annually on average. While these flows dominate global migration patterns, migration between developing countries is also significant, and several of them have attracted migrants in large numbers, for example, as guest workers (in the Middle East) and as refugees (in Africa). Looking forward, migration patterns are more difficult to predict as they are influenced by a complex interplay of economic, social, demographic and, environmental as well as political factors, but overall migration from less to more developed regions is projected to continue, albeit at a slower pace, in the decades ahead (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011a).        These demographic drivers lead to four major global population trends: the world population will continue to grow, it will grow at a much slower pace than previously, it will become older, and it will be increasingly urban (Cohen, 2010). These global trends mask large underlying heterogeneity between countries, and they pose important challenges to sustainable development, both globally and in specific regions and countries. With regard to population growth, it reached its peak between 1965 and 1970, and has decelerated ever since. This trend will continue, and by 2050 population in developed countries is expected to almost stagnate, and population growth in developing countries other than least developed countries will be 0.50 per cent annually, while the population of the least developed countries will grow at the rate of  1.42 per cent annually, significantly below todays rate, but still high enough to enable populations to double every 49 years (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011a; see also figure I.4).       This diversity implies that future increases in world population will be highly concentrated geographically. Only eight countriesIndia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and the Philippineswill account for half of the projected global population increase. More worrisome is the fact that rapid population growth continues in countries that are the least well equipped to provide the necessary investments to deal with larger populations. Populations are expected to more than double in the least developed countries between now and 2050, and short of major development progress in these countries, this is likely to challenge their sustainable development prospects in a number of ways. A vicious circle of poverty, lack of education, ill health, high fertility and high infant mortality can perpetuate inequalities. Breaking it will require further investments in health and education systems, as well as better access to reproductive health services and the protection of womens reproductive rights. At the same time, these investments have to be complemented by expanding productive employment opportunities, as a growing number of young people enter labour markets. Lastly, population growth, in particular in combination with climate change, can add to local environmental stresses and resource and land scarcity.       Owing to the decline in fertility and mortality rates, the global population will also become older at an accelerating pace (Lutz, Sanderson and Scherbov, 2008). The share of persons aged 60 years or over will increase to 22 per cent in 2050 globally, up from 11.2 per cent in 2011 and from only 8 per cent in 1950. However, countries are at very different stages in their demographic transition. Population ageing is most advanced in developed countries, leading to sharp increases in dependency ratios and putting a strain on those countries health and pension systems. Developing countries are younger on average, but their populations are growing older as well. Critically, the ageing process is projected to occur at a much higher speed than was the case in developed countries, while family structures undergo major changes and family support systems consequently play a smaller role. If basic pension systems are lacking, a growing share of older persons will therefore be at risk of falling into poverty.       On the other hand, because of their continuously high fertility rates, the least developed countries will continue to see the number of youth and adolescents rising. A growing share of young people presents opportunities for reaping a demographic dividend, if a demographic transition occurs and fertility rates and dependency ratios fall, which, at this point, is projected to happen in least developed countries in Asia (United Nations Population Fund, 2011). However, this dividend will pay out only if those economies can create employment opportunities, which will be a major challenge for least developed countries in the decades ahead. Such disparities in international population dynamics, in combination with existing income disparities, are also contributing to continued migratory pressures at the global level. If addressed in a coherent manner, migration can be beneficial for both countries of origin and countries of destination, by alleviatingalthough by no means eliminatingproblems arising from demographic trends, and contributing to transfers of knowledge and resources. Yet, at this point, there are no adequate mechanisms at the global level for addressing these concerns.       As noted above, the fourth major trend is increasing urbanization. Already, more than half of the worlds population live in towns and cities, and most future population growth will occur in the urban areas of developing countries (see figure I.5 below). In the least developed countries, the rate of growth in urban areas is 4 per cent per year, mostly driven by rural-urban migration in search of employment (United Nations Population Fund, 2011). Many of these migrants live in informal settlements and urban slums, where they are exposed to environmental hazards and increased health risks. Climate change can further increase these risks, as many cities are in locations particularly exposed to its effects (Satterthwaite, 2009). On the other hand, urbanization offers opportunities to provide better access to services and employment at lower cost and with a lower environmental impact. While building the infrastructure that would allow those opportunities to be realized entails huge investment and planning needs, the reality of continued population growth will render such an undertaking critical to any sustainable development strategy.  Environmental degradation While an unusually stable global environment has been the precondition for unprecedented human development over the last ten thousand years, this stability is now under threat from human activity. Most critically, energy consumption has skyrocketed owing to rapid population and economic growth, resulting in unprecedented concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere and anthropogenic climate change. If greenhouse gas emissions, global resource consumption and habitat transformation continue at or above current rates, a state shift in the Earths biosphere is likely (Barnosky and others, 2012), irreversibly changing the environmental conditions so favourable to human development in recent millenniums.        The environmental impact of human activity and the strong sustainability challenge that it poses are tightly related to the megatrends identified above. To decompose their overall effects and shed more light on the many interlinkages, it is useful to draw on the ImPACT identity, which relates demographic, socioeconomic and technological changes to their environmental impact. More specifically, ImPACT specifies that the product of total population (P), world product per person or affluence (A), the intensity of use of GDP or consumption patterns (C) and the efficiency of producers determined by technology (T) together determine overall environmental impact (Im) (Waggoner and Ausubel, 2002). These forces influence each other in important and multiple ways. Population dynamics impact on per capita income and vice versa, income levels affect consumption patterns and efficiency in production, and environmental changes in turn exert an impact on economies, to give just a few examples.       Within this framework, the contribution of the megatrends to environmental degradation can be delineated. Population dynamics determine the overall number of persons whose material needs have to be met, both at the local and national levels, and at the global level. Diverse demographic trends present highly diverse challenges to sustainable development at the local and national levels. Globally, however, population growth is slowing. More important, population growth is concentrated in countries whose contribution to global environmental challenges is comparatively small.       Economic growth lies at the heart of the global development agenda, and the persistence of large unmet material needs implies that sustainable development requires further increases in income and affluence for many. At the same time, humanitys overall demand for natural resources already exceeds Earths bio-capacity (WWF, 2012). Contributions to this excessive environmental footprint are extremely uneven, however: the global inequalities in incomes and wealth described above translate directly into starkly differing environmental impacts (see chap. II).       The impact of per capita income on the environment is mediated by the intensity of GDP use, which is a reflection of consumption patterns, and by the efficiency of production of goods, or technology. Consumption patterns and technological progress are sometimes called sustainability levers, as they can mitigate the environmental impact of income growth (Waggoner and Ausubel, 2002). Growth itself can be a driver of such technological progress, of structural change entailing movement away from material-intensive industries towards services, and of changes in consumer preferences. An environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis suggests that for these reasons, resource use would increase in the early stages of development, but fall in later stages (Rothman, 1998). However, there is no evidence of such an absolute decoupling of growth in resource use from economic growth at the global level, and only very limited evidence for relative decoupling, where resource use grows more slowly than the economy. Most importantly, global CO2 emissions have grown as fast as or faster than global GDP since the turn of the millennium, as large emerging economics industrialize (see below and chap. II). Planetary boundariesRockstroem and others (2009) have identified nine interlinked planetary boundaries. A crossing of certain threshold levels in any of them could lead to dramatic and irreversible damage to the global environment. In three areasclimate change, the rate of biodiversity loss, and interference with the nitrogen cycleboundaries have already been exceeded. In the othersthe phosphorus cycle, stratospheric ozone depletion, ocean acidification, global freshwater use, changes in land use, atmospheric aerosol loading and chemical pollutionhumanity may soon be reaching these boundaries. Overwhelmingly, these changes are driven by the reliance on fossil fuels to power economic growth, and by industrialized forms of agriculture, necessary to feed a growing and increasingly wealthy global population.       The overarching environmental challenge is anthropogenic climate change. The increased concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmospheremost importantly, CO2is leading to a warming of the planet. The atmospheric CO2 concentration has increased from 260-280 parts per million (ppm) in pre-industrial times to 391 ppm in September 2012, and global mean warming is already 0.8 C above pre-industrial levels (World Bank, 2012). Projections of future global warming depend on assumptions regarding future development pathways and demographic, economic and technological developments, and thus vary widely, but further warming is predicted in all scenarios. The business-as-usual scenario produced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007) arrives at a best estimate of a 4 C increase of global average surface temperature in 2100 as compared with the period 1980-1999.       There is also a strong scientific consensus that global warming is induced by human behaviour, predominantly by fossil fuel use and, to a smaller extent, by changes in land use and deforestation. The extent of future global warming will therefore primarily depend on successfully using the sustainability levers by reducing the energy intensity of GDP growth and the carbon intensity of energy, assuming that GDP per capita and population continue to grow. However, current trends are not favourable. While the carbon intensity of global growth decreased and thus slowed down the overall growth in CO2 emissions up until 2000, emission growth has accelerated in the new millennium because of a reductionand, partly, even a cessationin the long-term decreasing trends of carbon intensity of energy and energy intensity of GDP, largely owing to the high energy requirements of intensive growth in developing and emerging economies (Raupach and others, 2007).       This challenge, in its starkness and immediacy, clearly requires a global response. Rockstroem and others (2009) propose a CO2 concentration boundary in the atmosphere of 350 ppm, which has already been breached. Yet, reaching agreement on this global response entails addressing difficult equity questions, as contributions to global emissions have varied widely historically and continue to do so. While developed countries are responsible for almost 60 per cent of cumulative emissions and therefore bear the brunt of the blame historically, they now contribute little to emissions growth, which is driven by China, India and other developing countries (Raupach and others, 2007). In fact, China is now the single largest contributor to global CO2 emissions, having emitted 9.7 billion tons in 2011, representing 29 per cent of all emissions (Olivier, Janssens-Maenhout and Peters, 2012). At the same time, the stabilization of emissions in developed countries can be explained in part by growing imports of emissions-intensive products from developing countries. If these emissions transfers are taken into account, developed countries have not been able to stabilize their contribution to global emissions (see figure I.6). The picture is further complicated by stark differences in per capita emissions. While per capita emissions in the United States are about five times the global average, per capita emissions in least developed countries are a mere tenth of the global average (Raupach and others, 2007).       Climate change poses numerous and stark challenges for sustainable development, and its effects will be felt in all regions of the globe, although the intensity of exposure will vary. Degree of vulnerability will vary even more, with developing countries and the poor, which have contributed the least to global warming, likely to suffer the most. Coastal communities, notably in small islands and megadeltas, mountain settlements and urban communities in megacities of developing countries are particularly vulnerable (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2012). Agriculture will also be negatively impacted by the increasing frequency of extreme weather events such as heatwaves and droughts, and the intensification of the water cycle, further intensifying aridity of already dry zones and thus reducing the amount of arable land. Growing average temperatures and changes in precipitation trends are already having a significant negative impact on yields of global maize and wheat crops (Lobell, Schlenker and Costa-Roberts, 2011).         Arguably even more important in the functioning of the Earth system, albeit less visibly, are the worlds oceans. They, too, are dramatically affected by increased CO2 emissions, which lead, through the effects of warming and thermal expansion, to a rise in sea levels, as well as to ocean acidification. The latter would, if current trends continued,  halt or even reverse coral reef growth, undermining marine ecosystems, and, in combination with sea level rises, would endanger coastal regions worldwide (World Bank, 2012).       Climate change is also exacerbating biodiversity loss. Biodiversity is critical for the resilience of ecosystems and thus important for the provision of often-irreplaceable ecosystem services, encompassing, inter alia, food, water and cultural services (Steffen and others, 2011). While current losses in biodiversity are mostly due to habitat destruction, climate change could soon become an even bigger threat to the survival of species and is expected to accelerate the overall trend in biodiversity loss (Bellard and others, 2012).  Causal chains are complex and multiple, and include the increase in average temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns, the higher frequency of extreme weather events such as droughts and flooding, ocean acidification and further land-use changes.      The expansion and modernization of agriculture are largely responsible for interference with the planetary nitrogen and phosphorus cycle, and contribute to global land-use change. Fertilizer use, a major driver of the green revolution in agriculture, has increased by 700 per cent since 1960 (Foley and others, 2005). Fertilizer production involves the conversion of nitrogen from the atmosphere into reactive forms through which it becomes usable nutrient for plants. This has allowed for the remarkable expansion of agriculture, but at the same time it has led to the widespread dispersion and accumulation of reactive nitrogen in the environment. The same is true for phosphorus, which is mined from rock and also used in fertilizers. The excess concentration of nitrogen and phosphorus degrades water quality and threatens biodiversity and thus the resilience of marine ecosystems. Increasing nitrogen concentrations also contribute to acidification of rivers and streams, to stratospheric ozone depletion and to climate change (Galloway and others, 2003). Land-use change, which is driven not only by agriculture but also by the expansion of urban areas, further contributes to change in the global and regional climates and to biodiversity loss.       Most worrisome are the substantial risks of large-scale non-linear impacts of climate change and the breaching of other planetary boundaries. Once certain environmental thresholds are crossed, biological changes might interact in multiple ways, through feedback mechanisms which are not yet fully understood, and move the planets biosphere irreversibly into a different state. Such state shifts have occurred multiple times in the Earths history, most recently about thirteen thousand to eleven thousand years ago, when the planet transitioned from its last glacial into the present interglacial condition, or the Holocene, characterized by exceptionally benign conditions for human development. Planetary state shifts are irreversible, and cause dramatic changes in the global, regional and local assemblage of species (Barnosky and others, 2012). Some of the better-understood potential feedback mechanisms encompass a rapid loss in rainforest coverage and dieback, of the Amazon rainforest in particular; disruptions in the ocean ecosystem; abrupt loss of Arctic summer sea-ice; irreversible meltdown of the Greenland ice sheet; disintegration of the west Antarctic ice sheet; and melting of permafrost in the northern hemisphere (Lenton and Ciscar, 2012). A strong sustainability challenge? Climate change also puts pressure on natural resources that are essential for sustaining human civilization. In the past, resource scarcity was often presented as a critical challenge but for much of the twentieth century, resource prices actually fell. The combination of rapid economic expansion, continued population growth and a changing climate raises the spectre of resource scarcities. In the medium and long term, it may lead to a strong sustainability challenge. There is significant scope for substitution in many areas, yet certain forms of natural capital including the ecological services they provide cannot be replaced by man-made capital. Their exploitation has thus to be limited so as to preserve the overall capacity of ecosystems to provide those services (Ayres, 2007).       Land, water and energy in particular are critical resources for humanity, and their availability and use are tightly interconnected, with multiple feedback channels between them. All of them have strong links to agriculture and food production. Large unmet needs at the global level require and will inevitably lead to a further expansion in their use and exploitation. Combined with the additional impact of climate change, this expansion may very well lead to much tighter supplies, and thus to price volatilities and sustained price increases. If scarcities arise and if limits to substitutability are reached, distributional conflicts will have to be addressed at the national and global levels, as well as with respect to purposes of use.       The common drivers of resource use are population growth and economic expansion and the associated lifestyle changes. The global population will continue to expand, but population growth will take place largely in the poorest countries, adding comparatively small additional pressure at the global level. Resource use is strongly correlated with income, however. Currently, per capita material and energy use in developed countries is higher than in developing countries by a factor of 5-10. Population density also appears to be a significant determinant, with densely populated areas needing fewer material resources to achieve the same standard of living (Krausmann and others, 2009). For these reasons, the major drivers of global resource demand in the decades ahead will be economic growth and changes in consumption and urbanization patterns.        Competing demands for land stem from increasing global demand for food and feed, for livestock in particular, increasing biofuel production, and the expansion of cities, and from the need to protect forests so as to meet the demand for fibre, as well as the need for carbon sequestration (Evans, 2010). Climate change may further reduce the amount of arable land, particularly in low-lying regions susceptible to flooding (World Bank, 2012). Increasing pressure on land is already occurring worldwide, as evidenced by the dramatic increase in land deals. The Global Commercial Pressures on Land Research Project estimates that 203 million hectares of farmland worldwide have been sold or leased since 2001, with the pace of acquisitions accelerating markedly since 2008. Africa is the biggest target for these land deals, accounting for reported sales of 134 million hectares. (Anseeuw and others, 2012; see also box IV.1).       Stresses in water supplies arise from the increase in consumptive use and pollution of freshwater, for which agriculture is overwhelmingly responsible.  The consumption of agricultural products accounts for 92 per cent of the global freshwater footprint, an indicator for humans appropriation of freshwater resources (Hoekstra and Mekonnen, 2012).  Different commodities and types of food in particular differ dramatically in their water intensity; therefore, going forward, changes in food consumption patterns will have a major impact on global water stress.       In addition, energy production is likely to become thirstier in coming years, as biofuels become a more prominent part of the energy mix. The International Energy Agency (2012) estimates that water consumption for energy production will increase by 85 per cent between now and 2035. Overall, global energy demand is projected to increase by about one third in this time period. While technological advances are unlocking previously inaccessible fossil fuels for extraction, their exploitation is at odds with global emissions reduction goals. In fact, only a third of proved reserves of fossil fuels can be consumed by 2050, if CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is to be limited to 450 ppm (ibid.).       All three factorsland, water and energyhave a direct impact on agriculture and food production. Food prices have already increased and become more volatile in recent years, partly driven by higher prices and tighter supplies of those factors. By 2050, global food production will have to further expand by 70 per cent, in order to feed a growing world population and simultaneously address existing malnutrition and hunger (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011). Competing demands for land, water and energy, and the impact of climate change, are exacerbating the scale of this challenge. At the same time, the expansion of food production has to be achieved in an environmentally sustainable way, so as not to contribute to further degradation of the environment. This will entail dramatic improvements in food production, processsing, and distribution. (Godfray and others, 2010).       The implications of resource scarcities are manifold. Increasing prices and price volatility will not only heighten the vulnerability of poor and net food consuming households, but also raise issues of food and energy security for countries, and globally as well. Poor households are particularly vulnerable to rising food prices, at least in the short run, as they spend a much larger proportion of their total income on food. For this reason, they are also less well equipped to deal with price volatility and sudden price spikes, which, by possibly requiring them to sell assets, can exert permanent effects (Evans, 2010).       At the national level, higher food and energy prices dampen growth prospects for food-deficit countries and net energy importing countries. Globally, higher expenditure in resource-exporting countries is unlikely to compensate for the fall in aggregate demand in importing countries (Dobbs and others, 2011). At the same time, tighter trade links and lower buffers associated with more integrated production patterns cause local or regional shocks triggered by resource scarcities to reverberate more quickly in other regions of the world. Lastly, the prospect of scarcity could also increase concerns about the security of supply of food, energy and water and lead to more resource nationalism. The recent spike in cross-border land acquisition can be interpreted in this light, as can export restrictions on crops or mineral resources, which have increased in recent years (ibid.).      To address these issues, huge investments will be necessary to increase supply in an environmentally sustainable manner. Securing long-term financing at an adequate scale to finance these investments will be a major challenge. Yet, expansions of supply, technological progress and efficiency gains at all levels may not be sufficient. In this case, distributional questions will inevitably arise. Access to resources is already extremely unequal, even in an age of relative plenty, as evidenced by the large number of people who go hungry or remain without access to modern forms of energy. With scarcity, distributional conflicts over access to natural resources will become much more pressing, both within and between countries (Evans, 2011). Sustainable development in a more interdependent worldAchieving sustainable development post-2015 will entail progress in its four dimensionsinclusive economic development, inclusive social development, environmental sustainability and effective governance and peace and security (United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2012). The megatrends discussed above raise multiple challenges which threaten our ability to achieve such progress in the decades ahead. They also reinforce each other in myriad ways, and therefore have to be addressed in a broad and holistic manner, by achieving transformative change in production and consumption patterns, natural resource management, and mechanisms of governance. Mutually reinforcing trends and challengesAt the global level, socioeconomic, demographic and environmental megatrends have increased interdependence among countries, but without any commensurate strengthening of global governance. As a result, global macroeconomic imbalances, migratory pressures and environmental challenges are insufficiently addressed, and crises occur with increasing frequency. At the same time, tightly linked countries become more vulnerable to such external shocks, and crises spread more quickly, threatening development progress.        At the national and subnational levels, these tighter links have facilitated socioeconomic progress, but all are not benefiting to the same degree. Rather, heterogeneity both within and between countries increases. While growth has accelerated in many developing countries, often it has been non-inclusive, failing to create sufficient employment opportunities and exacerbating inequalities. The consolidation of value chains and the related deceleration of trade growth may render the implementation of export-based growth strategies even more difficult in the years ahead, at the same time as demographic developments make accelerated employment generation an imperative in countries with large youth cohorts. Population dynamics will also impose additional stresses on local governments and rapidly growing cities and national health and education systems. Rapid ageing in numerous countries, in particular, will require further investments in social protection systems. The persistence of inequalities, whether in incomes, or in access to services, decent jobs, land or technology, also hints at their entrenched structural causes. Discrimination and exclusion, based on gender, age, disability or ethnicity, have to be tackled directly in order that greater inclusiveness and transformative change may be achieved.         These challenges are exacerbated in multiple ways by accelerating environmental degradation. The poor are most vulnerable to environmental hazards and, owing to the unequal distribution of assets, will also suffer the most from resource scarcities. In terms of the medium and long run, threats to the stability of the global climate overshadow all other challenges, as they would fundamentally undermine the preconditions for human development.  Transformative change is needed World Economic and Social Survey 2013 discusses the changes required in local, national and global policies to achieve sustainable development post-2015. The transformative change necessary to address the challenges set out above will be driven mainly by actors at the local and national levels. Coherent local and national development strategies will therefore remain critical. In an increasingly interdependent world, however, they have to be articulated within the context of their global dimension, so that they do not undermine global development prospects. Policy decisions in one country have regional and often global repercussions, but currently such externalitiesbe they positive or negativeare not taken sufficiently into account in decision-making processes.      Coherence in national development strategies implies most fundamentally that socioeconomic development strategies do not contribute to a further violation of environmental boundaries. Developed countries in particular have to address unsustainable consumption patterns and their continuously rising environmental impact, while emerging and developing economies need to pursue the goal of greening their catch-up growth (chap. II).       National policies currently do not add up at the global level in many other areas as well. They include macroeconomic imbalances and lopsided trade relationships, financial instability and crises, poorly managed migratory flows, and restrictions in technology transfers, as well as conflicts over the exploitation and management of the global commons. Global coordination and governance have to be improved so as to create an enabling environment within which countries can pursue such strategies, while the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities would ensure sufficient policy space for developing countries.       Meanwhile, many specific measures will be designed and implemented at the local level and in towns and cities in particular (chap. III). Urbanization offers the opportunity to achieve socioeconomic progress in a more environmentally sustainable manner; but for that opportunity not to be wasted, enormous investments will be necessary.       Many of the major trends and challenges reinforce each other, as was starkly revealed by the 2008-2009 global food, fuel and financial crises. Therefore, policy coherence between areas is equally important. The availability and use of land, water, and energy, in particular, are tightly interconnected. They all impact on agriculture and food production, and that impact, in combination with the additional impact of climate change, represents a challenge that will require a rethinking of food and nutrition security strategies (chap. IV) and post-2015 energy strategies (chap. V). Lastly, the risks of financial instability have increased and require strategies for better managing that instability; at the same time, financial systems need to be adapted towards enabling the financing of long-term structural change (chap. VI).Chapter II: Post-2015 strategies for development and transformationProcess of implementation of Agenda 21 and its consequencesAs the reference period for the Millennium Development Goals expires in 2015, the world community faces the challenge of implementing strategies to address the concerns that have become more global and more pressing. The international community faced a similar situation when it gathered at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 1992, on the eve of the new millennium. One outcome of that brainstorming process was Agenda 21 (United Nations, 1993), which constituted a comprehensive and integrated programme encompassing all three dimensions of sustainable development. Bifurcation of the implementation process of Agenda 21The actual implementation of Agenda 21, proceeded, however, along two different tracks (figure II.1). One the one hand, during the 1990s, some of the concerns regarding economic and social development took the form of advocacy for human development, which finally crystallized in the Millennium Development Goals through the adoption of the United Nations Ministerial Declaration (Nussbaum, 2011; Sen, 1999). On the other hand, concerns regarding the environment (global warming, for example) were reflected in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was opened for signature at the 1992 Rio Conference. This was followed by the adoption, in 1977, of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its third session. Another response to environment-related concerns was the Convention on Biological Diversity, which was also opened for signature at the Rio Conference. However, the processes of both the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity have remained, by and large, separate from the Millennium Development Goals process.From the opposite perspective, the Millennium Development Goals could also have been considered sustainable development goals, since they focus on some aspects of economic and social development, which are both dimensions of sustainable development. This, however, was in fact not the case, mainly because the Millennium Development Goals were weak on environmental protection, which occupies a special position in sustainable development, despite the formal equality of the three dimensions in respect of their importance.      The above-mentioned bifurcation into two tracks of the implementation process of Agenda 21 was also associated with very different domain configurations. For example, the domain of action of the Millennium Development Goals was confined to developing countries, with the role of developed countries limited only to providing financial and technical support. By contrast, the Kyoto Protocol, following principle 7 on common but differentiated responsibilities of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (United Nations, 1993), required only developed countries to undertake greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets, while exempting developing countries from the requirement of undertaking such targets.      The bifurcation of the Agenda 21 implementation process had the advantage of allowing the focus of each track to be centred on the parts of the agenda that related to its goals. However, it also led to the current impasse with regard to climate change mitigation and worrisome prospects associated with poverty eradication and other human development goals.The impasse with regard to climate change mitigation The eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties (to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) held in Doha in 2012 again illustrated that climate change mitigation efforts are failing to meet expectations. The central outcome of this effort, the Kyoto Protocol, is now beset with problems. First, several major emitter countries have not ratified the Protocol. Some of the countries that had signed and ratified the Protocol, later withdrew from it, and a few others are considering withdrawal in future. The remaining State parties to the Protocol with obligations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions currently account for only 15 per cent of global emissions (Toye, 2012).     Second, the greenhouse gas reduction goals set out in the Kyoto Protocol remain largely unachieved. If the economies in transition are not taken into account, most of the developed countries (Annex B to the Protocol) have failed to achieve their reduction targets. Countries that apparently have achieved their targets have often done so mainly through offshoring greenhouse gas-intensive production operations to developing countries (chap. I; Li and Hewitt, 2008; Peters and Hertwich, 2008). Meanwhile, since production technologies in developing countries are generally more greenhouse gas-intensive, offshoring has led to an increase rather than a decrease in the total (global) volume of emissions, thus frustrating the very purpose of the Protocol.     Third, although the reference period of the Kyoto Protocol expired at the end of 2012, the world community has not yet been able to reach an agreement on post-2012 greenhouse gas reduction targets. At its eighth session, held in Doha from 26 November to 8 December 2012, the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, extended the reference period of the Protocol to 2020, with the expectation that a new protocol, legal instrument or agreed outcome would be adopted by 2015 and implemented from 2020.  However, this decision could not hide the general disappointment with respect to climate mitigation efforts. Worries regarding poverty eradication and other human development goalsWorries regarding poverty eradication emanate from the weaknesses in respect of poverty reduction achievement so far. First, although the world as a whole is on track towards achieving Millennium Development Goal 1, this has been largely due to China, which succeeded in raising about 600 million people out of poverty. By contrast, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa have been less successful, and the absolute number of the poor in these regions has in fact increased. Chen and Ravallion (2010) indicate that the developing world is poorer than we thought, reporting that the number of poor in 2005 was 1.4 billion (using $1.25/day as the poverty line). They further indicate that if the higher, $2/day definition is used, the number of the poor in developing countries in 2005 increased to 2.6billion (representing 47.6 per cent or almost half, of the developing worlds population).       Second, those who have risen above the poverty level still remain very close to it, so that negative shocks can easily wipe out the poverty reduction gains, which was what occurred during the recent food price spike.       Third, despite progress, the overall rate of poverty reduction is proving too slow to be satisfactory. For example, recent calculations by Woodward (2013) show that based on the average growth rate of income of the lowest decile of population during 1993-2008 (leaving out China), eradication of poverty, as measured by the $1.25/day line, would require another century; and it will take even longer if a higher income threshold (such as $5/day) is used (figure II.2). It is difficult to see how the world can wait that long to eradicate poverty without meanwhile becoming embroiled in major social conflicts, both internal and external.       Relying on the poverty reduction trends that held during 1990-2010, Ravallion (2012) suggests that an optimistic target would be to reduce the poverty rate (poverty line of $1.25/day) to 9 per cent in the next 10 years. Woodward (2013), however, points out that progress in poverty reduction during that period was dominated by Chinas exceptional performance, and that it is difficult to believe that this record can be replicated with China largely out of the world poverty picture post-2015. It is therefore not by chance that Ravallion himself deems this target optimistic.       Meanwhile, projections (see box II.1) show that decreasing marginal returns to additional public interventions over time increase the marginal costs of achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In addition, there are concerns with regard to quality. For example, while progress has been made in school enrolment rates (Goal 2), concerns remain regarding the quality of schooling. Thus, significant human development challenges persist.      More importantly, the current course of the human development effort appears to be on a collision course with the environment protection goal. For example, the very growth process that allowed China to reduce poverty has also catapulted it into the position of largest greenhouse gas emitter, surpassing the United States of America. The reduction in forest cover, biodiversity, stock of various mineral and other natural resources, etc., and the huge increase in various types of waste (including non-biodegradable plastic waste) have also been a consequence of the current type of human development effort.       Thus, bifurcation of the Agenda 21 implementation process has led to problems with regard to both human development and environmental protection. Persistence of bifurcation: Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development GoalsDespite the experience described above, the bifurcation of the Agenda 21 implementation process seems to persist and to have extended to the discussion of the post-2015 agenda which appears to be proceeding along two tracks. Discussions on the Millennium Development Goals track have been prompted by the impending expiry of the Millennium Development Goals deadline in 2015. A large literatureincluding AIV (2011), Institute of Development Studies (2010), Kenny and Sumner (2011), Melamed (2012), Vandemoortele (2012) and World Vision (2011)has emerged from this track. The report of the United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012) carries forward this discussion. The other track is represented by the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development entitled The future we want,  pursuant to which a process of formulation of sustainable development goals was initiated. This has led to the establishment of the Open Working Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals (see Assembly decision 67/555 of 22 January 2013).       These two tracks often present two different perspectives. Some of the publications associated with the Millennium Development Goals track had been written before the Conference and hence did not consider the concept and the process of formulation of Sustainable Development Goals. They generally continued to assign environmental goals a rather limited role in the post-2015 extension of the Millennium Development Goals, similar to what has been the case in the context of the existing Millennium Development Goals. The basic characteristic of this perspective is subsumption of environmental goals under the human development paradigm, an approach that continued even after the initiation of the Sustainable Development Goal process.       The discussion along the Sustainable Development Goals track often moves in the opposite direction, by attempting to subsume human development goals under the rubric of the Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations, 2012a; Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2012). Alternatively, it tends to focus only on environmental issues, leaving out human development issues. Furthermore, in doing so, it omits such issues of overwhelming importance as climate change, deeming it to be too contentious and hence intractable and focusing only on those environmental issues that are tractable. However, such an approach reduces drastically the scope of the Sustainable Development Goals.       A similar attempt to skirt difficult environmental sustainability issues is also made by many adherents to Millennium Development Goals track. For example, some of them seek to extend the current Millennium Development Goals and to include whatever objectives emerge from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process as the climate change goal. Clearly, this approach ignores the fact that the Framework Convention process itself is now at an impasse.      There is an express conviction that these two tracks, under which discussion is proceeding, need to converge so that the international community can emerge with one integrated set of goals. This conviction was reflected by the call, in the report of the United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012), for a rebalancing of the post2015 agenda by giving more importance to the goal of environmental protection (and to peace, security and governance issues). Similar feelings were reflected in the recommendation of the inter-agency technical support team of the Open Work Group that technical input be sought from the Task Team. However, despite these welcome urgings, it is not yet clear whether or how it will be possible to integrate the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals tracks and create an integrated post-2015 agenda.       The present chapter presents a conceptual framework for so integrating the Millennium Development Goals and the Sustainable Development Goals as to render both sets of goals universal. Means of achieving an integrated post-2015 agenda The integration of human development and environmental protection goals requires, at the outset, an understanding of the reasons for the impasse regarding climate change mitigation and the impediments to the achievement of the human development goals. Causes of the climate change mitigation impasseIt is well known that one reason for the climate change mitigation impasse is the demand by some developed countries that large, fast-growing developing countries, such as China, India, Brazil, and South Africa, also accept greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals. Those developed countries argue that developing countries as a whole currently produce more greenhouse gas emissions than developed countries (chap. I) and that large, fast-growing developing countries have now become major emitters of greenhouse gases. As a result, effective climate change mitigation is no longer possible without the agreement of those developing countries to reduce the growth of their greenhouse gas emissions.     In response, developing countries point out that their per capita greenhouse gas emissions are still very low and of recent origin. By contrast, developed countries have been emitting at a high per capita level for several centuries (Raupach and others, 2007). Accordingly, it is unfair to impose restrictions on developing countries greenhouse gas emissions, which need to increase as these countries try to reduce poverty and raise the material standard of living of their populations. Reconciling these two opposing viewpoints has so far proved difficult. Causes of human development concerns  One main reason for the concerns regarding poverty eradication is unequal distribution of wealth and income (figure II.3). Within-country inequality has generally increased across the world in recent decades (United States of America, Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office, 2011; Galbraith, 2012; Milanovic, 2012; Stiglitz, 2012; Wilkinson, 2005; Wilkinson and Pickett, 2008). Owing to this inequality, the elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to increases in total or average income (of the country) is very low. For small improvements in poverty, large increases in the income of people in upper income groups are necessary. According to Simms, Johnson, and Chowla (2010, p.18) and Woodward and Simms (2006, pp. 16-17), of every $100 worth of growth in world per capita income, the poor had received only $2.20, during 1981-1990. This figure decreased to $0.60 during 1990-2001, because in the meantime, inequality had increased and the poors share of income decreased further (see figure II.4). As a result, to reduce poverty by $1, it was necessary to raise global production and consumption by $166 during the latter decade. Furthermore, the fact that poverty is now concentrated in middle-income countries, instead of low-income ones, also shows the limits of the current approach to reducing poverty (through raising total and average output).       The low elasticity of poverty reduction is problematic from another angle. It exacerbates the current collision between the human development (e.g., poverty reduction) goal and the environmental protection goal. According to Simms, Johnson and Chowla (2010), under the current model, for everyone in the world to reach the income level of $3/day, resources equivalent to those of 3.4 Earths will be needed. Ironically, the poor suffer the most from the environmental stress resulting from this process. It is therefore in many ways a self-defeating process.       The climate change impasse, the poverty reduction predicament and the collision between current human development and environmental protection efforts all demonstrate the pressing need for the integration of human development and environmental protection goals in the post-2015 agenda.Combining the Millennium Development Goals and the Sustainable Development Goals: towards reintegration of human development and environment protection goals    Figure II.5 presents a framework for integrating the goals of human development and environmental protection and ensuring that they are both universal (i.e., shared by both developed and developing countries). The framework is based on a proposed grand bargain under which developed countries will make genuine moves towards sustainable consumption and, in return, developing countries will offer more cooperation in dealing with global environmental problems.      The process needs to start with the movement of developed countries towards sustainable consumption with equitable distribution (figure II.5, step (a)). How to determine what constitutes sustainable consumption is an issue, and there is no consensus criterion in this regard. However, given that, of current challenges, climate change has emerged as the most destabilizing, one may use per capita greenhouse gas emissions as the criterion of sustainability. This criterion is objective and has been well accepted as a relatively accurate measure.       Pre-industrial data suggest that the atmospheres sustainable CO2 absorption capacity (i.e., the absorption that does not cause a rise in CO2 concentration) is about 5 gigatons. According to United Nations Population Division projection (medium-fertility variant), the world population will stabilize at about 10 billion by 2080 (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011). This suggests a little over 0.5 ton of CO2 (tCO2) as the sustainable level of annual per capita emissions. However, expecting the per capita greenhouse gas emissions level to be brought down to about 0.5 tCO2 may appear unrealistic at this stage. Therefore, some scholars, based on the generally accepted goal of 450 ppm (parts per million) (instead of the pre-industrial level of about 270 ppm), have put forward 3 tCO2 as the per capita annual emissions level that needs to be achieved by 2050, assuming that the population will have reached 9 billion in that year.      These sustainable levels of greenhouse gas emissions may be contrasted with the current per capita emissions level of the United States (about 19 tCO2) and of most other developed countries (about 10 tCO2). The differences illustrate the enormity of the challenge faced by developed countries in climbing down to sustainable levels of CO2 emission. Yet, this is a challenge that needs to be accepted, if sustainability is to be attained (figure II.5, step (b)).       Another often-suggested criterion of sustainability relies on the concept of the ecological footprint, which measures the biological space (expressed in terms of area) required to produce the resources that a person consumes and to absorb the waste that his or her consumption generates (Global Footprint Network, 2010; Rees, 1992; Wackernagel, 1994). According to this measure, the bio-capacity of the earth is limited to 11.5 billion hectares of biologically productive space (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 3). With the current population standing at 6.4 billion, this implies only 1.8 hectares (often referred to as global hectares (gha)) of environmental space per person. Yet, the ecological footprint (also measured in gha) per person has already exceeded this limit and continues to increase.       There is an enormous difference between the ecological footprints of developed and developing countries (figure II.6). The average ecological footprint (per person) in Europe in 2007 was 4.7 gha, compared with an actual availability of 2.9 gha, implying that people in Europe are using up bio-space of other parts of the world. The same is true for the United States, where the average ecological footprint is 8 gha, compared with available bio-capacity of 3.9 gha. In comparison, the average ecological footprint in developing countries is 1.8 gha, which is equal to the global average (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 3; Global Footprint Network, 2010).      Furthermore, the ecological footprint in developed countries seems to be rising at a faster pace than in developing countries. For example, the ecological footprint in developed countries increased from 3.8 global hectares in 1961 to 5.3 global hectares in 2007, representing an overall increase of 39 per cent. By contrast, the per capita ecological footprint in developing countries increased from 1.4 global hectares in 1961 to 1.8 global hectares in 2007, representing an increase of only 28 per cent (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 3, and global Footprint Network, 2010).       Compared with the greenhouse gas criterion, the ecological footprint criterion of sustainability has both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage is that it is more comprehensive, reflecting a wider range of impacts of humans on the environment. The disadvantage is that it is less precisely measured and hence is subject to disputes (Toye, 2012). In contrast, the greenhouse gas criterion, is more narrowly focused, but more accurately measured and hence less controversial.      However, both the greenhouse gas criterion and the ecological footprint criterion reflect the same facts. First, the impact of human activities has already exceeded the capacity of the Earth to absorb it. Second, this breach has been due mainly to unsustainable consumption in developed countries. Third, as developing countries try to emulate the consumption patterns and levels of developed countries, the breaches in the Earths planetary boundaries are becoming larger. For example, under current production technology, if the whole world wanted to consume at the 2001 level of the United States, resources equivalent to that of 15 planets like the Earth would be required (Simms, Johnson and Chowla, 2010, p. 5).      Thus, genuine movement by developed countries towards sustainable consumption will require sweeping changes in these countries. In particular, they will also have to adopt human development goals. Until now, human development has generally been understood to consist in reduction of poverty, mortality rates, gender disparities in education, etc. The concept has therefore been perceived to be relevant to developing countries only. However, a shift towards sustainable and equitable consumption will also require significant changes in the lifestyles and reorganization of the economy and society. Taken together, these changes will make up another phase of human development which might be called human development plus. (figure II.5, step (c)). Understood in this way, human development will become a universal goal, instead of something applicable to developing countries only (figure II.5, step (d)).       Meanwhile, genuine moves towards sustainable and equitable consumption by developed countries may give rise to a new aspiration model for developing countries (figure II.5, step (e)), invoking a reciprocal response from the latter (figure II.5, step (f)). With regard to climate change, the new context may make it possible for developing countries to accept sustainable greenhouse gas emissions levels as the ultimate goal, with the scope for overshooting those levels for a while (figure II.5, step (g)). It may be expected that the overshooting will not be as large in extent or for as long a period as has been the case for currently developed countries. Thus, sustainable greenhouse gas emissions levels may become a universal goal shared by both developed and developing countries (figure II.5, step (h)). A similar process may unfold with regard to other environmental goals.      On the human development side, the conventional goals of reduction of poverty, mortality, gender disparity, etc., will continue to be very much a part of the agenda for developing countries. However, these goals would now be pursued in a more sustainable way (figure II.5, step (i)). Currently, developing countries (particularly their rich populations) try to imitate the unsustainable consumption patterns seen in developed countries, including a high level of greenhouse gas emissions and a high content of nonbiodegradable materials. The poor in those countries in turn try to imitate the rich. As a result, unsustainable consumption behaviour is spreading throughout the world. The new aspiration model may have a salutary effect on this harmful tendency. As noted earlier, high inequality is proving to be a serious obstacle to rapid poverty reduction and is exacerbating the collision between human development and environmental protection efforts. To the extent that the new aspiration model promotes equitable distribution in developing countries, it will become easier to achieve poverty reduction and other human development goals and avoid the collision course described above.       Overall, figure II.5 presents a framework within which both human development and environmental protection can become universal goals and be integrated, ending the current separation between their domains of application. It proposes a grand historic bargain between developed and developing countries, under which developed countries will make genuine moves towards sustainable consumption, and developing countries in return will accept voluntary restraints regarding greenhouse gas emissions and exhibit greater cooperation in resolving other global environmental problems. This grand bargain can provide the basis for the post-2015 agenda.       The ideas and the causal linkages presented in figure II.5 are abstract and very general. It is necessary to make them more concrete. By considering in some detail the changes that are necessary in developed and developing countries in order for the proposed bargain to work, the next two sections attempt to provide that concreteness.Post-2015 strategies for transformation in developed countries Role of technology in ensuring sustainabilityThe fact that consumption pattern in developed countries is unsustainable has been known for quite some time. However, efforts to move away from this unsustainable pattern have so far focused mainly on technology.      The technological route to sustainability was supported by the concept of decoupling of economic growth from resource requirements (Pearce, Markandya and Barbier, 1989; Ocampo, 2009). The concept has in turn been interpreted in two ways. Relative decoupling implies an increase in output with a less than proportionate increase in the inputs required. Absolute decoupling implies an increase in output with no increase in inputs required. While there has been some progress in achieving relative decoupling, there is no evidence to support absolute decoupling (United Nations, 2011). The aggregate volume of both resources used and waste generated continues to rise (Meadows and others, 1972; Meadows, Randers, and Meadows, 2002; Turner, 2008).       The evidence, however, does not suggest that the importance of technology is to be discounted. Earlier predictions of resource exhaustion have been invalidated by technological progress; and the advent of new technologies can serve as a game changer in future, too. For example, breakthroughs in hydrogen fuel technology and in technologies allowing extraction of carbon from the atmosphere to produce fuel can greatly reduce the greenhouse gas content of consumption. However, simply waiting for such technologies to arrive on the scene cannot be deemed a strategy (Brookes, 1990; Huesemann, 2003, 2004; Stern, 2007; United Nations, 2009). More importantly, the pace of development and adoption of new technologies depend on societal demand. Once the society decides on the kind of transformations that it wants to achieve, necessary technologies can develop in response to the demand. On the other hand, without such societal demand, even technologies feasible in principle may remain undeveloped and unused (Jackson, 2010). The reliance on technology has to be accompanied and guided by conscious changes in consumption and distribution patterns. It is therefore important to ascertain the ways in which consumption patterns need to change in order to achieve sustainability. Shifts in consumption patternsIt may be anticipated that necessary changes in consumption patterns would move in some general directions. One desirable change would entail movement away from material towards non-material consumption. For example, reading e-books may be less greenhouse gas-intensive than cutting down forests and filling up wetlands in order to construct large houses, and commuting to work in sport utility vehicles (SUVs). It is instructive to note that some shift towards non-material consumption is occurring even within the current order of things, owing to the impact of Internet-based communications technology and as a result of increased awareness of the environmental impact of human activities. However, it is necessary to accelerate this shift through implementation of policies.       Another desirable change would entail movement away from private to public modes of consumption. For example, use of public modes of transportation is less greenhouse gas-intensive than use of private cars. Similarly, use of a community pool is less energy- and resource-intensive than use by individual families of the private pools in their backyard.       Movement in a third direction of desirable change would consist in the reversal of the one-time-use mode of consumption. While this mode of consumption has its usefulness in certain spheres, such as health care, questions of overuse may be raised even here. In most other spheres, utilization of this mode of consumption is often unjustifiable, as it leads to overuse of resources and over-generation of waste.       A fourth direction of desirable change would entail discouraging development of spurious new models of essentially the same product, leading to unwarranted obsolescence of products and hence to wastage of resources and to generation of excessive waste.       Another important direction of desirable change would require movement away from non-biodegradable materials to either natural or biodegradable materials. While much of the discussion of sustainability focuses on greenhouse gas emissions, the threat posed to the environment by increased use of non-biodegradable plastic materials also deserves attention. As Figure II.7 demonstrates, while the weight per unit GDP of conventional materials such as steel, timber and paper has decreased, that of plastic has increased sharply. While the decrease in the weight of steel, an energy-intensive metal, may be encouraging, this seems to have been more than offset by an increase in the weight of aluminium, which is even more energy-intensive. Similarly, while the reduction in the weight of timber may signal reduced pressure on forests, it has been far outweighed by the increase in the weight of plastic. Easy availability of plastic has been one reason for the spread of the one time use mode of consumption and also for the spurious new models phenomenon.       Most of the plastics in use are non-biodegradable. Even the ones that purport to be biodegradable will take centuries to decompose and be absorbed by the Earths natural elements. Until then, plastic wastes will exert their harmful physical and toxic chemical influence on the Earths soil and water (Kaeb, 2011). Plastic waste has become a serious threat to inland water bodies, such as rivers and lakes, and even to the oceans and marine environment. Hence, substitution of plastic by natural fibre and production and use of rapidly decomposing plastic (in cases where natural substitutes are not available) would represent an important direction of change in consumption and production practices post2015.       The above discussion of desirable directions of change in consumption patterns is certainly not exhaustive. However, the general idea is clear: the changes have to be such that fewer resources are required and less waste is generated. The question is how such changes can be brought about.Means of bringing about shifts in consumption patterns    In a market economy, prices can play an important role in moving consumption towards sustainability. It is well known that in the presence of externalities, market prices do not ensure efficient resource allocation and need to be corrected so as to internalize the externalities. Thus, commodities and services involving high levels of greenhouse gas emissions need to be priced in such a way as to reflect the cost they impose through climate change. Similarly, products and services having a high plastic content need to be priced so as to reflect the cost that the disposal of plastic waste imposes on the environment. In most cases, necessary price corrections will have to take the form of taxes and subsidies.      There is strong evidence of the influence of price corrections on consumption behaviour. For example, high gasoline taxes in European countries and Japan have played a role in creating an environment where urbanization is more compact and public transportation is more important than, in the United States, for example, and currently, in China.       The necessity and importance of price correction are generally not denied. The challenge lies in determining which prices are to be corrected and by how much. This in turn requires calculation of the damages and benefits from a particular product or activity to nature and society that are not captured by market prices. Environmental accounting therefore becomes important (Burritt, Hahn and Schaltegger, 2002; Nordhaus and Kokkelenburg, 1999; Owen, 2008; Pemberton and Ulph, 2000; Schaltegger and Burritt, 2000). Environmental accountingThe report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (the Brundtland Commission) entitled Our Common Future (1987), had defined sustainable development as the process that meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987). The concept inherent in this definition led to two versions of sustainability: strong sustainability, which does not allow substitutability between natural capital and produced capital (either physical or human), and weak sustainability, which allows such substitutability. In either case, proper accounting (quantification and valuation) of natural capital and the services that it provides is a precondition for determining whether sustainability is ensured. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2010; 2011) has rightly noted that the worlds natural capital deserves a seat at the table.       Preservation of capital for future generations also requires paying more attention to depreciation, in particular of natural capital (Kates, Parris and Leiserowitz, 2005). In fact, economists have shown that net concepts of output, such as net national product (NNP), are better measures of welfare than the corresponding gross measures, such as gross national product (GNP) (Asheim and Weitzman, 2001; Dasgupta, 1994; Dasgupta, Kristrom and Maler, 1997; Weitzman, 1976, 2000, 2003). One reason for the lesser prominence of the net measures of output, despite their attractive theoretical property value (as optimal measures of income), is the difficulties encountered in the computation of depreciation (Hartwick, 1990; Weitzman, 1997). These difficulties are more salient in the case of natural capital, which itself has yet to be properly quantified and valuated (United Nations Environment Programme, 2005).      Fortunately, considerable progress has been made in this regard by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), the Division for Sustainable Development of the United Nations Secretariat, UNEP and other organizations, and individual scholars. Through its System of Environmental-Economic Accounting (SEEA) project, UNSD has formulated guidelines for the quantification and valuation of natural capital and the various non-marketed services that it offers (see box II.2 for an update on this work). An important post-2015 goal may be to implement those guidelines and to make estimation of natural capital and its depreciation part of national income accounts.       The fact that, initially, many difficulties and disagreements will remain with respect to the estimation of natural capital and its non-marketed services, is one reason why the concept of strong sustainability needs to be upheld. Otherwise, natural capital will quite possibly be underestimated and the decrease in natural capital will appear to be more than compensated by growth in produced capital. It is therefore important, within the context of encouraging implementation of environmental-economic accounting, that such undesirable unintended consequences be prevented. Shifts in consumption and quality of lifeThere is concern that efforts to make consumption sustainable will lead to a decline in the quality of life. However, recent research indicates that the opposite may be true. Surveys of citizens of developed countries show that life satisfaction does not necessarily increase with increase in material consumption and that the non-material aspects of life, such as family and community relationships, play a more important role in ensuring subjective well-being (figure II.8). Since the relentless drive to increase production and consumption of material goods has affected family and community relationships adversely, the increase in material consumption has failed to increase life satisfaction and instead, has resulted in a social recession (Thompson and others, 2009).     Thus, shifts away from material to non-material, from private to public, and from unequal to more equitable consumption, may actually improve the quality of and satisfaction with life and provide a win-win solution to problems of both environmental unsustainability and social recession (Lyubormirsky, Sheldon and Schkade, 2005). Shifts in consumption patterns and the implications for employment and incomeConcerns remain, however, with regard to the impact of the transformation proposed above on the economic growth, employment and income of populations. Some scholars have coined the expression growth dilemma to capture these concerns (Jackson, 2009). This expression encapsulates the fact that, on the one hand, relentlessly increasing output and consumption is not environmentally sustainable and that, on the other hand, without growth, employment and income are likely to suffer and thus prove socially unsustainable. Active research is under way on this issue (Simms, Johnson and Chowla, 2010; Jackson, 2009) and several observations can already be made.      First, as the transformation of consumption is not the same as its reduction, the focus needs to be on the pattern of consumption and not necessarily on its level. Accordingly, the move towards sustainable consumption may not necessary imply a fall in income and employment even in a conventional setting, which is not, however, to ignore the fact that there are limits to material consumption arising from the very real physical limitations of human beings. For example, there is a limit to the amount of food a person can consume, the number of items of clothes he or she can wear, and the amount of dwelling space he or she can effectively use. Beyond a certain point, an increase in consumption along these lines may prove unnecessary or even harmful. Non-material consumption has its limits as well, inasmuch as there are only 24 hours in a day. The number of e-books that a person can read, the number of films downloaded from the Internet he or she can view and the amount of time he or she can spend with family and friends are all limited. Thus, the issue of reorganization of the economy and society to deal with a situation where relentless quantitative growth of consumption is no longer desirable cannot be entirely sidestepped (Daly, 1991, 1996; Patel, 2010).      Second, the above considerations also point to the fact that the current measures of output and income are not absolutes but rather social constructs of somewhat recent origin. As they reflect a particular arrangement of the economy and society, it is quite possible that those measures will be modified in the light of changing contexts and demands (Layard, 2005; Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi, 2010).       Third, it may be noted that a shift of consumption towards non-material items may be complementary to an increase in productivity, because non-material consumption may require more leisure time.       The answer to the question of the potential impact of proposed changes in consumption on income and employment may therefore depend to a great extent on how distribution and the organization of the economy and society are carried out. If productivity gains are shared widely, people may experience an increase in leisure time (to be devoted to non-material consumption, and family, friends, community and society) without suffering from a diminished income or unemployment. Thus, institutional changes facilitating sharing of employment and profit may be helpful in this regard. Weitzman (1984; 1985) and others have created models showing that a shared economy (where workers share profits of enterprises) produces better outcomes with regard to both employment and productivity. Many business leaders are calling for a move away from profit towards making three P (namely, people, planet and profit) the driving force behind business activities (Rahman, 2012). There is also a rising call for social business, under which entrepreneurs will be motivated by the desire to earn social recognition rather than private profit (Yunus, 2007; 2010). Implementing some of these concepts might be part of the post2015 agenda. Strengthened political egalitarianism, which has been under threat in some developed countries, may be helpful in achieving wider distribution of productivity gains and in facilitating the move towards more socially motivated business operations.       Finally, it may noted, in this connection, that transition to sustainable development will require development and diffusion of many new technologies, and that developed countries can provide leadership in this regard. Thus, the transition to sustainable consumption may lead to the expansion of employment and income even within the traditional framework.       Having examined the broad directions of post-2015 transformation necessary in developed countries, we now turn to a discussion of the directions of post-2015 changes in developing countries. Changes in post-2015 strategies of developing countries A heterogeneous developing worldDeveloping countries have become more heterogeneous than they were when Agenda 21 was formulated. Some of them have proved successful in achieving industrialization and have reached per capita income levels close to those of developed countries. Others have not been so successful, and the difference between their per capita income levels and those of developed countries has increased further. This diversity among developing countries can be seen with regard to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals as well. While some countries have made remarkable progress in achieving the Goals, others have lagged behind. These varied performances with regard to achievement of the Goals could be a point of departure in discussions concerning the post-2015 agenda. Further progress along current dimensions of the Millennium DevelopmentGoals An important priority for developing countries post-2015 is therefore to consolidate the progress made, to overcome the weaknesses that remain and to strive to achieve further progress along the dimensions encompassed by the current Millennium Development Goals. With regard to Goal 1, as noted earlier, even countries that have done well in terms of the $1/day poverty line need to raise the income of their poor population further; otherwise, they may easily fall back into poverty, particularly because $1/day is a very low threshold for measuring poverty.       Second, in the post-2015 phase, it will be necessary to pay more attention to quality issues than was possible during the current phase. For example, as noted earlier, in an effort to achieve Millennium Development Goals 2 and 5, many countries made significant progress in raising school enrolment. However, less attention was paid to the quality of schooling. Quality issues are also important with regard to several other Goals, targets and indicators.       Third, more attention must be paid to coherence and compatibility of achievement made along different dimensions. For example, improvement in schooling enrolment rates needs to match job creation rates. Thus, greater policy coherence at the national level must be an important characteristic of post-2015 development strategies.       The above discussion also suggests that it will be important in post-2015 strategies to pay greater attention to variations in temporal characteristics (such as duration, gestation lag, etc.) of various dimensions of human development efforts. For example, cash transfer programmes can exert rapid effects on poverty rates, and enrolment rates may also respond quickly to investments. However, for investment in education and health to be reflected (through human capital development) in a countrys economic (growth) performance, more time is required. It will therefore be important that a lack of return to investment in education and health in the short run not become a source of frustration. This also implies that much of the investment made by developing countries in health and education during the current Millennium Development Goals period may actually yield returns post-2015 (see box II.1).Human development through more equitable distribution post-2015 An important lesson for post-2015 strategies learned from the current Millennium Development Goals experience is that equitable distribution of income, wealth and access to opportunities and resources helps greatly in achieving human development goals. This lesson was clear from the low elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to the increase in average and total income of a nation. Cross-country evidence provides additional support for this lesson. For example, among Latin American countries, Brazil has been more successful in poverty reduction in part because it also succeeded in reducing inequality, countering the general trend in most other countries of an increase in inequality.       Research shows that redistribution of only 1 per cent of the income of the richest 20 per cent can provide as much additional income to the bottom 20 per cent of the population as would be derived from per capita income growth rate of between 8 and 25 per cent in the majority of developing countries, including almost all countries of Latin America and subSaharan Africa (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 19).      The fact that inequality in China rose as it succeeded in reducing the poverty rate does not negate the importance of equitable distribution for human development. It is well known that China and several other East Asian countries started off with a highly egalitarian distribution of physical and human capital which allowed the growth benefits to be distributed more widely and led to poverty reduction. A comparison with India illustrates the point more clearly. Since India did not begin with an egalitarian distribution of its initial endowment, the impact on poverty reduction of its recent growth has been less dramatic than in China. Furthermore, the experiences of both China and India show that a highly unequal distribution is socially unsustainable. According to many observers, rising inequality is one reason behind the spread of insurgency in some parts of India. Similarly, the recent turn of Chinas leadership towards harmonious growth is also seen by many as a response to the high degree of inequality.       The unequal distribution observed in developing countries is often the result of the imitation of the economic model and policies of developed countries. Moves towards more equitable distribution by developed countries will therefore be helpful in facilitating the switch towards greater equality in developing countries, too. Development in a more environmentally constrained post-2015 worldWhile emphasis on further progress along existing dimensions of Millennium Development Goals is necessary, it is important to recall that unless human development and environmental protection goals are integrated, they will remain on their current collision course, jeopardizing both sets of goals. It is therefore important that post-2015 strategies of human development internalize and reflect more thoroughly the environmental protection goal.       First of all, developing countries cannot ignore global environmental problems, such as climate change. As a whole, they are no longer minor contributors to these problems. Without their playing an effective role, it will no longer be possible to solve global environmental problems.      At the same time, it is important to recall the heterogeneity of the developing world. There are now vast differences across developing countries with regard to their contribution to environmental problems and their potential role in resolving them. In particular, fastgrowing large developing countries, such as China, India, Brazil and South Africa, currently assume an important role in dealing with global environmental as well as other problems. Their inclusion in the Group of Twenty (G20) reflects recognition of this changed reality.        On the other hand, a vast number of developing countries remain as marginal as before with regard to their role in creating global environmental problems and their potential for resolving them. Yet, many of them are, ironically, the worst sufferers from global environmental problems. Thus, many small island developing States, such as Maldives, face submergence due to the sea level rise caused by climate change. The same situation is found in many least developed countries, such as Bangladesh, which is the worlds seventh largest country in terms of population, (about 160 million inhabitants).       Reconciling the interests of different groups of developing countries, on the one hand, and of developing and developed countries, on the other, will be an important challenge in the post-2015 period. Such a reconciliation is possible only within the context of the grand bargain presented in figure II.5. First, it shows how the interests of the developed and developing worlds as a whole can be reconciled. Second, it offers a means of reconciling the interests of the fast-growing large developing countries and the rest of the developing world, namely, through the self-imposed restraint accepted by the former, which will alleviate the situation of the latter.       Furthermore, developing countries need to pay more attention to environmental problems post-2015, because industrialization causes not only global environmental problems but also severe local environmental problems. The processes that increase greenhouse gas emissions also lead to other types of air pollution whose impact is more local. This was brought to the fore in China through the recent build-ups of smog and haze observed in Beijing and nearby cities. Similarly, countries that engage in large-scale deforestation not only increase greenhouse gas emissions, but also suffer from landslides, the filling up of water bodies, and the diminution of biodiversity, etc. Rampant use and inappropriate disposal of plastic waste clog local drainage systems. Chemicalization of agriculture damages local water bodies, fish stock and the aquatic environment. Local adverse impact is another reason why developing countries need to pay more attention to these environmental problems in their post-2015 strategies.The Souths initiatives towards sustainable development     There was a time when many in developing countries thought that caring for environment was a luxury that only the rich countries could afford. While some continue to hold that view, more are realizing that developing countries, too, need to care for the environment even as they focus on economic growth and development.      In fact, in recent years, many developing countries have been implementing initiatives that are more advanced than those of developed countries. For example, Ecuador has included the rights of nature in its 2008 constitution, thereby recognizing the inalienable rights of ecosystems to exist and flourish. Under this initiative, individual citizens and organizations can petition and seek remedy in case of the violation of those rights, with the Government being obliged to offer such remedy (see box II.3). Nature is thus considered a subject rather than, as in the traditional view, an object, to be conquered, occupied and exploitedor, at best, managed. Ecuadors declaration of the rights of nature is part of the general initiative towards fostering buen vivir (the good life), which encompasses an alternative view of developmentone that, instead of focusing on material wealth, emphasizes harmony in the community and with nature. On the basis of this alternative philosophy of development, Ecuador has decided not to exploit the oil reserves in its Yasuni National Park in order to protect the forests of the Amazon. Many other developing countries have come forward with pioneering initiatives aimed towards sustainable development. Several developing countries, such as Bhutan, Costa Rica, Maldives and Tuvalu, have announced their goal of becoming carbon-neutral.       The economics historian Alexander Gerschenkron coined the phrase advantages of backwardness to conceptualize the phenomenon whereby late industrializing countries benefit from technologies that were already developed by early industrializing countries. This concept may also be used in arguing for the leapfrogging of developing countries to more sustainable post-industrial consumption patterns and lifestyles.       There are several directions in which developing countries can go in making use of these advantages. One option is related to the fact that, in many cases, developing countries face the task of building anew rather than modifying what has already been built. A clear example in this regard is provided by urbanization. Many developing countries need to create new urban spaces. In doing so, they can plan from scratch and make their cities environmentally more sustainable. Many developing countries are indeed doing just that. For example, China is creating brand-new eco-cities, which rely on public transportation and renewable energy, achieve high degrees of conservation and recycling and minimize carbon emissions and other waste. Similar initiatives can also be seen in Brazil, Cameroon, the Republic of Korea, the United Arab Emirates, etc.      Another direction along which such leapfrogging may be possible is that of promoting sustainable life practices. Members of the more environment-conscious segments of society in industrialized countries often revert to the practices of pre-industrial societies, albeit upgraded to a new level. They are returning to organic agriculture, nonmotorized modes of transportation (walking and biking), use of non-fossil fuels as source of energy, vegetable-oriented diets, use of natural fibres instead of nonbiodegradable ones, etc. Developing countries can make creative use of their preindustrial heritage to promote these features of sustainable living. This does not mean, however, that sustainable development has to be a throwback to the past. Indeed, sustainable development has to be a forward-looking post-industrial goal which builds on the positive achievements of the industrial revolution.      Success in leapfrogging of the above types will depend, to some extent, on the cooperation of developed countries. First, as shown in figure II.5, by presenting a new aspiration model, developed countries can encourage the leapfrogging process. Second, developed countries can provide technologies and market opportunities necessary for this process to be successful. For example, developing countries are eager to expand and switch to non-renewable sources of energy. Developed countries can develop large-capacity and cost-effective wind-power and solar-power technologies and make them available to developing countries on favourable terms. Similarly, developed countries can open their market for organic produce from developing countries.       Diffusion of new energy technologies and expansion of organic agriculture in developing countries may also help developed countries switch to sustainable consumption. Thus, a virtuous cycle may unfold, confirming that achieving sustainable development has to be a joint task of both developing and developed countries. However, as shown above, the new aspiration model (based on sustainable consumption) does not necessarily have to be derived from developed countries. Based on their heritage and experience, developing countries are themselves offering aspiration models of sustainable development (see boxII.3).A new type of global cooperation post-2015  Global cooperation in the post-2015 era has to emerge from the current framework, which is based predominantly on the donor-recipient relationship, and establish a new foundation for solidarity. Accordingly, global governance must become more democratic.      The Millennium Development Goals were, to a great extent, the outcome of an implicit bargain which hinged on overseas official development assistance (ODA) (Toye, 2012; Vandermoortele, 2012). The objective was to encourage developing countries to make progress measurable by concrete human development indicators in exchange for ODA. The poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) process introduced by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) made this link more explicit.       Accordingly, the role of the Millennium Development Goals in national development efforts depended to a large extent on the degree of a countrys dependence on ODA. Over time, however, the importance of ODA for developing countries has been decreasing. As a result, there is now less scope for adapting the post-2015 agenda to the donor-recipient framework (Vandermoortele, 2012). Instead, the framework has to be one of solidarity. The grand bargain proposed in figure II.5 shows how this solidarity may be generated and utilized.       However, the switch to solidarity will not be easy. The difficulty was manifested at the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at its eighteenth session, held at Doha from 26 November to 8 December 2012, in the controversy over whether to insert in the outcome document the expression loss and damage so that the concept could serve as a basis for the contribution of developed countries to climate change adaptation funds. This signified a reluctance on the part of developed countries to depart from the donor-recipient framework. At other times, it is the resistance of developing countries that comes to the fore. Attitudinal shifts are therefore necessary on all sides. Further, global institutions and their mode of operation and governance need to change in order for the new bargain to work.       The gradual decrease in the importance of ODA and the rise in South-South cooperation may provide an objective basis for the necessary shifts in attitude towards cooperation between developed and developing countries. In fact, the traditional imbalances between these groups of countries are shifting with changes in economic strength (Toye, 2012). Often, as noted above, more of the advanced initiatives for achieving sustainable development are created by developing countries. Perhaps, through this changed reality, the old ways of thinking will ultimately be overcome, which will pave the way for cooperation among all countries of the world on the basis of solidarity.Box II.2: System of Environmental-Economic AccountingThe System of Environmental-Economic Accounting (SEEA) provides a measurement framework within which to integrate environmental data in physical and monetary terms with economic data. SEEA organizes environmental information adopting a systems approach to stocks and flows, using definitions and classifications that are consistent with those of the System of National Accounts (SNA). The strength of the framework lies in the derivation of high-quality aggregates, which are comparable across countries, consistent over time and go beyond gross domestic product (GDP).  The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting Central Framework  (SEEA Central Framework (CF)) provides the statistical framework for categorizing and analysing stocks of individual environmental assets such as water, mineral and energy resources, timber, fish, land and soil, the flows of resources into the economy, the exchanges of products within the economy and the return of residuals from the economy. At its forty-third session in 2013, the Statistical Commission adopted the 2012 SEEA Central Framework as the initial version of the international statistical standard for environmental-economic accounts, on a par with the SNA, and encouraged a flexible and modular approach to its implementation, depending on country priorities and policy demands. SEEA Applications and Extensions describe many indicators that may be generated through use of the SEEA Central Framework. For example, the SEEA Central Framework may be used to calculate environmental efficiency (e.g., tons of CO2 generated per unit of GDP) and its evolving pattern over time so as to evaluate decoupling trends. Through its defined system for incorporating use of resources by industry, SEEA also permits evaluation of resource use over time by different industries and may be used to evaluate the generation of wastes discharged into the environment, by industry or sector. The figure below presents an application of data analysis through the SEEA for 27 countries of the European Union in 2006, using data obtained from Eurostat. It shows the decomposition of CO2 emissions from the perspectives of production and consumption. Information derived from this exercise can be helpful in studying many policy questions. Water and energy have been identified as two priority areas in many countries. The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water (SEEA-Water)  and the System for Environmental-Economic Accounting for Energy (SEEA-E) are subsystems of the SEEA Central Framework and provide a more in-depth discussion of the statistical framework for water and energy. These subsystems also provide examples of indicators that can assist in tracking progress towards national policy goals in these areas.Regional and global CO2-emissions per capita, from the production and consumption perspectives, based on data compiled for 27 European Union countries in 2006. The SEEA Central Framework is now accompanied by the SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting, which provides a robust statistical framework for countries seeking to measure the contributions of ecosystems to economic activities and human well-being as well as track the condition of ecosystems, changes in conditions, and the impact of those changes on the provision of services.  The SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting builds on well-established disciplines, including national accounting, economics and ecological sciences. A research agenda designed to advance the methodology based on testing and practical experimentation in several countries was approved by the Statistical Commission. Selected modules of ecosystem accounts, in particular those focusing on the measurement of biodiversity, flows of ecosystem services and ecosystem conditions, will provide, in due course, useful indicators for policy analysis.The SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting accounts and resulting indicators can provide information to decision makers on progress in meeting goals and targets, including the movement towards sustainable consumption and production. Those accounts and indicators will therefore be helpful in monitoring the achievement of progress towards meeting the sustainable development goals that may be adopted through the post-2015 consultation process. Box II.1: Long-term pay-offs from investments in meeting the Millennium Development Goals Developing countries have made considerable progress towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals, but the most important rewards associated with past human development investments may still be pending. Investments in education and health improve social outcomes and human capital, enhancing labour productivity and economic growth. However, this process takes time, because children need to go through one or more educational cycles, and improved child and maternal health care today will bring about rewards in terms of healthier students and workers several years from now. Also, meeting the demands for the resources necessary to achieve Millennium Development Goals may prove to be an excessive burden for many developing countries which may have certain negative consequences. These conclusions emerged from a simulation study conducted for four developing countries: namely Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Costa Rica, Uganda and Yemen (for details, see Snchez and Cicowiez (2013)).According to the simulation, those countries would fail to achieve the targets of the Millennium Development Goals for primary school completion, child and maternal mortality rates, and access to drinking water and basic sanitation, under a baseline scenario that assumed a continuation up to 2030 of currently expected economic growth and current public spending interventions. Public investment would have to be increased by about 4.08.5 per cent of GDP each year in the period leading up to 2015, if the Millennium Development Goals were to be achieved, owing to the diminishing marginal effectiveness of investment. Second, the question whether such a huge amount of financing could be made availableand if so, from wherewould need to be considered. If the Governments tried to mobilize domestic resources to finance this investment gap, they may create a significant crowding-out effect. On the other hand, if the Governments relied on foreign resources (assuming they were available), their economies might end up suffering from Dutch disease, an appreciation of the real exchange rate and a decline in exports.As a result of the above trade-offs, there would be limited net growth effects. GDP growth would increase by 0.6-1.8 percentage points per year, provided the demand-driven effects were not offset by sluggish exports. Capital accumulation and productivity growth would carry on beyond 2015, generating additional GDP growth at 0.2-1.0 percentage points per year. The growth effect beyond 2015 would be partly due to the delayed impact of human capital investments made before 2015. Enough time would have elapsed for children to have gone through one or more educational cycles and for better education and better health to have led to an improvement of human capital. However, whether or not the potential productivity improvement effects were realized would depend on whether commensurate investments had been made in other areas of the economy, creating enough employment opportunities for the better-educated graduates entering the workforce. Absent those investments, unemployment might actually be higher than under the baseline scenario, as shown in the figure below. This points to the need for a complementarity of investments in different dimensions and for the kind of policy coherence that can ensure it. Box II.3: Sustainable development initiatives from the South     Many developing countries have been implementing significant initiatives aimed at promoting sustainable development. Ecuador, for example, has included the rights of nature in its constitution, adopted in 2008. In declaring that nature and ecosystems have the right to exist and flourish, Ecuador empowers its citizens to petition whenever those rights are violated, and obliges the Government to remedy such violations.     Recognition of the rights of nature reflects the concept of buen vivir (the good life) which is now gaining popularity in many countries of South America. The concept, which originated from indigenous peoples of South America, focuses on social, environmental and spiritual rather than material wealth. It recasts the relationship between humans and nature as a bio-pluralistic one, and emphasizes harmony with other people and nature. Buen vivir is, in a sense, a response to conventional development efforts, which often failed to improve the conditions of the common people and damaged the environment. It constitutes an alternative concept of development, suggesting that the good life can be achieved only in a community that includes nature. The constitution of Ecuador embodies buen vivir in a set of rights, including the rights of nature. Proceeding from the concept of the rights of nature, Ecuador has decided to leave the oil reserves (valued at approximately 3.5 billion United States dollars) in its Yasuni National Park untapped in order to protect the forests of the Amazon.     In a similar vein, the King of Bhutan, Jigme Singye Wangchuck, coined the term gross national happiness (GNH) in 1972 as a more holistic measure of quality of life and social progress than the conventional gross domestic product (GDP). Inspired by the idea, the Centre for Bhutan Studies developed a survey instrument to measure the well-being of the population, and policies in Bhutan must pass a GNH review.     The four pillars of GNH are the promotion of sustainable development, preservation and promotion of cultural values, conservation of the natural environment, and establishment of good governance. Support for the concept of GNH is not limited to Bhutan. In fact, so far, five international conferences have been held on GNH, in Japan, Canada, Thailand, Brazil and Bhutan itself.     These initiatives show that developing countries are not waiting for developed countries to provide initiatives that promote sustainable development. Instead, based on their own heritage and experience, they themselves are offering aspiration models of sustainable development. Chapter III: Towards Sustainable CitiesSummary1. Numerous challenges threaten the ability of cities to become viable pillars of sustainable development. Unequal access to, and inefficient use of, public services, as well as financial fragility and the harm inflicted by natural hazards, demand an integrated and coordinated response at the local, national and international levels. 2. The predominance of small- and medium-sized cities provides an opportunity to invest in green infrastructures, bypassing old energy technologies, and in social development, before social inequities become unsustainable. 3. Rural development is critical for an integrated approach to sustainability and for reducing poverty. Ensuring wider and inclusive access to public services can reduce rural/urban inequalities, disaster risk and food insecurity, as well as strengthen networks between cities and villages.4. Building sustainable cities requires investment in (a) renewable energy sources, (b)efficiency in the use of water and electricity, (c) design and implementation of compact cities, (d) retrofitting of buildings and increase of green areas, (e) fast, reliable and affordable public transportation and (f) improved waste and recycling systems. Cities in poor countries need resources to support green technology transfer, and capacity development, and to improve access to soundly constructed housing, water and sanitation, electricity, health and education.IntroductionCities and towns have become the primary human living space. Since 2007, more than half of the worlds population has been living in urban areas and the figure is estimated to exceed 70 per cent by 2050. This is a hallmark of the transformation of humans economic base and social structure, inasmuch as, previously, populations lived and worked primarily in rural areas.       Cities can provide many socioeconomic benefits. By concentrating people, investment and resources (a process known as agglomeration), cities heighten the possibilities for economic development, innovation and social interaction. More specifically, cities also make it possible to lower unit costs so as to provide public services such as water and sanitation, health care, education, electricity, emergency services and public recreational areas (Polse, 2009; Satterthwaite, 2010). However, this requires a functioning city government able both to ensure that such benefits are realized, and to adopt a sustainable framework that encourages the citys growth within ecological limits. Along these lines, cities also face challenges that threaten their efforts to achieve sustainability, for example, through improvement of access to, and efficiency in the use of, public services, as well as reduction of their ecological footprint and financial fragility, and the building of resilience against the adverse impact of natural hazards.       The present chapter recommends an integrated strategy for making cities thriving centres of sustainable development and innovation. It starts by assessing what a city is, the scale and speed of urbanization in recent decades, and the main trends and projections of urban growth across regions. The trends and projections analysed serve as an introduction to the conception of  future urbanization as a process that can enhance the benefits of cities, while reducing the threats to a more balanced and sustainable development. The evolution of the concept of urban sustainability is described and a framework is proposed based on four pillars: economic development, social development, environmental management and effective urban governance. The following section examines relevant challenges associated to the fulfilment of those objectives by different groups of countries. The last section examines urbanization through the lens of the investment opportunities that addressing those challenges involve. A proposal put forth for an integrated set of investments in infrastructure, public services and capacity development is complemented by an examination of relevant world experiences associated with urban sustainability at the sectoral level, e.g., disaster risk reduction, housing, and green infrastructure.The city and main urbanization trendsThere is no uniform definition of what constitutes a city, given the diversity of urban realities around the world. Every country defines cities according to its own criteria. It should also be noted that gaps in and measurement issues connected with urban data limit the accuracy of projections and international comparisons of levels of urbanization and sizes of city populations. Box III.1 below discusses the different criteria used in defining cities and data issues.Box III. 1: Definition of a city and data issuesThe majority of countries use a single characteristic or a combination of administrative, population size or density, economic and urban characteristics (e.g., paved streets, water-supply systems, sewerage systems and electric lighting) to define a city. The lower limit above which a settlement can be considered urban varies greatly, between 200 and 50,000 inhabitants, which can give rise to error when comparing urban populations (and urban areas) in different countries. For example, if Indias national authorities would classify populations of 5,000 or more as urban, the country would be considered predominantly urban and not rural. In Angola, Argentina and Ethiopia, all settlements with 2,000 people or more are classified as urban. In Benin, only areas with 10,000 people or more are considered urban. In Botswana, an agglomeration of 5,000 people or more where 75 per cent of the economic activity is non-agricultural can be considered urban (Cohen, 2006). Certain countries define the urban population as comprising people who live within certain administrative centres or municipios (El Salvador) or under the jurisdiction of municipality councils (Iraq). Others define cities as places with a municipality, municipal corporation, town committee or cantonment board (Bangladesh and Pakistan).      The population of any urban centre is influenced by how its boundaries are setfor instance, are they determined by the built-up area or are peri-urban areas which have little or no urban development included within them? The size of a city can be made significantly larger if fringe populations are included in official statistics; many cities have boundaries set to include the city and large areas around the city which may include small towns and large rural populations. Most large cities have more than one boundaryboundaries for the central city, for instance, for an entire metropolitan area, or for a wider planning region which often includes many rural settlements. In general, countries urban populations are defined as the residents whose main source of income is not from agriculture or forestry (Satterthwaite, 2010).      Inadequate attention paid to data limitations has led to misconceptions regarding urban trends which can ultimately distort urban policies. Urban population projections often do not include high- and low-variant estimations, which are typical of world population projections published by the United Nations (Satterthwaite, 2007; United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012b). Moreover, the traditional urban/rural dichotomy has become increasingly inadequate for distinguishing between urban and rural settlements. Increased trade, labour mobility and innovation in communications have spread urban functions and influence over wide geographical areas, including rural ones. In parts of Asia and the Pacific, for example, intense economic activity in the intersection between urban and rural areas has blurred differences (Cohen, 2004). Yet, in the case of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, censuses and surveys that consider the urban/rural dichotomy are still valid since they persistently indicate social inequalities subsisting between rural and urban areas (United Nations, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2012). Still, some of the most profound social inequalities are seen within cities or within nations urban populations (Mitlin and Satterthwaite 2012).      To improve the consistency and comparability of data on urban populations across countries and over time, the United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2012b) uses two auxiliary concepts: (a) urban agglomeration, which refers to population contained within the contours of contiguous territory inhabited by, e.g., 750,000 inhabitants or more and (b) metropolitan region, which includes both the contiguous territory and surrounding areas of lower settlement density which are under the direct influence of the city through frequent transport, roads, commuting and so forth (p. 7). In addition, there is a potential for research on urban databases and data-collection mechanisms to support local policy, planning and investment decisions.      In general, caution is recommended regarding the interpretation and comparison of urban population statistics between nations, owing to different official criteria for defining urban areas, and setting city boundaries, and, in some cases, to the lack of census data.END BOXCities are diverse in terms of their size, structure, spatial form, economy, wealth, local resources availability and ecological impact. According to population size and conditions, urban centres can be, e.g., small, medium, large or mega. The population of an urban centre can range from a few thousand to over 10 million people or more. According to relevant studies, small urban centres have a population less than or equal to 500,000 people; medium urban centres, a population  between 1 million and 5 million people; and mega urban centres, a population of  10 million or more (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012b; Dobbs and others, 2011). For statistical comparison of urban centres sizes and development, this chapter uses these categories, along with large urban centres defined as agglomerations with 5 million inhabitants or more. The scale and scope of urbanizationAt the start of the twentieth century, just 16 cities had 1 million or more people, with the majority located in advanced industrialized countries (Montgomery and others, 2004). By 2010, there were 449 cities with 1 million people or more, of which three quarters were located in developing countries (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012b).       Pursuant to the caveats associated with urban population projections noted in box III.1, the following estimations should be interpreted as guidance only. During 2000-2050, developing regions could add 3.2 billion new urban residents, a figure larger than the world population in 1950 and double the urban population added during 1950-2000. By 2050, the world urban population could reach a total of 6.25 billion, 80 per cent of whom may be living in developing regions, and concentrated in cities of Africa and Asia. It is possible that African urban centres would house over 1 billion people by 2050, which would be about 3 times the figure for the urban population of North America, twice the figure for the urban population of Latin America and the Caribbean or Europe, and comparable to the figure for Chinas urban population at that time. These trends would challenge the institutional capacities of many of these cities to provide decent employment, public services and a clean environment, especially for those that already have sizeableand growingnumbers of underserved residents living in slums, under unsafe conditions (Satterthwaite, 2007).       Urban population growth is expected to continue setting the pace of world population growth, and in the next 10-15 years, for the first time in history, the world rural population is expected to decline (figure III.1 below). Globally, a net 1.3 billion people was added to small urban centres during 1950-2010, more than double the number of people added in medium (632 million) or large urban centres (570 million). This trend is important, since different sizes of urban settlements can affect the levels of provision of services needed to sustain growing populations. The challenges and policy implications of the likely continued predominance of small urban centres and the rising significance of middle and large urban centres in the next 15 years are noteworthy and will be further analysed below. Diverse paths and paces of urbanizationThere is considerable regional diversity in the patterns of urbanization and an even greater variation in the level and pace of urbanization of individual countries. For example, on average more than three quarters of the Latin America and the Caribbean region is highly urbanized, whereas least developed countries and landlocked developing countries are still predominantly agriculturalalthough their path towards urbanization is expected to accelerate in the next decades (see table III.1). The case of the small island developing States is worth mentioning because they have been able to achieve a balance through a midlevel urbanization path (60 per cent share) with economies that are based on industry and services.      On average, nearly 80 per cent of the population in developed regions resides in urban centres, contrasting with an average share of urban populations in Asia and Africa of less than 50 per cent. At the country level, while urbanization in some African nations such as Burkina Faso, Burundi, Ethiopia and Malawi can be as low as 20 per cent, the urban population represents over 60 per cent of the total population in South Africa. Moreover, urban populations in low-income nations are highly concentrated in a very small number of cities, which also contrasts with the urbanization pattern in developed regions. For example, 75 per cent, 60 per cent and 47 per cent of the urban populations in Sierra Leone, Kenya, and Guinea are concentrated in Freetown, Nairobi and Conakry, respectively (Grbler and Buettner, 2013; United Nations, 2010).      Yet, late urbanization in Asia and Africa is expected to gain speed and concentrate the majority of the additional 3 billion urbanites during 2010-2050. Similarly, the number of urban agglomerations (750,000 inhabitants or more) and the number of inhabitants per agglomeration are expected to grow significantly in Asia and Africa by 2025 (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012b). It is expected that over 80 per cent of the urban population added in the next 15 years will be found in middle-income countries such as China, India, South Africa, Nigeria, Indonesia and Pakistan (ibid.). Changing patterns of urban settlementsOver 50 per cent of the worlds urban populations lived in settlements with 500,000 people or less by 2010. Although their significance will remain, the share will have been reduced to 42 per cent by 2025 (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012b). Medium cities (those with 1-5 million people), on the other hand, will increase their share of the urban population, from 21 to 24 per cent over a similar time interval. The share of the urban population in large cities (those with more than 5 million people), including megacities, will grow the most, from 17 to 22 per cent, with an absolute increase of more than 410 million people. By 2010, megacities of 10 million inhabitants or more contain only 10 per cent of the global urban population (ibid.).      All of the types of growing cities will be located largely in low- and middle-income countries. In many developing countries, the main challenge is to provide underserved urban residents, including populations in large cities, with affordable access to adequate public services and job opportunities. Inhabitants in poor urban settlements, typically, reside on the outskirts as well as within large cities without adequate access to piped water, waste disposal, electricity and good schools. Evidence also suggests that rates of poverty and infant and child mortality can be high in small and large cities, often indicating an inadequate access to public-health facilities and the lack of political will to invest in them (Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2012).      Cities in low-income countries may often lack the institutional capacity to manage growing populations. Although some national Governments in developing countries have begun to decentralize service delivery and revenue-raising to regional and local levels of government, lower tiers of urban government often do not have enough resources and adequate capacity to manage, e.g., health, education and poverty programmes (Montgomery and others, 2004). Is there a twin path between urbanization and economic growth?The economic strength of countries lies in cities; in fact, urban gross domestic product (GDP) represents about 80 per cent of world GDP (Grbler and Fisk, 2013). Cities have been pivotal centres for economic growth, employment creation, innovation and cultural exchange. Cities in many developing countries (e.g., Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Honduras, India, Nigeria, Peru and South Africa) concentrate the core of modern productive activities and are the areas par excellence where income-earning opportunities are to be found (Satterthwaite, 2007). Cities are also the centres where women enjoy the highest labour participation, health access, literacy rates and upward social mobility (Cohen, 2006).      Nonetheless, urban population growth has outpaced economic growth as well as the needed improvement of competence and institutional capacity of city governments in many developing countries, which contrasts with the closer correlation found in developed countries (figure III.2). Thus, for an equivalent level of urbanization, the level of income per capita in developing regions is several times lower. This trend, which might be explained partly by different criteria used for defining urban centres, has implications for the actual capacities of poor countries to build sustainable cities. Figure III.2 illustrates this trend in relation to the urbanization of the Latin America and the Caribbean region.In particular, the urbanization process in least developed countries or countries of subSaharan Africa may have occurred with negative or almost no economic growth (figure III.3), which ultimately implies an increased precariousness of urban life.  Population in slums almost doubled in sub-Saharan Africa between 1990 and 2010, rising from 103 million to 200 million (United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2010). Even so, Satterthwaite (2010) recommends caution in the interpretation of the negative correlation between economic growth and urbanization in sub-Saharan countries because of data shortcomings, which can prevent accurate measurement of urbanization patterns (see, also, Potts, 2006).Cities are constantly evolving as a result of dynamic processes heightened by population mobility, natural population growth, socioeconomic development, environmental changes and local and national policies. The trends and projections described above serve as the basis for an introduction to the concept of future urbanization as a process that can enhance the benefits and synergies of cities, while reducing the threats to a more balanced and sustainable development. A framework for sustainable citiesIt has been suggested that the building of a green city is equivalent to the building of sustainability (Beatley, ed., 2012). Many countries are planning and engaged in building green cities and eco-cities as starting points for the building of sustainable development. Yet, it is important to understand cities sustainability as a broader concept which integrates social development, economic development, environmental management and urban governance. In this regard, chapter II provides guidelines for possible sustainable development paths for countries at different stages of development.       The 1987 report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, also known as the Brundtland Commission, defined sustainable development as development that meets the needs of the present, without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The report included a chapter on urban issues. In 1991, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS) Sustainable Cities Programme attempted to define a sustainable city as one where achievements in social, economic and physical development are made to last (see United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2002, p. 6). However, this definition was still too general and neglected the fact that a sustainable city must have a low ecological footprint and reduce risk transfer (economic, social and environmental) to other locations and into the future (Reese, 1992).	The concept of sustainable cities and its links with sustainable development have been discussed since the early 1990s. Sustainable cities should meet their inhabitants development needs without imposing unsustainable demands on local or global natural resources and systems (Satterthwaite, 1992, p. 3). In this sense, consumption patterns of urban middle- and high-income groups as indicated in chapters I and II are responsible for the use of a significant portion of the worlds finite resources and contribute significantly to the production of polluting wastes. Sustainable development should focus on better living and working conditions for the poor, including affordable access to, and improvement of, housing, health care, water and sanitation, and electricity.      The first approximations to a concept of city sustainability noted above were reflected in the 1992 Rio de Janeiro Conference on Environment and Development (United Nations, 1993), attended by more than 178 Governments. The 1992 Rio Declaration integrated the economic, social, environmental and governability dimensions of sustainability and argued for the eradication of unsustainable patterns of production and consumption, the eradication of poverty, and the role of the State, civil society and international community in protecting the environment.       Another outcome of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development was Agenda 21 (United Nations, 1993), which aimed at preparing the world for the challenges of the twenty-first century.  Agenda 21, which was built upon at subsequent United Nations conferences, defined sustainability in the context of economic, social, environmental and governance issues, noting the decisive role of authorities and civil society at the local, national and international levels for the implementation of sustainable development policies. Yet, Agenda 21 did not specifically refer to cities nor did it explain how the concept of sustainability could become the basis for the creation of sustainable cities.      The Habitat Agenda (United Nations, 1997), adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul from 3 to 14 June 1996, echoed the concerns expressed in Agenda 21 with respect to the multidimensionality of development, and discussed urban sustainability as requiring a harmonious integration of economic, social and environmental issues. At this summit, nations reported on the progress towards achieving the sustainability of their cities. Yet, this Agenda still needed to include climate change as one of the main threats to building sustainable cities and to development in general.      At the first session of the World Urban Forum convened at the headquarters of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) in Nairobi from 29 April to 3 May 2002, an in-depth discussion was held on urbanization in the context of sustainable development. The Forum affirmed that addressing economic, social, environmental and governance issues was integral to the creation of sustainable cities, and that the inability to address those issues would prevent the achievement of sustainable development (United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), 2002). The main messages of the Forum were comprehensively discussed and reaffirmed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002. More recently, this approach to sustainable cities has been echoed by the Rio+20 Declaration (United Nations, 2012, p. 26) and by the United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012), which includes governance under the broader umbrella of peace and security issues. In an increasingly urbanized world which demands more sustainable ways of living, urban governance entails the fostering of urban planning and environmental management, which includes the reduction of ecological footprints, and the decentralization of decision-making, and resource allocation, as well as enhanced policy coordination between local and national authorities.      In this context, achieving the sustainability of cities can be conceived as entailing the integration of four pillars: social development, economic development, environmental management, and urban governance. Figure III.4 presents the four pillars for achieving urban sustainability as encompassing the balanced accomplishment of social and economic development, environmental management and effective governance.  Yet, the ways in which a particular city is able to build sustainability will reflect its capacity to adapt, within the context of its particular history, to the policy priorities and goals defined by each pillar.        The integration of the four pillars can generate synergies, for example, between waste and recycling management (environmental management) and access to water and sanitation (social development); between air quality conservation and green public transportation; and among production and distribution of renewable energy sources, green energy access, and adaptation to and mitigation of climate change, as well as between the goal of reducing inequities (urban governance) and that of ensuring adequate access to green housing, education and health (social development). Investment is the catalyst element behind the realization of each of the component goals of urban sustainability. To build upon the four pillars can be a challenge for many cities and countries. Cities are often at different stages of development and have their own specific responses to policy priorities at the local and national levels. In this sense, the sets of sustainability challenges to be overcome by cities are diverse. The challenges associated with building sustainable citiesThe present section analyses the main social, economic and environmental challenges associated with building sustainable cities in developing and developed countries.       For city governments, the challenges include securing the necessary resources for investment in disaster-proof public infrastructure, and renewable sources of energy, and providing incentives to the private sector to create decent employment for large urban populations that are underemployed and have limited access to good housing conditions, clean water, sanitation, drainage and schools (table III.2). Upper middle income and high-income countries with urban populations that already have access to basic public services face the challenge of becoming more efficient in the use of energy and water, reducing the generation of waste, and improving their recycling systems. Growth of cities has often gone hand in hand with an increased use of natural resources and ecological systems, driven by economic growth and changes in the economic structurein terms of a shift from agriculture to manufacturing and then to services. While wealthier cities and people, in particular, may have well-managed resource systems, they also have a greater ecological impact through drawing resources from larger areas. For example, wealthier residents in New York City, Los Angeles and Mexico City contribute greatly to the demand for freshwater from distant ecosystems, whose capacities are consequently affected and whose use generates significant levels of pollution and greenhouse gas emissions at the national and global levels (McGranahan and Satterthwaite, 2003). Thus, urbanization can be an important contributor to high resource use and waste generation, both with ecological effects at the local, regional and global levels.      Some of the most significant challenges associated with building sustainable cities are discussed more extensively below.Socioeconomic inequalitiesInequalities between rural and urban areas as well as within urban areas have been features of development and urbanization in developing countries (Cohen 2006; Baker, ed., 2012).  The gap between rich and poor neighbourhoods can imply significant differences in access to job opportunities and basic public services such as water and sanitation, electricity, education and health, housing and communications. As a consequence, many urban residents in developing countries suffer to varying degrees from environmental health issues associated to inadequate access to clean water, sewerage services, and solid waste disposal. In many cities of developing countries, adequate water and sanitation services are primarily channelled to upper- and middle-class neighbourhoods, while low-income neighbourhoods often depend on distant and unsafe water wells and private water vendors who charge higher prices than the public rate for water delivery (Cohen, 2006). The poor often live in highly overcrowded dwellings in shacks which lack basic infrastructure and services. On the whole, less than 35 per cent of cities in developing countries have their waste water treated, while globally, 2.5 billion and 1.2 billion people lack safe sanitation and access to clean water, respectively (United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2012). For a broader overview and assessment of the impact of social and economic inequalities, see also chapters I and II.      Wider urban access to public services,income-earning opportunities and broader social interaction in cities has driven rural-urban internal migration in many developing countries for the past 60 years (Beall, Guha-Khasnobis and Kanbur, eds., 2012). The speed of urbanization has ultimately outstripped the limits of the economic opportunities provided by cities, making poverty a salient feature of urban life. Cohen (2006) suggests that congestion costs in large cities might be high, since the well-being advantage has declined in many cities of developing countries since the 1970s. Moreover, the rising urban inequalities in, e.g., Brazil, China and the Philippines in the 1990s is consistent with the existence of highly heterogeneous urban labour markets, which are in part the result of their high level of exposure to world markets.      Mitlin and Satterthwaite (2012) indicate that 1 out of 7 persons in the world lives in poverty in urban areas, mainly in informal settlements of the developing world, with inadequate provision of water, sanitation, health care and schools. Yet, urban poverty is still underestimated mainly owing to inadequate methodologies used to define and measure poverty. For example, the $1.25-per-day poverty line does not necessarily capture higher costs of food and non-food items in large cities, while indicators of improved water provision include public taps and standpipes which often do not provide safe and regular water.      About 1 billion people, lacking basic infrastructure and services, currently live in slums, whose number may multiply threefold by 2050 if no policy framework is in place to reduce their growth (United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2012). More than half of urban dwellers in countries of sub-Saharan Africa and 40 per cent in Asia lack access to basic sanitation (Baker, ed., 2012). The growth of cities in least developed countries, in particular, often results in a rise in the number of people living under precarious conditions in respect of their livelihoods and employment, whose effect on the environment is harmful through their use of dirty energy, e.g., wood and charcoal, to meet basic energy needs.      At the regional level, data provided by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) (2010) indicate that 62 per cent of urban populations in sub-Saharan Africa live in slums, a proportion that is expected to rise in the next decades. Slums in Latin America and the Caribbean and regions of Asia house about 24 per cent and 30 per cent of the urban populations, respectively.       Further, international migrants working in low-skilled occupations have increasingly joined the ranks of the poor in the main cities of both developed and developing countries. Key industries and trades such as food production and processing, construction and repairs, buildings maintenance, taxi driving, the garment industry, household services, and agriculture often engage a significant share of immigrant workers. Frequently living in insecure and low-quality conditions in terms of housing and public services, many immigrants are undocumented and disenfranchised. In New York City and other cities in the United States of America, for example, unsafe labour conditions for many immigrant workers include working schedules of up to 60-72 hours per week and no social benefits such as health care and social security (Orrenius and Zavodny, 2009; Passel, 2006). Sprawl and weakened capacities Many large cities have also experienced rising sprawl over the past 50 years, challenging urban planning. Wealthier citizens have chosen to reside on the outskirts of cities where they enjoy greater privacy, have bigger homes and better schools for their children, and are spared having to use public transportation and endure the frenzied atmosphere of urban downtowns. As a consequence, the carbon footprint of wealthier inhabitants, households and neighbourhoods is often much higher than that of the rest of urban inhabitants (McGranahan and Satterthwaite, 2003).       Small cities with less than 500,000 inhabitants experience a different type of vulnerability. Although there is much diversity in their economic structure, many small cities in developing countries have very weak economies and inadequate communication with more economically dynamic cities. These cities tend to have inadequate infrastructure for provision of basic public services, which may be of low quality.  Access may be time-consuming, costly and risky (in the case, for example, of public transportation). Poor land management and weak urban planning capacities are part of the problem. The deficiencies in urban governance, institution-building and adjustment to changing land development conditions have reduced real possibilities for improving urban planning (Cohen, 2006).Energy accessThe present section highlights the differences between the energy needs of poor urban households and countries and rich ones. Access to cleaner sources of energy is intrinsically linked to development, and vice versa.  Countries with higher gross domestic product (GDP) per capita (e.g., above US$ 4,000) are associated with the use of electricity by above 60 per cent of the urban population, and the use of wood and charcoal for cooking by a low proportion of urban households (e.g., 20 per cent or less). In fact, cities in the majority of middle-income countries have access to electricity, including Amman, Bogota, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Caracas, Jakarta, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro and Santo Domingo (Satterthwaite and Sverdlik, 2013).          Similarly, while only 18 per cent of urban dwellers in developing countries use wood and charcoal for cooking, the proportion for least developing countries is almost four times higher. Overall, there are about 680 million people in developing countries with no access to modern fuels (see table III.3 below). Lack of access to electricity is associated with informal urban settlements where dwellers typically have high transportation costs and poor-quality housing. The use of cheap fuels implies increased deforestation, pollution, health risks, energy cost and time burden. Poor people often have to spend a lot of time for travelling to purchase or gather those fuels. In contrast, regular electricity supplies would often be cheaper and safer, and could be used for household appliances (e.g., lights needed by children when doing their homework and for reading) and home enterprises. Common and differentiated impacts of natural hazardsThe adverse impact of social inequalities on human health and the environment is multiplied when we factor in the adverse effects of natural disasters. Natural hazards linked to climate change events have also increased in intensity and frequency. Most disasters tend to occur in developing countries and the human cost in terms of both the number of persons affected and the loss of human lives is much higher in these countries. Yet, some developed countries have also started to be affected despite their generally greater resilience (United Nations, 2011). Mutizwa-Mangiza (2012) indicates that 40 per cent of the worlds urban population, many of them poor and vulnerable to storms, floods and sea-level rise (e.g., southern Brazil, China, Viet Nam and Honduras), live less than 100 kilometres from the coast (see also World Bank, 2009).      The combined impact of sea-level rise, floods, heatwaves and storms have adversely affected millions of livelihoods, homes and lives in different countries, with projections indicating that the trend will continue and, in some cases, worsen (United Nations, 2011).  Middle-income countries such as China, India, Indonesia, the Philippines and Viet Nam had the highest number of floods and storms combined during 2000-2009. Cities located along the west Coast of Africa and the coastlines of South, East and South-East Asia have been affected by sea-level rise, flooding and salt intrusion in river flows and groundwater, compromising the quality of clean water.  Endemic morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoeal disease are projected to increase in these regions. The reduction of the Andean glaciers and the melting of the Himalayan glaciers have disrupted the regular production of hydroelectric plants and reduced water supply in many cities (World Bank, 2010).       In fact, the likelihood of mega-disasters has seized the attention of policymakers, particularly in countries that have long coastlines, including Australia, China, France, Indonesia, the Philippines and the United States. Coastal developments in urban centres are likely to sharpen disaster risks from sea-level rise and increased intensity and frequency of storms and floods (Lee and others, 2012). Although disaster risks such as droughts disproportionately affect rural areas, there have been recent disasters in urban areassuch as earthquakes in Japan (2011), Haiti (2010), Chile (2010) and China (2010); flooding in China (2010), Pakistan (2010), Brazil (2010, 2011) and Bangkok (2012); and the extensive damage wrought across cities along the East Coast of the United States following Hurricane Sandy (2012)which highlights the fact that urban disaster risk is also a reality. The concentration of people and economic activity in areas at risk from extreme weather events or earthquakes can interrupt global supply chains, reduce economic output, reverse development gains, and affect the livelihoods of the poor who often live in those areas (Baker, ed., 2012; United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2013).      Stronger storms and saltwater intrusion in water systems have weakened adaptive capacities in coastal cities of both developed and developing countries. The damages to infrastructure in the former and the weakening of resilience in the latter threaten their policy space for taking effective adaptation measures and developing capacities for rebuilding.      The integrated effects of the challenges described above threaten the economic resilience of cities and heighten their vulnerabilities. Cities have to start perceiving those challenges as opportunities for investment and building cities to serve as the main pillars for a sustainable world. Opportunities for building sustainable citiesAs demonstrated above, there are both challenges and opportunities associated with building sustainable cities. The multidimensional impact of megatrends represents a strategic opportunity for taking an integrated approach to urban planning and a major opportunity for investment in industrial transformation, improved infrastructure, social development and environmental management. Sustainable development in growing cities, of poor countries in particular, implies investment in infrastructure such as roads, water, sewers, electricity and services such as schools, public transportation and health-care. Leapfrogging investment in green industrial transformation can generate employment for the youth bulge dividend experienced by those countries. In cities of middle- and high-income countries, investment in the production and use of renewable sources of energy, as well as in the renovation of infrastructure, retrofitting of buildings and improved efficiency in the use of electricity and water, is important. At the same time, investment in strategies for the reduction of waste production and improvement of waste collection and recycling systems are needed in most cities across the world. Inevitably there will be trade-offs between investments yielding benefits in the short-term, e.g., infrastructure for development and those with benefits in the long-term such as on environmental protection and disaster risk reduction.     Cities contribution to sustainable development can be multiplied if more countries are committed to that goal and when people are enabled to produce, consume and govern their behaviour in a sustainable manner. Thus, urban sustainability defined within the framework of a global integrated approach must include both developed and developing countries. An integrated and coordinated approachAn integrated approach to urbanization will be based on a holistic view of its social development, economic development, environmental management (at the local, national and global levels) and governance components.  It will entail the coordination of objectives and programmes among different city stakeholders (e.g., citizens, government and the business sector), as well as the development of linkages between and within socioeconomic sectors and activities. In economic terms, the integrated approach tries to improve synergies and efficiencies among activities such as public transportation, energy consumption, biodiversity and human health.      Further, under an integrative approach, city administrations would integrate investment in various types of infrastructures with the development of institutional and management capacities and the active participation of all stakeholders in the process of building sustainable cities. The city of Curitiba in Brazil has gained worldwide recognition for having successfully developed that kind of integrated approach to sustainability over the past 40 years. A description of the relevant processes involved in Curitiba is offered in box III.2.Box III.2: How Curitiba became a reference point for sustainable development  Curitiba, a city in southern Brazil, has approximately 3 million residents (including in the metropolitan area). The implementation of the Curitiba Master Plan began during the first administration of Mayor Jaime Lerner in the early 1970s. The plan relied on the physical integration of a public transport system, land-use legislation and a hierarchized road network. The urban growth structure is characterized by a linear expansion across five structural geographical sectors which are served by express buses.  It links the city centre with the periphery and other neighbour municipalities, with priority given to public transport.       The implementation of the Master Plan was conducted incrementally, consonant with the perception of sustainable urban design as a long-term process. Curitiba first developed a modest express route system with dedicated bus lanes. It then sought out ways to improve and extend the system. The result was a surface networked system which provides high-quality service comparable with that of well-known underground systems but at a capital cost that is about 200 times less. As a result, mass transit is almost entirely financed by passenger fares.       The systematic approach to urban transportation has reduced travel times and increased convenience for commuters and other travellers. Private companies operate public buses whose intensive use continues despite the fact that Curitiba has one of the highest automobile ownership rates in Brazil. Rider surveys suggest that at least 20 per cent of the new bus passengers previously commuted by automobile. The city has replaced several downtown streets with broad pedestrian malls and shopping areas. Reduced traffic appears to result in substantial fuel savings as well as reduced carbon emissions. Estimates based on information from URBS, the public-private company that manages the system, suggest that the reduction in automobile traffic has saved 27 million litres of fuel per year.      While Curitiba is best known for its innovative public transport system, this is only one among many initiatives that have improved the environment and reduced resource use.  For example, residents of subsidized low-income housing have easy access to public transportation whose route is in the direction of the Curitiba Industrial City, where polluting industries are not allowed. Curitiba has 60 square metres of green area per inhabitant, one of the highest rates among all cities in the world. Curitibas green spaces are integrated with flood control; and artificial lakes in many public parks provide a flood control system for the entire city. A strictly enforced citywide policy ensures that rivers and streams are protected and rainwater is collected and recycled.       Curitiba has also implemented relevant solid waste programmes. The Garbage that is not garbage initiative, created in 1989, promotes domestic recycling through the separate collection of more than one thousand tons of metal, plastic, glass and paper per month. Additional benefits of this programme have included the positive change in the attitude of the population towards recycling and the extension of the life of landfills through the conservation of considerable space. The goal of the Garbage purchase programme is to clean up dense areas in low-income communities (favelas), where garbage collection vans do not have space to circulate. The community sells garbage to the city in exchange for bags of food, bus tokens, notebooks and tickets for soccer matches and plays. The innovative feature of these programmes is the integration of environmental improvement with social inclusion.          City planning is an ongoing challenge. Curitiba has grown more than fourfold in the last 30 years, which has resulted in social issues and the environmental challenges associated with traffic and transportation, land use, waste management and housing. Yet, Curitiba continues to stand out as a visible point of reference for integrated urban development based on sustainability principles.  The most important lesson is that Curitiba has taken control of its own destiny by embracing a sustainability approach which has brought important benefits. At the same time, it has become an inspiration for thousands of small and medium-sized cities worldwide which are about to make crucial choices for their future and the future of the planet.      END BOXAt the national level, the integration of the rural and urban sectors is critical. Wider access to public services and development of linkages with industrial development can leverage rural sector capacities to exchange resources and information, and engage in social interaction, with urban areas. Investment in economic and social infrastructure in rural settlements can be a catalyst for reducing rural-urban migration. Although every area is characterized by a different configuration of land use, resources and potentials, the systemic integration of different villages, towns and cities in the context of their particular specializations and strategic locations can bring sustainable development to both urban and rural areas. Box IV.2 illustrates the positive effects of investment in rural infrastructure on Ugandas food sustainability.      Empirical evidence suggests that for the drivers of sustained development in some newly industrialized countries of South-East Asia (Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia and Viet Nam) within the past 50 years included improved social development in the rural sector, increased agricultural productivity, and food supply, and support of decision-making capacities of peasant farmers. In fact, macroeconomic stabilization was important insofar it was directed towards reduction of poverty, which was understood to be concentrated in rural areas (Kees van Donge, Henley and Lewis, 2012). Henley (2012) argues that the economic success of South-East Asia was due to pro-poor agricultural development and historical consistency in respect of investment in agriculture, as was the case for Malaysia over the period 1956-1990. Pro-rural sector policies are not the same as pro-poor policies; for example, investment in land redistribution is not necessarily pro-poor when the money is allocated to purchase land and not to implement poverty-reduction programmes, as was the case in Kenya during the 1960s and 1970s. The road towards building sustainable cities covers two types of investment, namely:      (a)  Investment in infrastructure and capacity development to close social development gaps linked to the issue of access to good-quality public transportation, water and sanitation, health, education, housing and energy services in urban and rural areas;       (b)  Investment in urban resilience, including industrial transformation towards the use of renewable energy sources, creation of decent employment in green productive activities, and adoption of adaptation and mitigation strategies.       The first area of investment applies mainly to cities located in low-income countries and should be part of a development agenda that is supported by the international community with a view to spurring sustainability. In particular, support should be directed towards infrastructure investment efforts made by poor countries in order to reduce poverty (see box III.5 for an example of investment in waste processing infrastructure (Dhaka)). The second area of investment applies mainly to cities located in middle- and high-income countries. In the case of economies with fast growth, for example, resources generated by sustained economic growth in the past decade can serve as a means of financing the production and use of renewable energy as well as building resilience against natural hazards.      All things considered, building sustainable cities requires an integrated approach to investment in (a) rural development and affordable access to public services by the urban poor, (b) rapid, reliable, accessible and affordable public transportation in all its forms, (c) industrial transformation based on the production and use of renewable energy sources and the creation of decent jobs, (d) retrofitting of buildings and increase in the number of green areas, (e) improved efficiency in the use of water and electricity and (f) effective management of waste and recycling systems.      A study of urban households in the United States by Holian and Kahn (2013) indicates that investment and effective measures to reduce air pollution and crime in downtown areas have resulted in higher urban population density and reduced per capita carbon emissions. The Plan Verde of Mexico City is also making positive strides in reducing urban air pollution and carbon emissions (see box III.3).Box III.3: Plan Verde of Mexico City       In 1990, Mexico City had had 333 days in which the ozone level rose above Mexicos national standard.  In 2006, the city developed a 15-year Plan Verde which included the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 7 million metric tons during 2008-2012, which was accomplished in a timely manner. The Plan also has a business and citizens education component. Nearly 20 city agencies have worked together to optimize the use of the $1 billion-per-year investment, which represents about 7 per cent of the citys yearly budget. By 2009, the number of days with an ozone level above the standard had fallen to 180. Moreover, the average number of hours per day during which the ozone standard was above the norm fell from 4.9 in 1990 to just 1.5 in 2009.      In addition to improving air quality, the plan includes other pillars encompassing: land conservation; public spaces; waste management and recycling; water supply and sanitation; climate action planning; and transportation and mobility. The citys efforts to control atmospheric pollutants have included replacing ageing taxis, microbuses and government fleets with lower-emissions vehicles, introducing a bike-sharing programme, and building a bus rapid transit system. The city offers a tax incentive of 10 per cent of the value of a building for promotion of green roofs. By December 2011, 21,000 square metres of green roofs had been installed in public buildings and private establishments. The city has also implemented 22 programmes on 11,000 hectares of conservation land for improving water management by reducing soil loss due to water and wind erosion.      To reduce the effects of population growth and the increase in vehicle fleets, the city has plans to replace official Government vehicles with fuel-efficient and low-polluting units. By 2012, four lines of a bus rapid transit system which used clean-burning, ultra-low sulphur diesel fuel had been inaugurated. The city is investing $2 billion in constructing a twelfth metro line and is providing subsidies for replacing ageing taxis. By December 2011, 75,000 taxis had been replaced with more efficient vehicles and 12,695 taxis had been scrapped. The city has restricted vehicle usage on certain days and in certain high-traffic zones as part of the Hoy no circula programme which is designed to reduce both traffic and emissions. The city has also introduced a bicycle mobility strategy (EcoBici), which includes free bike rentals and the creation of 21 kilometres of new bicycle paths. The city has also built bicycle-parking infrastructures at major metro subway stations. By December 2011, EcoBici had made 1,200 bicycles available at 90 bike stations and had 35,000 registered users, who had taken a total of 3 million trips.       By focusing on improving air quality across multiple dimensions including land use, transportation, waste management and climate action planning, the city has produced effective programmes in seemingly unrelated areas such as water use and supply.      END BOXGreen investment in poor countries would enable them to leapfrog from dirty/high-carbon energy use to a low/zero-carbon development path. Investment is needed in the renovation of infrastructures of transportation as well as in education programmes that value efficiency in the use of public services. Households and businesses in cities of middle- and high-income countries would need to continue investing in improving the quality of life in urban centres and to create incentives to retrofit buildings and subsidies for producing and consuming clean energy sources. Box III.4 lists 10 essentials for investments and measures to reduce disaster risk, including investment in critical infrastructure, and early warning systems, and direct involvement of communities in designating prevention and reconstruction priorities.Box III.4: The 10 essentials for urban resilience 1. Put in place the organization and coordination needed to promote the understanding and reduction of disaster risk, based on participation of citizens groups and civil society. Build local alliances. Ensure that all departments understand their role in disaster risk reduction and preparedness. 2. Assign a budget for disaster risk reduction and provide incentives for homeowners, low-income families, communities, businesses and the public sector to invest in reducing the risks they face. 3. Maintain up-to-date data on hazards and vulnerabilities. Prepare risk assessments, to be used as the basis for urban development plans and decisions, and ensure that this information and the plans for your citys resilience are made readily available to the public and are fully discussed with them.4. Invest in and maintain critical infrastructure which reduces risk, such as flood drainage, adjusted where needed to cope with climate change. 5. Assess the safety of all schools and health facilities and upgrade them, as necessary.6. Apply and enforce realistic risk-compliant building regulations and land use planning principles. Identify safe land for low-income citizens and upgrade informal settlements, wherever feasible. 7. Ensure that education programmes and training on disaster risk reduction are in place in schools and local communities.8. Protect ecosystems and natural buffers to mitigate the impact of floods, storm surges and other hazards to which your city may be vulnerable. Adapt to climate change by building on good risk reduction practices.9. Install early warning systems and emergency management capacities in your city and hold regular public preparedness drills.10. After any disaster, ensure that the needs of the affected populations are placed at the centre of reconstruction, with support for those populations and their community organizations in designing and helping to implement responses, including rebuilding homes and livelihoods.END BOXTrade-offs between investments?Cities with a growing number of informal settlements are trying to meet basic urban infrastructure needs, such as for public transportation, clean piped water, drainage systems and waste management. As a result, investment in adaptation to climate change may take a back seat to investment in development. Moreover, building resilience has been constrained by poor infrastructure, weak institutions and lack of enforcement of planning regulations, e.g., in Pakistan. Similarly, in Narok and Kisumu (Kenya) and Moshi (United Republic of Tanzania), the municipalities limited capacity, knowledge and coordination, and competing priorities, have prevented the adoption of disaster risk reduction strategies (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2013).      Post-disaster reconstruction is another area where cities often face trade-offs between investing in sustainable development and re-establishing services. As observed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2012), tensions frequently arise as a result of competing demands for speed of delivery and sustainability of outcome. Response and reconstruction funds tend to be time-limited, often requiring expenditure within 12 months or less from the time of disbursement, with disregard for long-term pay-offs. Such pressure is compounded by the fact that multiple agencies work with limited resources and coordination. Indeed, trade-offs are often a by-product of short-sighted approaches versus long-term investment in win-win sustainable development solutions.      In fact, trade-offs between investments are often associated with whether formal established incentives exist for a particular type of investment. Wu and others (2013) argue that, in China, investments in transportation infrastructure, e.g., roads and electrification, tend to attract more incentives and therefore more rewards than investments in the environment. For these reasons, local urban authorities often prioritize the former type of investment based on its higher correlation with real GDP growth, career promotion and cities revenues from land lease sales.  As a result, investments in the environment tend to be negatively affected.Learning by doing in building sustainable citiesBuilding sustainable cities entails integration and coordination among sectors. For example, a land plan would need to include space for industry, residential housing, and green areas, to be integrated with adequate space for access to public transportation. Some overlaps would exist since investment in green infrastructure, for example, can imply a reduction of CO2 emissions, while protection of green areas can include management of groundwater sources.       Similarly, integration within sectors such as transportation would include the development of linkages between various transportation modes (e.g., bus, tram, metro, bicycle and walking) in order to reduce travel time, gas emissions and the use of private cars. China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, for example, has an extensive network of privately owned minibuses; maintains a low-fare tram system in the traditional downtown; and has effective pedestrian connection links with commercial buildings which double pedestrian capacity, directing people away from the noise and fumes generated by motorized traffic. Similarly, Bangkok has adopted the bus rapid transit (BRT), a transportation system that mobilizes high-capacity buses along routes with limited stops (Lim, 2012, p. 36).      In respect of water management, cities face access and efficiency challenges. Phnom Penh and Cape Town have been able to meet challenges by providing clean water at affordable rates to all people, including the poor living on the outskirts. Singapore has overcome its long-term water dependency with multi-pronged actions which included the installation of desalination plants and the recycling of waste water (Lim, 2012).      Annex III.1 sets out the different profiles and policy experiences of a sample of cities in respect of building urban sustainability. Independent of its size or its breadth of experience, each city has started on its own road towards urban sustainability. Cities such as Curitiba, Copenhagen and Freiburg have greater experience in building sustainability, and a few of their accomplishments have already served as models for other cities; for example, Curitibas integrated bus system has been emulated by the TransMilenio bus system of Bogot, Metrovia in Guayaquil, and Metrobs in Mexico City. Other cities have just started to design and implement a sustainability plan. As stated earlier, cities are poised to become pillars of sustainable development. In this sense, urban governance (figure III.4) can promote a more balanced and inclusive development as well as ensure a more effective use of local and national resources. As policy areas, the sectors indicated in annex III.1 capture the economic, social and environmental aspects of urban sustainability. The specific measures and activities listed in each cell do not necessarily constitute all of the actions taken by each city; rather, they reflect mainly the relevant information found and some of the agreed priority initiatives that cities have begun to carry out. In particular, some cities have been quite actively supporting green infrastructure (in buildings and transportation); renewable energy and reduction of CO2 emissions; and management of waste and recycling.      The sustainability challenges faced by each city are diverse and reflect the size of its economy, technology capacities and population (e.g., Shanghai has 21 million residents, while Ilo has 53,000 residents), as well as its development priorities. Information and communications technologies (ICT) can increase efficiencies, reduce costs, and enhance quality of life; however, the adoption of ICT depends on the capacity to scale up and on flexibility for implementation in different urban settings. Indeed, ICT also offers an opportunity to integrate cities infrastructures, including utilities, real estate, transportation and other public services (Falconer and Mitchell, 2012).      Cities priorities are determined by their own urban planning capacities and by the pressing development challenges that they face. Different stakeholders coming, e.g., from the business, professional, government and political sectors, often gather to discuss how to build a particular citys sustainability. Their individual views on urban sustainability have to be synthesized to yield common denominators, e.g., a common language and a unified approach to implementation. The survey presented in annex III.1 reveals the existing gaps and the diversity of policy priorities adopted in different cities. For example, housing in Kampala is a priority owing to the fact that 60 per cent of its inhabitants reside in slums, while in Paris one priority is to ensure in the implementation of insulation programmes for old buildings in order to improve households energy efficiency. On the other hand, it is the Clean Air Project that is of foremost importance in Ilo, a city whose mining activities have produced one of the worlds highest levels of air pollution (Boon, Alexaki and Herrera Becerra, 2001, p. 215). The improvement of water infrastructure is essential to improving the quality and efficiency of water use in a large urban area like Mexico City, while protection of groundwater to ensure a supply of safe drinking water and reduction of water consumption per capita are main priorities in Shanghai and Freiburg.       In this context, the fact that cities differ in their complexities militates against a one size fits all approach towards sustainability, since such differences render their priorities, objectives and paths diverse as well. Thus, measures of progress will be tailored to the particular challenges and opportunities determined and prioritized by the cities main stakeholders. Yet, establishment of stakeholder roles must precede development of a sustainability plan. For example, Governments should develop technical standards, e.g., building codes while working closely with the private sector; in its turn, the private sector should develop processes for partnering with government, academia and non-governmental organizations to ensure solutions that are both functional and economically feasible (Falconer and Mitchell, 2012).      It is important to underscore the significance of ambitious housing plans and successful integration of public transportation infrastructures in some cities. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that China plans to build up to 36 million subsidized flats by 2015 for low-income people, mainly for the rural workers who come to work temporarily in the city and cannot afford decent housing. Similar subsidized housing projects are planned in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur in order to reduce slums and squatter settlements (Lim, 2012). Of course, the quality of the housing to be built in terms of sustainability (based, for example, on the materials used and energy efficiency) will need to be assessed. The challenges faced by these cities in respect of providing adequate housing are enormous.  For example, a vast floating population circulating among most of the cities in China, which is important for their economic success, do not have access to Government services (Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2012).       In general, the integration and coordination of different infrastructures and modes of public transportation save travel time and energy and reduce congestion and carbon emissions; the success of these measures has been reported in cities like Copenhagen, Curitiba, Freiburg and Paris. Other cities, like Bangkok, Lima, Mexico City and Singapore, are also working on integrating different forms of public mobility. In many of these cities, the goal is to reduce the transportation time between home, the city and the workplace, so as to reduce energy consumption and ensure that people have more time to be productive and enjoy urban life.       Copenhagens Finger Plan 2007 includes protection of its green belt and limitation of sprawl development through better use of city land, with new compact buildings located near public transportation and other services. The protection of green belts are important for reducing carbon emissions and supporting urban agriculture, which can provide employment to local farmers, bring fresh produce to urban residents, and stabilize food prices, since transportation and packaging costs are thereby reduced. More important, direct public participation has been vital for planning legislation in Copenhagen, through, for example, the Citizens Dialogue Project, which is being financed through the citys annual budget.      Freiburg promotes the integration and mixing of functions within compact buildings and neighbourhoods which encompass shops, medical offices, schools, churches and childrens playgrounds, including nearby green spaces. Renewable energy production is encouraged through the tax credits from federal Government and subsidies from the regional utility Badenova; grass-roots financing schemes also allow citizens to invest directly in renewable energy sources.       It is important to note the level of awareness that some cities have attained with respect to waste reduction and recycling for urban sustainability. Waste is treated as a raw material and energy source in Freiburg, while cities like Copenhagen, Curitiba, Kampala, Shanghai, Singapore and Stockholm, have made significant progress in recycling and reducing waste. Private-public partnerships have often been the key to financing and improving waste collection and transformation. Although by many accounts, Dhaka exemplifies a city with an unsustainable growth pattern, box III.5 indicates that, even under those circumstances, it is possible to build up an effective partnership on solid waste management.Box III.5: A partnership in Dhaka to convert organic waste to a resource and generate carbon credits Economic development, population growth and urbanization have generated rising volumes and diverse streams of municipal solid waste in Dhaka, a city with limited urban infrastructure and capability. The city generates 3,500 metric tons of municipal solid waste daily, which is transported to a sanitary landfill. However, uncontrolled land filling has become a common practice in the city, which does not have adequate facilities for treatment, recycling and disposal of hazardous waste, a common problem in many cities of poor countries. Eighty per cent of municipal solid waste generated in Dhaka is organic in nature, with a moisture content ideal for recycling into compost.      Waste Concern, a local non-governmental research organization, works in partnership with the Government, the private sector, international agencies and local communities to implement community-based composting. Its services include waste collection, separation and composting. Since its launch of solid waste management projects in 1998, Waste Concern has served 30,000 people in Dhaka and 100,000 in 14 other cities and towns in Bangladesh, including low- and middle-income communities. The project has led to new job opportunities and better livelihoods in the communities.      Innovative financial arrangements have included community involvement and public-private cooperation. Communities utilize a door-to-door collection service and share the cost of waste collection by paying a monthly fee based on affordability. The private sector stakeholder has joint venture partners which include Waste Concern and banking institutions. The investment required for the project was 12 million euros and the mode of financing was made up of equity (38 per cent), a soft loan (45 per cent) and a loan from a local bank (17 per cent).      A private company ensures the sale of compost by enriching the compost with nutrients and effecting its subsequent distribution to the market (e.g., farmers). As a result, 75 per cent of the projects revenue comes from the sale of compost. The partnership was also registered as a Clean Development Mechanism project under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; as a result, the remaining 25 per cent of the revenue comes from community contributions in the form of a user fee and the sale of certified emissions reductions (CERs).       The project had several positive effects: (a) reduction of the landfilling budget of the city, (b) creation of assured revenue for 10 years through the sale of compost and CERs, (c) creation of 800 jobs for poor urban residents, (d) production of 50,000 metric tons of compost for sustainable farming and (e) achievement of knowledgeability by urban communities about the resource value of waste.      END BOX      Lastly, in many cities, the use of the bicycle is becoming an essential part of public transportation. Education and initiatives to discourage car circulation (e.g., through the imposition of higher tariffs during rush hours in Singapore and the Hoy no circula programme in Mexico City), and the provision of adequate infrastructure, such as bike parks near metros and bike lanes, free bike rentals, and bike-sharing, have facilitated the rapid adoption of bicycles as a means of transport and the rapid spread of their use in cities of both developed and developing countries.Act locally with national support and global coordinationTo strengthen the financial and decision-making capacities of cities, national Governments need to adopt an inclusive and decentralized approach towards the use of resources and development. Issues such as rapid ageing in developing countries pose a real challenge to urban authorities, which often do not have sufficient resources to respond and therefore need long-term sources of finance. National authorities need to enhance decentralization and share the resources needed for economic growth to increase the policy space of local administrations. Effective dialogue between urban and national authorities on development priorities can be a means of identifying synergies and areas of development for national, regional and global coordination.       National sustainable strategies of development should explicitly consider cities as main pillars for building sustainability. Some countries have already begun to build sustainable cities in country capitals such as Copenhagen, Oslo and Stockholm and in a selected group of cities including Tianjin, Chongqing and Shenzhen (eco-cities) in China.      A coordinated international response is necessary. Sustainable national strategies should reflect development priorities that are consistent with cities priorities. For example, food security and adaptation to climate change are two of the most immediate priorities in poor countries, while recovery from financial fragility and measures for reducing the impact of ageing can be pressing priorities in rich countries. In both cases, upfront investment in green productive activities, infrastructure and efficient use of public goods is essential for building thriving and sustainable cities.       Urbanization will be truly sustainable only when it engages the commitment of the global community. To overcome the challenges to building sustainable cities, the identification of common and differentiated urban development priorities should itself be prioritized and those priorities should be consistent with common and differentiated responsibilities for addressing the impact of climate change among countries. Further, binding commitments between countries to confront cross-border challenges such as climate change can greatly improve the effectiveness of urban sustainability strategies. Financing sustainable citiesThe scale and scope of needed financeBuilding sustainable cities poses significant financial challenges to national and municipal authorities.  It entails commanding enough resources to finance the cost of infrastructure and the provision of a wide range of public services, within the context of major challenges such as ageing of populations and climate change threats. Urban authorities have to prioritize competing financing requirements, usually without sufficient budget resources to address the challenges of sustainable development simultaneously.       The nature of the trade-offs between economic development and climatic priorities varies from city to city. For cities located in poor countries (low-income and lower middle income), sustainable development depends mainly on their capacities to finance investment in green infrastructure and access to basic services. For cities located in richer countries (upper middle income and high-income), financing is needed for restructuring cities design, infrastructure, transport and efficiency in the use of water and electricity.       Similarly, with a growing number of international migrants and rising inequalities among countries, global and medium cities in both developed and developing countries are challenged to provide adequate public services. On the other hand, immigration has often stimulated the economic and cultural revival of urban neighbourhoods and has been a source of labour vital for the growth and competitiveness of the cities. At the same time, many cities across the world need resources to finance the industrial processing of waste and the improvement of recycling systems.A policy framework for sustainable financing The creation of a policy framework for responding effectively to the challenge of financing the sustainability of cities requires multilayered cooperation among local national and global communities, including the development of partnerships to harness public and private resources for the purposes described above.      Financing investment in public infrastructure, including adaptation to and mitigation of climate change, is a daunting task, one that often demands large sums of upfront finance and an acceptance of the fact that returns will be seen mainly in the medium and long terms.      Regulatory measures, including market and non-market mechanisms, are important for determining pricing structures, taxes and subsidies for households and industry, e.g., for the development of compact neighbourhoods and the retrofitting of buildings. Various types of taxesincluded, for example, in lower fares for public transportationcan be used to finance the gap between the financial outlay and the actual cost of services.      Thus, for cities in poor and rich countries alike, part of the financing would have to be directed towards limiting the damaging effects of climate change on the environment, biodiversity and the livelihoods of present and future generations.  In this sense, the principle of common and differentiated responsibilities can guide the establishment of an international cooperation framework capable of supporting the development and resilience of poor countries.       Oil-exporting and emerging economies experiencing relatively high economic growth but with urban settlements vulnerable, for example, to sea-level rise, storms and droughts, should use part of the resources generated to finance cities risk reduction strategies and improved infrastructure for adaptation, mitigation and provision of public services.Examples of financing strategiesBond banks and resource pooling can be useful instruments for reducing risk. In 1998, the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation issued 1 billion rupees in bonds (without a State guarantee) to finance a water supply and sewerage project. The bond issue improved the citys finances.      Public-private partnerships can also serve as viable instruments for raising funds for financing infrastructure projects, particularly in developing countries with limited access to long-term credit.  Public-private partnerships can improve asset utilization and favour cost recovery through user fees.  For example, improvement in the quality of public transportation services through engagement of the private sector can justify higher fees (annex III.1 for information on the public-private partnership established in Freiburg, Germany, to finance the production of renewable sources of energy).      Cities in poor countries may also leverage the value of land to finance infrastructure.  In Cairo, for example, the auction of 3,100 hectares of desert land in 2007 generated $3.1 billion. This amount of resources was to be used to reimburse costs of internal infrastructure and build a connecting highway to the road surrounding Cairo. Leaseholds can also leverage the value of land. These instruments can generate the initial capital needed to cover the start-up costs of infrastructure investments. In the long run, other instruments, such as property taxes, can finance maintenance and upgrade of public investments. However, land-based financing instruments require relatively strong and effective institutions and well-articulated legal frameworks.      Viet Nam has been able to finance universal access to electricity and achieve high levels of access to water and sanitation.  In the poorest provinces, equalization has enabled access to basic services. Cities also finance themselves through taxes, land leases, short-term debt, investment funds and cross-subsidies from provincial public utility companies. Land leases, for example, are becoming an increasingly important source of finance. Yet, financing infrastructure services is still a challenging task for many cities.       Sources of finance can have different degrees of stability and predictability.  Financing for Germanys cities is largely derived from tax income tied to business profits, which can fall during times of crisis. For example, since Berlin is liable for high interest payments on past borrowing, it has requested debt relief from the federal Government. In contrast, city budgets in France and Italy rely more on real estate taxes, partly because the revenues are more stable and easier to predict.      However, the situation of cities in many poor countries is more problematic. Financial support from national Governments and donor agencies is often minimal, and provided, typically, only for the initial construction of infrastructure and not for ongoing operations. Thus, cities rely mainly on fees, tariffs and property taxes. However, property valuations can be out of date or incomplete, while capacities to collect taxes remain weak. Sprawling, in particular, can weaken tax systems in dynamic cities since, frequently, suburban residents pay property taxes not in the city where they work but in a differentand smallercommunity.      In a context of policies of fiscal restraint, some national Governments are pressed to grant more autonomy to cities in generating resources and determining their destiny.  For example, since 1988, the central Government of China has not financed local expenditure; hence, local governments have to provide and finance public services.Chapter IV: Summary* The persistence of malnutrition reflects deep inequalities in the distribution of and access to food at national and global levels. Ensuring that everyone in the world has access to enough nutritious food should be at the forefront of the post-2015 development agenda.* Increasing food production in parallel with population growth, urbanization and a change in consumption patterns will require an integrated approach that takes into consideration the nexus of food, water, energy, environment and climate, while reorienting food production, distribution and consumption.* Increasing agricultural productivity will be required, in particular in developing countries where the agriculture sector accounts for an important share of gross domestic product and where large productivity gaps still exist.* Access of poor households to food and of isolated producers and smallholders to markets will need to be improved, in particular given that hunger can exist even in countries where there is enough food produced.* Food consumption will need to be oriented towards diets that are less resource-intensive and more nutritious, which will be crucial for the sustainability of the food system and for better health outcomes.* The transformation and development of the agricultural sector will require investments on a significant scale. The public sector should typically finance infrastructural needs as well as research and development, while introducing adequate incentives for private investments, such as risk protection and better access to credit markets. In addition, Governments need to design a regulatory framework that ensures inclusive and sustainable private investments.IntroductionEnsuring that everyone in the world has access to enough nutritious food should be at the forefront of the post-2015 development agenda, as recently emphasized by the Secretary-General through the launch of the Zero Hunger Challenge. The present chapter highlights the changes needed in the food system to ensure food and nutrition security by 2050 and the challenges involved, given that malnutrition is only partly an issue of food availability. The persistence of malnutrition reflects the deep inequalities in the distribution and access to food in a world that produces enough for everybody.      Recent studies have found that the challenge of malnutrition is broader than the issue of hunger or undernourishment, as highlighted by the United Nations Millennium Declaration. Low quality and low diversity of food are other major sources of malnutrition. Individuals may have an intake of enough calories for daily subsistence, and still suffer from hidden hunger, with low levels of micronutrients due to low diversification of diets. This is a problem in both developing and developed countries, affecting 30 per cent of the worlds population. The excess of calories is another rising major global public-health concern, as overweight and obesity cause more than 2.8 million deaths per year among adults.       In addition to the multiple burdens of malnutrition, other problems are on the horizon. On the demand side, population growth, rapid urbanization and consequent changes in consumption patterns will require additional food. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates that food production will have to increase 70 per cent globally to feed an additional 2.3 billion people by 2050. At the same time, food demand has been shifting towards more resource-intensive agricultural products, such as livestock and dairy products, thereby exerting additional pressure on land, water and biodiversity resources.      On the supply side, meeting an increasing food demand is a major concern, given rising resource constraints and the effects of climate change. Current agricultural practices, developed during an era of cheap oil, and of abundant water and land, are a leading source of greenhouse gas emissions. Those practices are now proving unsustainable both environmentally and in respect of health. In addition, climate change has been affecting various agroecosystems and reducing productivity in the agricultural sector as a result of extreme temperatures and volatile weather patterns. The regions and social groups most affected by climate change are those already experiencing a higher prevalence of undernourishment. In response to the imperative of reducing demand for fossil fuels, certain food crops have been used for ethanol production rather than for consumption, increasing constraints on the supply side. Similarly, current urbanization trends conduce to the use of available land for purposes other than agricultural production (see chap. III).      Thus, increasing food production in parallel with population growth, urbanization and a change in consumption patterns will require an integrated approach to addressing several challenges simultaneously along the entire food chain. An integrated approach to food security and environmental sustainability should take into consideration the nexus of food, water, energy, environment and climate, while reorienting food production, distribution and consumption.       The first challenge is to increase food production, while minimizing the environmental impact and increasing natural resource efficiency. This will require increasing agricultural productivity, in particular in developing countries where the agricultural sector contributes an important share of gross domestic product (GDP) and where large productivity gaps still exist. The introduction of improved agronomical practices and advanced technologies will be central. Information and communications technologies (ICT), for instance, can improve the application of inputs, maximizing output, while minimizing negative impacts on the environment. Additional investments in research and development (R&D) will be crucial in increasing productivity, but better dissemination and adaptation of existing technology in different agroecological regions will also need to be part of the solution. A broader rural development strategy is also required, including infrastructural investments to better connect producers to output markets, including rural-urban linkages.       The second major challenge will be to improve the access to food and markets of isolated producers and smallholders, given the knowledge, in particular, that hunger can occur in countries where there is enough food produced. Income poverty is a major factor preventing access to food. Therefore, increasing the income level of poor households will help them obtain food that is adequate in quantity and quality, thereby reducing the prevalence of undernourishment. However, high inequality in the rural sector, in particular in the distribution of assetssuch as land, water, capital, education and healthis an obstacle that needs to be addressed in order to enhance food security. The underlying issue of discrimination in the rural sector, including against women, also calls for concrete action. In addition, social protection mechanisms, including safety nets, must also be part of a broader strategy to facilitate access of lower-income groups to food, in particular during economic shocks.        The third challenge is to orient food consumption towards sustainable diets, that is, diets that are less resource-intensive and more nutritious, which will be crucial for the sustainability of the food system. Such changes would also improve health conditions related to low diversification of diets, including obesity. Reducing food wastage will also contribute significantly to the sustainability of the food system. Currently, it is estimated that from 30 to 50 per cent of the total food produced globally is wasted. In order to substantially reduce the quantity of food lost and wasted, changes have to occur at different points along the food chain: production, storage, transportation and consumption. Strategies to reduce food waste will vary among countries according to their structural conditions.      Finally, in an increasingly interconnected world, improving agricultural productivity and the allocation of food within and across countries requires well-coordinated actions at local, national and global levels. At the local and national levels, in particular in food-insecure countries, institutions should promote transparency and accountability, as well as the participation of all individuals in the decisions that affect them. At the global level, the international community can help developing countries in their efforts to design and implement policies that increase resilience to food price volatility and to climatic shocks, as well as safety nets, especially for smallholders. Wealthier countries will also be required to change their production and consumption patterns through actions that should include reviewing trade policies to ensure that they are pro-food and pro-nutrition security, establishing regional and international strategic reserves, and addressing the issue of speculation in land, as well as enabling the adoption of sustainable diets.Multiple dimensions of malnutrition: undernourishment, micronutrient deficiencies and over-nutritionMalnutrition is a broad term encompassing conditions that hinder good health, including both under-nutrition and over-nutrition. Under-nutrition can be the result of undernourishment (energy deficiency) or micronutrient (vitamin and mineral) deficiencies. Undernourishment continues to affect the worlds population (12.5 per cent), mainly in developing countries, despite remarkable progress in reducing hunger during the last decade. Obesity, on the other hand, has been increasing rapidly in all countries, although its prevalence is still considerably higher in developed countries, while stunting and micronutrient deficiencies affect a significant number of people. Thus, today, the world as a whole is facing multiple burdens of malnutrition. The health risks associated with undernourishment and inadequate diets in many developing countries are running parallel to a rapid rise of non-communicable diseases in many developed and middle-income countries, owing to the rampant increase in over-nutrition. Under-nutritionFood insecurity persistsAccording to recent estimations, in 2010-2012, about 868 million people were chronically undernourished (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012). Despite the fact that this figure is still particularly high and represents, as noted above, 12.5 per cent of world population, it also indicates that there has clearly been progress in reducing hunger at the global level (figure IV.1).       In several regions, however, the food and financial crisis halted that progress, reflecting different levels of vulnerability to external shocks and different country capacities to increase food supply when needed. Sub-Saharan Africa and Western Asia are facing the most serious challenges to reaching the Millennium Development Goal hunger target by 2015. Western Asia, in particular, has experienced a significant increase in the number of people that are undernourished, from 8 million in 1990-1992 to 21 million in 2010-2012 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012), increasing the prevalence of undernourishment over that period.       The distribution of undernourished people in the world has also been altered in line with different progression rates in hunger reduction during the past two decades (figure IV.2). In the past 20 years, the share of the worlds undernourished people decreased in East Asia and the Pacific, from 41 per cent in 1990-1992 to 28 per cent in 2010-2012, whereas the proportion increased significantly in sub-Saharan Africa, from 17 per cent in 1990-1992 to 27 per cent in 2010-2012, as well as in Northern Africa and Western Asia, from 1 per cent in 1990-1992 to 3 per cent in 2010-2012.       Periods of high food prices in the past few years have affected countries and regions differently, according to their different levels of vulnerability to external shocks. For instance, many African countries, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, were fully exposed to price hikes and the global recession. Over the long run, the differences in hunger reduction across regions and countries are attributable to several factors. Inclusive economic growth, generating demand for the assets controlled by the extreme poor, has a much higher impact on hunger reduction. In addition, when poor households invest part of their increased income in health, sanitation and education, the impact of economic growth on hunger reduction is also stronger. In parallel, as seen in the case of Bangladesh, which is on track to reach the hunger target of Millennium Development Goal 1, higher public spending on health and education with targeted interventions increases nutritional success (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012). Impacts of under-nutrition: undernourishment and micronutrient deficienciesUndernourishment is the result of food intake that is inadequate as regards providing sufficient calories to meet peoples physiological requirements on a continuing basis. Micronutrient deficiencies are also a result of under-nutrition, but in this case they are related to insufficient intake of vitamins and minerals. An individual may take in enough or even too many calories for daily subsistence; however, if his or her diet is not diversified enough, the result may be low levels of micronutrients, a condition referred to as hidden hunger. This is an issue in both developing and developed countries, affecting 30 per cent of the worlds population (ibid.).      The relation between poor nutrition and poor healthincluding the existence of a vicious cycle of poor nutrition, poor health and low incomeis well documented. For instance, iron deficiency anaemia impacts negatively on cognitive development and academic performance in school-age children (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013). Short-term consequences in terms of learning disability, as well as long-term economic consequences, can be expected, since lower education levels lead to lower income opportunities.       Vitamin A deficiency, for instance, is a leading cause of blindness and corneal damage. In developing countries, 163 million children were estimated to be vitamin A-deficient, with a prevalence of more than 30 per cent, in 2007, down from approximately 36 per cent in 1990 (United Nations System Standing Committee on Nutrition, 2010).      From a longer-term perspective, there is also the risk of intergenerational transmission of poor nutritional status. Women who suffer from undernourishment are more likely to give birth to underweight babies, whose development will then be affected throughout their life. Undernourishment may also lead to irreversible consequences, such as physical stunting, excluding individuals from better-rewarded tasks which demand greater physical strength. Ultimately, undernourishment affects individuals freedom and well-being (Drze and Sen, 1991).      Not only does undernourishment have microlevel negative consequences, but it affects the whole economy, reducing its rate of growth. For instance in India, stunting and iron and iodine deficiencies result in productivity losses equivalent to 2.95 per cent of GDP annually. Despite the evidence of negative outcomes from poor nutrition in the short and long terms, nutritional health has not received sufficient priority in the development agenda (United Nations, 2012). In particular, a good nutritional status for the whole population is a precondition for sustainable development.Over-nutritionObesity on the riseMalnutrition has been traditionally associated with undernourishment; but in recent years, greater attention has been given to overweight (body mass index equal or superior to 25) and obesity (body mass index equal or superior to 30), as a major global public-health concern and a cause of death of at least 2.8 million adults per year. Overweight and obesity are often perceived as higher income economy issues, but in fact they have been on the rise, and at a fast pace, in low- and middle-income countries.      Globally, in 2008, the number of overweight adults reached more than 1.4 billion, surpassing the number of undernourished people worldwide. Almost 13 per cent of the worlds population are obese.       The prevalence of overweight and obese individuals varies across the world. Breaking down by World Health Organization (WHO) regions, in the Americas, overweight and obesity affect 62 per cent and 26 per cent of the population, respectively. On the opposite side of the spectrum, in South-East Asia, only 14 per cent of the population are overweight. In Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries for which data exist, the prevalence of obesity varies from 4 per cent in Japan and the Republic of Korea, to 30 per cent or more in the United States of America and Mexico.Worldwide obesity has almost doubled between 1980 and 2008 (figure IV.3). In OECD countries, until 1980, obesity affected less than 10 per cent of the population. Since then, that rate has doubled or tripled in many countries. In 2012, in 19 countries out of 34 OECD countries, the majority of the population was overweight. OECD projections suggest that more than 2 people out of 3 will be overweight or obese in some OECD countries by 2020.       In low- and middle-income countries, the number of overweight children has been increasing. Out of 40 million overweight children worldwide, close to 35 million were living in developing countries in 2010 (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012). Thus, it is not surprising to see health challenges associated with over-nutrition in countries that are still facing the issue of undernourishment. These two dimensions of malnutrition are sometimes experienced within the same household. This is the result of the greater susceptibility to obesity of adults that have suffered from undernourishment during their childhood.  Impacts of over-nutritionThe health consequences of over-nutrition and obesity are quite different from those of hunger. There is an increase in non-communicable diseases instead of infectious and communicable diseases in those affected by over-nutrition and obesity. For instance, excessive consumption of meat (especially red meat), dairy products and eggs by older children and adults can have detrimental health effects and increase the risk of chronic non-communicable diseases such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes and obesity.      According to WHO, overweight and obesity are the fifth leading risk factors for global deaths, posing a greater risk than underweight. At least 2.8 million adults die each year as a result of being overweight or obese. Compared with people of normal weight, severely obese people die 8-10 years sooner. Every 15 extra kilograms (kg) increase the risk of early death by approximately 30 per cent. In addition, 44 per cent of the diabetes burden, 23 per cent of the heart disease burden and 7-41 per cent of certain cancer burdens are attributable to overweight and obesity.       Obesity also represents an important source of health expenditure at the individual and macro levels. For instance, in any given year, an obese person incurs 25 per cent higher health expenditures than a person of normal weight. At the macrolevel, obesity accounts for 5-10 per cent of total health expenditures in the United States of America. At the same time, obesity negatively affects personal income. Obese people earn 18 per cent less than people who are not obese (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012).Increasing food availability In developing countries, where the prevalence of undernourishment is higher and the population is growing faster, food production will need to almost double (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009c). Therefore, the first concern will be increasing agricultural productivity, in particular in countries where the prevalence of hunger is higher and where large productivity gaps still exist. The main challenge, however, is to increase food production while minimizing the environmental impact and increasing natural resource efficiency. Finally, food production requires additional investments in rural infrastructure, including in harvest technologies designed to reduce wastage at the production level. Increasing agricultural productivity Low productivity and slow growth in the agricultural sector, including in small farms, raise specific concerns. Despite some improvements in total factor productivity in the agricultural sector (Fuglie, 2012), growth in yield, an indicator of land productivity, for most of cereals has been declining since the 1980s (FAOSTAT). Today, important gaps between farmers yields and technical potential yields still exist in many developing countries. In 2005, such gaps varied from 11 per cent in countries of East Asia to 76 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011b). Reducing these gaps would increase agricultural output, and consequently, food security, as well as nutrition outcomes, in many developing countries. Extension servicesThe extensive menu of technologies and sustainable practices that are already available can, in part, reduce existing productivity gaps in agriculture. In sub-Saharan Africa for instance, where the prevalence of undernourishment is high, important productivity gainson the order of a two- to threefold increase in average yieldscan be achieved through better use of existing knowledge and technology (Foresight, 2011). Dissemination of information and technical assistance will be an effective strategy for improving access to knowledge and technology. Further, agricultural extension services are a useful tool for helping farmers increase their productivity, and collaborate with a broader network of farmers and researchers. In the current context, a large number of actors (civil society organizations, the private sector, farmers and multilateral organizations) need to contribute towards this end.      A survey conducted by the Global Conference on Agricultural Research for Development (GCARD) 2010 points to the importance of official agricultural extension workers. The general perception is that their number is inadequate, especially when measured against the needs of small-scale farm holders, who have limited access to the services they offer, which represent an important vehicle for the transmission of knowledge, information and training (Lele and others, 2010).       Thus, a longer-term commitment to training and a new approach to technical education are required. Training and education have to be more practical in nature and oriented towards problem-solving and decision-making. At the same time, they must involve farmers and civil society organizations in finding interdisciplinary and creative solutions to new problems.      Focusing more on building capacity among farmers, in particular smallholders, is a better strategy than prescribing technological practices. The former approach, considered to embody the empowerment model, would help farmers to identify and take advantage of available opportunities (World Bank, 2008a). The exclusion of women from technical support also needs to be explicitly addressed. In Africa, women receive 7 per cent of agricultural extension services and less than 10 per cent of credit offered to small-scale farm holders. Gender analysis and targeted initiatives must be incorporated in agricultural education, research and extension services (Davis and others, 2007).Increasing investment in R&DIn addition to existing technology and agricultural knowledge which already provide a range of alternatives for achieving better outcomes, continuous research and development in respect of new technologies are needed. In this regard, an important lesson from the previous green revolution is that the development of new technology requires long-term financial support for R&D, in parallel with wide and effective dissemination of information and know-how.      However, public expenditure for agricultural R&D remains low in many developing regions (figure IV.4), the main reason being that since the 1980s, international support for agriculture research has decreased and many national agricultural research centres have scaled back their programmes for the production and distribution of seeds (Dubin and Brennan, 2009). Thus, national initiatives must be designed to address the lack of investment in R&D, including through partnerships with the private sector.In developing countries, where agricultural R&D remains relatively weak, the main focus of the public research institutions should be the adaptation of technology to particular farming conditions and agroecological settings. However, the main challenge in developing countries is their national research institutions lack of adequate resources. For instance, the development of a new variety of wheat, rice or corn, requires 7-10 years of breeding (Pardey and Beintema, 2001).  The resulting discontinuity in funding compromises their independence and capacity to operate efficiently, while poor documentation of processes increases the risk of permanent loss of knowledge.       In addition to securing stable financial resources, national public research centres have to change their organizational culture. They need to improve their responsiveness to the needs of farmers, including through joint experimentation and learning. This requires that research institutions work more closely with farmers and other actors such as non-governmental organizations, farmers organizations and innovation brokers, which can make farmers needs known to the research and government communities, using innovations made possible by ICT. In this field, participation of women, especially in sub-Saharan Africa where women constitute a large proportion of the agricultural labour force, will also be critical to enhancing their decision-making in agricultural research and extension services and to addressing their specific needs.       Research institutions also need to expand their traditional disciplinary approach to encompass an interdisciplinary focus in response to wide-ranging farmer demands. For instance, transformation of diverse agroecological rural economies requires the expertise of biologists, agronomists, water engineers, nutritionists, economists and social and political scientists (Lipton, 2010).       The private sector has become a more active player in agricultural R&D, but its involvement has not been sufficient to compensate for the reduction in public expenditure. In developing countries, public funding remains the main source of finance for agricultural research. Moreover, the private sector tends to invest mainly in profitable research, including agricultural chemical inputs, machinery and biotechnology, targeting wealthier economies and larger farmers. The involvement of private research in managing natural resources and maintaining biodiversity also remains limited (Biodiversity International and others, 2012).      The private sector also can play an important role in promoting rapid technological innovation for achieving food security and tackling climate change. Biotechnology and innovative market access for smallholders constitute one of the areas where the private sector can play a major role in expanding research. Despite the fact that biotechnology remains a controversial issue, it nevertheless holds great potential for increasing agriculture productivity (United Nations, 2011).       Today, one third of the rural population in developing countries lives in rain-fed regions, characterized by frequent moisture stress, which limits their agricultural output. Biotechnology could be an effective instrument for facilitating the transformation of agriculture in these agroecological regions affected by harsher conditions. It has a significant potential to increase yield gains by making crops herbicide-resistant, less dependent on chemical pesticides and more resilient to water stress, while conferring on them a greater nutritional value.       So far, private research in biotechnology has concentrated on the development of products that can be easily protected by patents and has focused mainly on the demand from large-scale farmers. The cost of seeds and inputs may discourage use of this technology by small farm holders, especially if the market continues to be dominated by a few large companies which exert influence over prices. The potential of genetically modified organisms to increase food production is limited not only by their excessive costs, but also by their unknown possible risks, including long-term environmental impacts. Independent assessments of the larger impacts of this technology are urgently needed.      Moving forward, the structure of incentives and the governance of innovation in this area require radical changes. New mechanisms for engaging the private sector need to be explored: results-based performance contracts granted on a competitive basisfor the development, for example, of improved seed or crop varieties with higher water-stress tolerance and greater responsiveness to fertilizersmay be one means of stimulating private research. Patent buyouts and prizes may be other means of doing so (Elliot, 2010; Bhagwati, 2005). Use of more traditional subsidies, cofinancing arrangements and joint ventures, within a framework of appropriate protocols for maintaining the public-good nature of research products, could also be explored (Pardey and Beintema, 2001).      Many countries face serious challenges to addressing these complex technological changes. Overcoming these challenges will require the cooperation of the public, private and civil society organization sectors within countries, as well as between countries, towards adapting know-how to specific agricultural conditions (Biodiversity International and others, 2012).  CGIAR (formerly the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research) has a positive record in developing technology well suited for smallholders, although diffusion of these technologies has been a challenge. In 2008, CGIAR was re-formed to refocus its research and develop partnerships with the capacity to increase the diffusion of results.       Yet, given the need to adapt technologies to different agroecological systems,  CGIAR and other international research institutions must work more closely with national agricultural research centres so that they can adapt internationally developed technologies to their various national contexts and share back their innovations with other countries. The growing capacity of large national agricultural systems in Brazil, China, India and South Africa, for instance, has generated South-South cooperation aimed at benefiting countries with limited resources, by allowing them to adopt or adapt the technologies of the countries with large agriculture systems, which are typically less capital-intensive and have less intellectual property rights protection.Sustainable management of natural resourcesAn increase in food production will also require integrating sustainable practices, in particular in the use of natural resources. Many of the current agricultural practices have relied on cheap energy and abundant water and land, and are a leading source of greenhouse gas emissions. These practices are now proving unsustainable for the environment and health. At the same time, they have led to substantial productivity losses, thereby posing risks to food security. Thus, agricultural productivity and an efficient use of natural resources, as well as climate-related adaptation and resilience-building, should be part of an integrated policy approach.  Current unsustainable practicesEven if 90 per cent of the growth in crops will come from higher yields, land availability will continue to be crucial for agriculture. Arable land would need to expand by 12 per cent in developing countries by 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009). However, available land for food cultivation has been shrinking, owing to land degradation and competition from other uses, such as urban development and production of non-food crops, like biofuels. In many regions, available agrarian land is constrained, especially when biodiversity and soil degradation are taken into account. Every year, about 12 million hectares of agricultural land are lost owing to land degradation, adding to the billions of hectares that are already degraded (Beddington and others, 2012). Soil degradation not only affects its fertility, reducing agricultural production opportunities, but also has negative effects on the hydrologic cycle, and climate, biodiversity, landscape and other ecosystem services.       There are many factors leading to soil degradation which should be prevented. The excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides is considered the major factor affecting the resilience of land. For instance, in the past 50 years, global fertilizer use increased by 500 per cent, causing widespread pollution (Earth Security Initiative, 2012). Managing the use of fertilizers will be crucial for long-term land development; for example, in the United States, it has been demonstrated that in the long term, organic agricultural methods can outperform conventional chemical farming in terms of crop yield, sustainability and profit (ibid.). While large-scale farming is, in general, identified as the main source of excessive use of fertilizers and soil degradation, land fragmentation and limited farm size can also be a source of soil degradation. In the minifundias of the Andean highlands of Latin America for instance, poor small-scale farm holders over-exploit natural resources, owing to population pressure and scarcity of suitable land (United Nations, 2011).       The urbanization process is also increasing competition for arable land and wetlands. So far, urban areas occupy about 1 per cent of the total land surface (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012), but urbanization is projected to continue at a fast pace in the next decades (see chap. III). Between 2012 and 2050, the world urban population is expected to increase by 69 per cent. At the same time, renewable energy strategies, such as use of biofuels, are increasing demand for land resources. Hence, developing the potential to create more sustainable land management systems, in order to reverse current trends in food insecurity and unsustainable land degradation, is desirableand possible (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012).       More recently, the purchase (or long-term lease) of large extensions of land is subjecting use of land for cultivation and local food consumption to pressure (see box IV.1). These transactions have raised concern about their implications for rural communities and for the food security of countries already vulnerable to insecure food supplies.  Improved national and international oversight mechanisms may be needed to prevent the unintended negative impacts of leasing arrangements for large extensions of land on the food and nutrition security of poor communities.Box IV.1: Purchase of large extensions of landThe demand for agricultural land intensified at the peak of the food price crisis in 2007-2008. Estimates about the extension of land involved in large-scale acquisitions vary wildly, from 120 million acres, as reported by the World Bank in 2010, to 560 million acres, as reported by Oxfam in 2012. There are many factors explaining the accelerated interest in foreign land. Reportedly, over 60 per cent of foreign investment in land is for food exports and around two thirds of land deals in the last 10 years were made with a view to producing crops for biofuels (Oxfam, 2012, p. 6). In addition, land is also becoming an asset that offers portfolio diversification for international investors, through large pension funds and financial institutions.      There is a large controversy about the recent interest of foreigners in purchasing or leasing large landholdings: some see an opportunity to leverage foreign investment for agriculture and rural development, while others warn against the risk of displacing traditional rural communities and pastoralists from their land, thereby increasing food insecurity in countries already at risk. In countries like Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique and the Sudan, this development has raised widespread concerns over forced evictions, social vulnerability and dwindling water resources (Earth Security Initiative, 2012). Pearce (2012) found that in countries selling (or leasing) large extensions of land, in the largest majority of cases, local communities lose access to forests, pastures and water resources, with no major gains in employment, owing to the use of capital-intensive technology in large farms.      In the absence of policies and institutions that provide secure tenure and adequate safeguards to domestic smallholders and their communities, large-scale purchases of land may have unintended negative consequences for rural communities and smallscale farmers. Countries such as Argentina and Brazil have already erected legal barriers in relation to the amount of farmland that can be owned by foreigners (Earth Security Initiative, 2012). More recently, United Nations entities adopted the Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment with the intention of providing some form of protection to rural dwellers. Globally agreed safeguards to protect the rights of traditional communities, often lacking legal recognition of their rights to land, water and forests, are particularly relevant for countries in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America where, according to the World Bank, most of the 450 million hectares of available land are located.END BOXWater is another essential natural resource for agriculture, whose limit of sustainability may have already been reached in many regions. Global water withdrawals have tripled over the last 50 years and water withdrawals for irrigation are expected to increase by almost 11 per cent by 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009c). Yet, today, 80 per cent of the worlds population lives in areas with high levels of threat to water security, particularly in developing countries (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012b). In addition, it is expected that the increasing and competing demands for water will aggravate the serious depletion of surface-water resources. Water scarcity represents an important challenge for agriculture, which uses 70 per cent of global freshwater.  There are several causes of water scarcity. Intensive agriculture, including livestock production, has become a major factor in water quality degradation (United Nations, 2011). Excessive use of agrochemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) contaminates waterways. Energy production and climate change are also main causes of water scarcity. For instance, use of traditional sources for energy production results in increased greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme climatic events such as flood and droughts, sealevel rise, and the loss of glacial and polar sea ice, all of which contribute to water scarcity. Alternative solutions, such as utilization of energy sources with lower carbon footprints, can also have implications for the water environment. Hydropower production can contribute to fragmentation of river systems, while the construction of some solar-energy infrastructure consumes significant quantities of water (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012).Finally, climate has been changing, mainly owing to the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, presenting a serious threat to agriculture. Extreme weather events such as droughts and floods, have been affecting food production, with dramatic consequences for various agroecosystems. In the coming decades, it is expected that climate change will continue to have adverse effects on agricultural production. Even a modest climate change of about 2 Celsius can change rainfall patterns, resulting in a shorter growing season and lower agricultural production, particularly in areas that are already hot and dry, for example, in Africa and South Asia (Beddington and others, 2012). Communities already plagued with high levels of food insecurity and environmental degradation are disproportionally affected. In particular, smallholders relying on rain-fed agriculture are more vulnerable to climate change, including its long-term consequences for households nutrition, health and education. There are several factors contributing to the problem of climate change. Current agriculture practices, including land clearing for cultivation and inefficient use of fertilizers and organic residues, constitute one such factor, being responsible for 25-33 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions (Beddington and others, 2012). While agriculture is a major contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions, it can also be part of the solution to the problem of climate change. There is ample room for lowering emissions throughout the food system, through more efficient productive techniques and better demand management. On the production side, climate change can be mitigated through carbon sequestration in both vegetation (forests, for example) and soil. On the demand side, reducing wastage, for instance, will be important (see the sect., entitled Diets and consumption patterns, below), as well as increasing demand for organic and eco-certified products, which should encourage producers to pay more attention to sustainable practices. Despite international and national awareness of the risks related to climate change, there has so far been limited financial and political support for implementing more sustainable practices. Improving management of natural resources Improving agricultural outcomes will therefore require an integrated approach which promotes the resource efficiency of the whole agriculture and food system, while mitigating its environmental impacts. In this regard, government policies can foster an agricultural innovation system approach to developing a comprehensive policy framework for innovation, which can respond to the double challenge of increasing agricultural productivity and achieving environmental sustainability (United Nations, 2011).       The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of the United Republic of Tanzania (SAGCOT) exemplifies such an integrated approach. The Growth Corridor brings together the capabilities and resources of businesses, government and civil society within a common platform in order to overcome the countrys various ecosystems barriers to achieving the triple objective of agricultural productivity, food security and livelihoods creation in a sustainable manner. By encompassing the entire agricultural value chain, the SAGCOT approach attempts not just to raise agricultural productivity but to ensure the necessary infrastructure, policy environment and access to knowledge required to create an efficient, well-functioning agricultural value chain.      Traditional practices have recently also gained in importance within the context of adaptation to climate change. For instance, local farmers and communities have shown a great capacity to innovate in response to weather and other shocks. There are thousands of successful experiences of localized enhanced pest and weed management, water efficiency and biodiversity, including stories of highly successful innovation in the most challenging circumstances characterized by a poor natural resource base and widespread poverty. Traditional practices, such as low-tillage farming, crop rotation and interplanting, water harvesting and recycling, water-efficient cropping, and integrated pest management, have also proved their relevance to increasing productivity and ensuring environmental sustainability.       Agricultural research should also consider the climatic, soil and water conditions of the relevant agroecological region. Adaptation measures involving organic soil nutrient enhancement and other ecologically sound methodsan approach popularly known as climate-smart agriculturecan contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. As noted above, there is much interest in the climate change mitigation potential of carbon sequestration, in both vegetation (forests in particular) and soil (United Nations, 2011). The use of ICT and better access to information facilitate the transition to precision agriculture adapted to different agroecological regions. For instance, using satellite-based remote monitoring and in-field sensing technologies is of great help in the global and regional monitoring of crop productivity and weather-related impacts. Investments in rural infrastructures In respect of addressing the structural constraints on food production and distribution within a wider framework of sustainable natural resource management, investments in infrastructure in rural areas will also be determinant. In particular, small farm holders in developing countries face limited access to output markets, which affects the efficiency of their farming. As a result of the existence of such inefficiencies, an opportunity is missed to increase agricultural output. This is especially regrettable since most of the findings presented in the literature dealing with agricultural development in low-income countries indicate that small farm units tend to show higher productivity than large-scale farms.      In agriculture-based countries, in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia in particular, the priority should be expansions of basic infrastructure such as roads, electricity supply and potable water. In many African countries, for instance, transportation can account for 50-60 per cent of total marketing costs. Improving road connections is thus crucial for bringing marketing costs down and stimulating local economies (World Bank, 2008a).       By addressing long-term structural constraints on food production, investments in physical infrastructure can be a catalyst of productivity growth. In poor agriculture-based countries, public investment will also play an important role in leveraging private investment, which will otherwise not flow in sufficient amounts to meet needs, owing to the perception that agricultural production is high-risk. Larger public investment in infrastructure will provide greater incentives to increase private investment within a wider framework of sustainable natural resource management.       The case of Uganda (see box IV.2) not only provides a good illustration of the potentially large impact that public infrastructure can have in increasing productivity, but also raises important questions about the larger macroeconomic impacts of increasing government expenditures and the need to take into account the trade-offs involved in this decision. Carefully crafted strategies for achieving food security will require national consensus and the political will to prioritize investments, as well as greater government capacities to stimulate large productivity gains through sustainable finance.  Development cooperation would have an important role in at least two areas: (a) support for development of capacity, especially within least developed countries, to conduct policy assessments, and (b) provision of additional resources for infrastructure development. Enhancing the outreach and volume of resources in the Aid for Trade initiative for infrastructure development would make an outstanding contribution to achieving the objective of sustainable food security.  Box. IV.2: Infrastructures potential to drive productivity and sustainable food production: the case of Uganda Uganda is a low-income country with severe deficits in physical infrastructure, where agriculture still generates about 23 per cent of GDP. Several policy scenarios illustrate the potential of Government investments in physical infrastructure to drive productivity growth and enhance food production capacity. These scenarios are compared with a baseline that delineates a continuation of currently expected economic growth and public spending interventions up to 2030.      Public spending in agriculture infrastructure, mostly for irrigation projects, represents only 0.7 per cent of Ugandas GDP under the baseline. The first scenario assumes an increase of public investment in agriculture by the Government equivalent to 2 percentage points of GDP over the period 2016-2030. As a result, factor productivity growth in agricultureof about 2.4 per cent per year under the baselineis pushed up by an additional 1.3 percentage points per year during the period 2016-2030. Consequently, agricultural output growth increases by about 1.5 percentage points per year. In a second round of effects, public spending spurs export growth and a higher level of household consumption, especially of agricultural goods, but the results are also favourable at the national level (see table).       These results support the idea that public investment in agriculture infrastructure contributes to productivity gains. While investments in other public infrastructure, mainly roads and electricity supply, also yield positive results, they are relatively less significant in magnitude, particularly for agriculture, compared with the results under the first three scenarios.      The main concern for policymakers is how to finance the new investments in infrastructure. The financing requirements could create undesirable macroeconomic hardships and may be politically unattainable. In the case of Uganda, for example, the scenarios show that financing new infrastructures through higher direct-tax revenues spurs GDP growth and household consumption relatively less than does, for example, financing them through foreign resources. However, the use of foreign resources affects export growth negatively, owing to real exchange rate appreciation. In addition to these macroeconomic hardships, other factors, like debt sustainability, (declining) support from foreign donors and the issue of the real feasibility of raising tax burdens, need to be taken into consideration as well when defining a financing strategy.       According to these simulations, the ideal scenario entails the creation of fiscal space by reducing other government expenditures, which avoids the said macroeconomic trade-offs. The feasibility of this scenario will depend, however, on the political conditions for improving the efficiency of government spending and/or reallocating resources towards the agricultural sector.END BOX      In some countries, the focus should also be on crop harvesting technologies, as significant wastage occurs at the producer end and before reaching the market, owing to inadequate harvesting techniques (Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 2013). The amount of food wasted represents not only an economic cost but, more importantly, a waste of energy and natural resources. As mechanized harvested systems are implemented, food distribution and storage systems will need to be improved in parallel. Access to affordable energy and cooling systems, for instance, could provide storage options and also facilitate their installation by smaller scale farmers, isolated from markets, which would ultimately increase food availability throughout the whole year.      Many developing countries, especially those with an agriculture-based economy, will need external support to increase their investments in infrastructure. In 2010, the international community launched the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme (GAFSP), which, among several activities, has been channelling long-term investments in food and nutrition security. However, this Programme is costly and has required a high level of funding that has not become available. Of the $1.2billion pledged, $752 million have already been received, of which $658 million have been allocated to country-led programmes in 18 countries. More funds should be provided, however, to help implement these strategies and support the development of new ones so as to reinforce the resilience of the food production system.  Improving access to foodAlthough crucial to improving nutrition outcomes, improving food availability is not sufficient to ensure access to food. Food insecurity is more often the result of limited access to food. As explained by A. Sen (1981), starvation is a matter of some people not having enough food to eat, and not a matter of there being not enough food to eat. Thus, investments in food production systems need to be complemented by programmes designed to increase the incomes of the poor, as well as social protection and safety nets. At the international level, measures also have to be taken to prevent excessive food price volatility and to ensure that a pro-food security trade system is in place. Limited access to food Income poverty is obviously a main underlying factor preventing access to food. For instance, when comparing the highest and the lowest income quintiles of the population in developing countries, the poorer children are almost 3 times more likely to be underweight than children in the wealthiest 20 per cent of households (United Nations, 2012). Hence, increasing the income level of poor households will help ensure adequate food quantity and quality, and reduce the prevalence of undernourishment. However, in many regions and countries, economic growth has not been inclusive enough to provide employment and income-earning opportunities for the poor.       As many poor people live in rural areas, it is not surprising that it is in those areas that the prevalence of undernourishment is also higher. For instance, in developing regions, children living in rural areas are almost twice as likely to be underweight than children in urban households (ibid.). Therefore, economic growth should generate demand for the assets controlled by the poor (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012a), in particular the rural poor.       Among the rural poor, the situation of small farm holders is at the heart of the food security challenge. Small farmers face limited resources and assets, either for purchasing or for producing the quantity of food that is adequate to their needs. Empirically, it has been observed that the majority of the extremely poor and about half of the undernourished people in the world, which includes 1.5 billion people in least developed countries, live on small farms of less than two hectares, representing 90 per cent of farms worldwide (United Nations, 2011). Further, according to the most recent data, average farm sizes are still declining in many countries, for example, in Africa, and in India (World Bank, 2008a).       Thus, addressing the issue of food availability and undernourishment in rural areas necessarily implies responding to the challenges faced by smallholders. In particular, high inequality in distribution of assetssuch as land, water, capital, education and health careis a main obstacle which needs to be addressed so as to enhance food security. This is particularly evident in countries where large farms have been controlling a larger proportion of the land, while exacerbating the asset squeeze on smallholders (ibid.).       Discrimination against women in the rural sector also has a negative impact on the outcomes of efforts to secure access to food and nutrition. Women make up over 40 per cent of the agricultural workforce in Africa, and East and South Asia, but they constitute only 5 per cent of landholders in Northern and West Africa, 15 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa and 25 per cent in several countries in Latin America. Women have restricted access not only to land but also to credit and technology, which increases their economic vulnerability and the instability of their situation with respect to nutrition. These restrictions imposed on women exacerbate gender discrepancies with regard to nutrition, with serious intergenerational effects, as nutrition in children under age 5 depends critically on the nutrition of their mothers during pregnancy and lactation (Horton, 2008; Copenhagen Consensus, 2008). Generating income in rural areasThe ability to generate income for the rural poor will be a main determinant of food security. Generating an increase in agricultural productivity is an important strategy for increasing food availability, but it may not improve access to food of a large portion of the population, including vulnerable social groups.Improving agricultural incomeA successful strategy for increasing rural households income entails promoting the diversification of their farming activities. When comparing households relying on more diversified farming activities with those that remain engaged in more traditional farming, it is evident that the former are more successful in moving out of poverty. In Uganda, for instance, the combination of higher productivity of land and diversification of crops, in particular cash crops, has led to lower rural poverty (World Bank, 2008a).       In addition, a diversified farming system, integrating, for instance, horticulture and livestock, can enhance nutritional outcomes, as it improves rural households access to foods from animal sources, fruits and vegetables. In Viet Nam, for example, the vegetation, aquaculture, and cages for animal Husbandry (VAC) system, which includes a diversified farming system at the household level, has contributed to improvements in both incomes and nutritional outcomes, in terms of consumption of foods from animal sources and fruits and vegetables (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013). This experience shows that integrated farming projects can be particularly successful in raising micronutrient intake, in addition to improving income stability.       However, a main challenge is the unequal access to rural assets, which prevent many households from adopting market-oriented strategies and moving out of poverty. There are gaps in the institutional structure required for the operation of land markets, financial services, input markets and producer organizations. An appropriate institutional setting is also crucial for supporting small-scale farming, so as to increase agricultural investment and productivity, while preserving natural resources. Improving womens access, for instance, to several assets, such as land, input markets and technology, could increase agricultural production by as much as 2.5-4.0 per cent, thereby reducing the number of undernourished people by 12-17 per cent, equivalent to freeing 100 million-150 million people from hunger (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011a).       Moreover, flexible land management and the capacity to innovate in production, storage and marketing practices and techniques require the appropriate use of information and technology, as part of a continuous learning process (Davis and others, 2007). Therefore, rapid expansion of quality education in rural areas, including adult literacy and training, should receive the highest priority in any strategy aimed at strengthening farmers capacity for response to rapidly changing market conditions. Innovative mechanisms for the transmission of knowledge and training also need to be strengthened. The experience of the Farmer Field Schoolsoperating in 87 countriesshows that innovation and flexible natural resource management can be advanced through farmer-to-farmer learning, including participation in formal and informal research institutions. In-service and on-the-job training and distance education have also proved effective and are increasingly complementing extension services (United Nations, 2011).Non-farm economyAs has been extensively documented, many rural households complement their own agricultural activity with non-farm sources of income. In agriculture-based economies, the share of rural income derived from non-agricultural sources may be only 20-30 per cent, but in urbanizing economies, it can be as high as 60-70 per cent (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012a). That is to say, many rural households diversify their source of income by dividing their time and labour units between farming and non-farm activities.       Thus, in agriculture-based countries, growth in the agriculture sector can be complemented by non-farm activities, creating a virtuous cycle of rural growth and employment generation (ibid.). However, as noted above (see the previous sect. on increasing food availability), developing rural infrastructure and improving rural-urban linkages will also be important for promoting additional sources of revenue. For instance, stimulating rural-urban migration will help in diversifying the income sources of the household and reducing poverty, particularly in urbanizing economies. In China, for instance, the existence of areas of high population density combined with lower transport costs has stimulated labour-intensive manufacturing for export markets using the labour force from rural areas (ibid.).       Moving forward, rural development strategies should enhance opportunities for smallholders to diversify their agricultural as well as non-farm activities. These strategies can at the same time reduce rural poverty and under-nutrition. First, they can enable households to both diversify their sources of income, by incorporating more cash crops in their agricultural production, and secure higher-productivity jobs outside the agricultural sector. Second, they can lead to direct improvement of nutritional conditions through enhanced access to a more diversified source of nutrients.       However, access to assets, individuals skills and migration opportunities will all be determining factors in the process of moving out of rural poverty. Infrastructural as well as institutional changes will be necessary to ensure access to rural assets, such as land and water. Access to education will also be crucial to ensuring that the rural poor and specific social groups, such as women, can take advantage of new income opportunities. Social security and safety netsAs discussed above, one of the main obstacles to achieving food security is the lack of access to food, in particular among lower-income groups which lack the necessary purchasing power. The 2007-2008 food price crisis exacerbated the problem of food accessibility and nutrition outcomes, in particular for poor people, who spend 50-70 per cent of their income on food. A social protection system, including safety nets, can protect the most vulnerable against short-term economic and food price shocks. Several large countries were able to protect consumers by insulating their markets from international price shocks with additional safety net programmes. Social protection can also contribute to long-term resilience by facilitating access to food and by strengthening the ability of smallholders to manage risks and adopt new technologies with higher productivity (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012). The types of social protection instruments will vary depending on national social needs, development objectives and fiscal space. Safety nets in the short termAs regards short-term relevance, emergency food assistance and safety nets are effective tools for meeting urgent food needs and protecting the poor and the most vulnerable against price or climatic shocks. Safety nets include community support systems, transfers (direct and indirect), subsidies, public works and microcredit. For instance, in the aftermath of the 2007-2008 food price crisis, 23 countries introduced or expanded cash transfer programmes, 19 countries introduced food assistance programmes and 16 countries increased disposable income measures (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009b). Multiple solutions are possible, but, in general, scaling up existing social protection interventions has proved to be the best strategy for facing urgent challenges.       An adequate safety net can also ensure a basic level of consumption, which enables poorer farmers to assume the higher risks associated with higher-return strategies, which, potentially, could break the vicious circle of poverty and hunger. Public works (or cash for work) programmes, such as Indias National Employment Guarantee Scheme, represent typical employment-based safety nets which entitle individuals to a minimal amount of work and income, while they contribute to labour-intensive infrastructure development projects (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009b). These employment programmes can also incorporate training components, thereby enhancing human capital at the local level. Social security in the long term Long-term resilience and food security will require a more comprehensive social security system. The main goal should be to establish systematic and predictable programmes, targeting specific social groups, including the poor and smallholders, which can enhance human capital and stimulate the adoption of new technologies. For instance, nutrition intervention in early childhood, especially in the first thousand days, can lead to higher adult economic productivity. In Guatemala, a study showed that children who had received nutritional supplements before reaching the age of 3 earned hourly wages as adults that were 46 per cent higher (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012).       Much has been learned about how best to design social protection floors, how to determine which combinations of plans work and where, and how to target them. The international community can provide assistance to developing countries in designing such plans in a cost-effective time-bound manner so as to realize the right to food, as well as stimulate rural development, agricultural production and poverty alleviation. Support should also be offered to help integrate the social protection floor plan within the national agricultural strategies. The leaders of the G20, at their 2012 Summit, recognized the importance of establishing nationally determined social protection floors. They are being endorsed within International Labour Organization conference processes, which could support national efforts. The international community may also need to help the least developed countries finance their own social protection programmes.A pro-food security international trade systemIn todays interdependent world, the implementation of national strategies to improve access to food also requires concrete actions at the global level. As observed during the 2007-2008 food price crisis, higher food prices deeply affect nutrition and macroeconomic conditions of net food importing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011c), in part owing to a shortage of the foreign currency required to increase food imports. Conditions promoting the trade and food market transparency needed to reduce price distortions and volatility will be crucial to stimulating staple food production at the local level and ensuring access to food at the same time.The trade system Agricultural trade is potentially a pathway for GDP growth, lower rural poverty and food security. However, global markets have been working in favour of major production companies and some food exporting countries, often to the detriment of small landholders. The main challenge for the international trade system is to become more food security-oriented, in particular as regards food importing countries. For instance, the export subsidies and import protection granted by developed countries continue to create price distortions in the global food markets, with large negative consequences for developing countries. As a result, several countries have lost confidence in the trade system and reduced investment in their agriculture sector. In this regard, as suggested in the specific proposals for the review of World Trade Organization rules, the trade system should be flexible in order to protect non-traded agricultural sectors that are vital to food security.       In food exporting countries, export restrictions must be disciplined, as agreed at the G20 Cannes Summit in 2011 within the context of food crisis situations. Export restrictions provide a disincentive to farmers to invest in food production and undermine progress towards multilateral trade reforms and freer trade in the agriculture sector. At the same time, in food importing countries, import and domestic taxes on food must be temporarily reduced, especially when taxes constitute a significant proportion of the final price. For instance, tax reductions could be a better option than a subsidy programme, despite some of the negative effects on public revenue.       In the longer run, a fairer international trading system, taking into account the food security, livelihood security and rural development needs of developing countries, will be crucial. For instance, in higher-income countries, agricultural trade distortions need to be eliminated, in particular subsidies and market restrictions, which have devastating consequences for farmers in lower-income countries. In this regard, the Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations should be completed, with the Marrakesh Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least Developed and Net Food-importing Developing Countries assisting countries in the implementation process.  Food security stocks and information transparency Maintaining food stocks at the global and regional levels is an additional useful mechanism not only for improving emergency access to food, but also for stabilizing food prices. A certain level of world stock could be a sufficient condition for price stability (Committee on World Food Security, High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition, 2011). Supporting and improving access to these stocks can enhance food security and prevent humanitarian crises in countries under emergency conditions. These stocks should, however, target lower-income countries and be released strategically to support programmes that facilitate food access to the most vulnerable populations. In this regard, the High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security made two important recommendations on how to maintain a minimum level of world stocks and ultimately reduce food insecurity.       Pursuant to those recommendations, first, there is need for better information, with the creation of a transparent and coordinated food market information system. The elimination of most public stocks in OECD countries and the privatization of most State-trading enterprises have concentrated knowledge concerning agricultural commodity availability in the hands of a small number of companies which maintain this information as proprietary. One of the most important elements of the Action Plan on Food Price Volatility, agreed by the G20 Agriculture Ministers at their meeting held in Paris on 22 and 23 June 2011, was the launching of the Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS) to improve market information and transparency of data on current stocks, and promote coordination of policy responses (see Ministerial declaration, para. 26). While this initiative is considered a positive step, the High-level Panel of Experts at the same time recommended that given the importance of food insecurity, trading firms should be mandated to report on stocks instead of being allowed to do so voluntarily. AMIS market information should also be extended to include food crops other than the usual global cereals, including livestock and fish. Second, assuming the role traditionally played by the United States of America and China as stock holders, the international community should maintain a minimum level of world food stock. The objective would not be to defend a price band but rather to avert price spikes through the release of stock when prices started to boom.      In addition, increasing food reserves managed by the World Food Programme (WFP) could reduce delivery time and costs when a situation reaches crisis level. Since WFP usually relies on cash to purchase food for its work, upward price spikes limit the quantity of food it can purchase and its ability to respond to human needs. In order to fill these gaps, including delivery time, WFP initiated a regional stocking programme in 2008the Forward Purchase Facilityin Eastern and Southern Africa. This system offered several advantages, such as more accurate provision due to reduced time lags between requests and provision, and could be expanded to other regions. However, the lack of funding, and of available advance financing in particular, constitutes a major constraint on expanding this pilot project. Diets and consumption patternsNutrition outcomes are largely determined not only by food production and accessibility but also by food quality and diversity. A considerable potential for increasing the nutritional status of people and the efficiency of the whole food chain lies in encouraging changes in diet and consumptions patterns, as well as designing pro-nutrition policies in other sectors, such as health and education. In addition, reducing food losses is a cost-effective means of increasing the availability of safe and nutritious food for all. Preventing food wastage would also reduce the challenge of how to increase production in a world with limited natural resources. Sustainable dietsThe challenge of feeding a rising and increasingly affluent population also requires behavioural changes in terms of consumption, including dietary patterns. In particular, the livestock sector, which has grown rapidly to meet the increasing demand for meat, is a prime contribution to water scarcity, pollution, land degradation and greenhouse gas emissions. This has prompted calls for support of more sustainable diets with a more balanced content of calories derived from animal food. While the caloric content of meat is, on average, not substantially higher than that of cereals, meat production is much more demanding in terms of natural resources. On average, grain-meat conversion ratios, i.e., the number of kilograms of cereals needed to produce one kilogram of poultry or beef ranges from 2 to 1 for poultry all the way up to 7 to 1 for beef (United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, 2012).      Consumption by an increasingly affluent population in 2050 will exacerbate pressures on the use of land and water and increase greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture (see previous sect. on increasing food availability). A decrease in the consumption of meat through adoption of more sustainable diets can lead to a substantial reduction in the use of land and other natural resources, thus improving the prospects of sustainable development, as illustrated in box IV.3. Box IV.3: Sustainable diets and reduced food waste The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has estimated that meat consumption in 2050 will amount approximately to 4.65 billion tons. Poultry meat consumption level is expected to be 2.3 times higher than in 2010, while consumption of other livestock products is expected to be between 1.4 and 1.8 times higher (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009d). The worlds average daily calorie availability is projected to rise from an average of 2,789 kilocalories per person in 2000 to 3,130 kilocalories per person in 2050, a 12 per cent increase. Further, current food waste is around 30-50 per cent of total production (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011d; Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 2013).      Using the T21 model, the Millennium Institute simulated the impact of reducing meat consumption and food waste on the demand for land. The simulation assumes an overall reduction in the consumption of meat to provide 500 calories per capita per day in 2050 (down from the 620 projected by FAO). In addition, food waste and loss are assumed to decrease slightly from the current 32 per cent of total production to 30per cent. These two assumptions result in a substantial reduction in harvested area, from an estimated 1.31 billion hectares required in 2050 to 1.065 billion hectares, a savings of almost 20 per cent in respect of the demand for harvested land.       While the changes projected do not seem ambitious, much larger changes will have to occur in each country, according to their starting point. For meat consumption, it is assumed that there is a global convergence towards the current world average of 500 calories per capita per day from animal food, which would require an increase in the consumption of animal food in low-income countries in Africa, the Caribbean and Asia and a reduction in the consumption of animal food in high-income countries in Europe, North America and Oceania of 30-35 per cent.       Similarly, the projected decrease of food waste and loss, from the current 32 per cent to approximately 30 per cent by 2050 is based on the assumption of a global convergence towards a level of about 200 kilograms per capita per year. This allows for some slight increase in food waste and loss in low-income countries (mainly driven by an expected substantial increase in production), a gradual decrease of food waste and loss in middle-income countries, and a more drastic reduction in high-income countries.      While these results demonstrate that even a conservative change in global consumption patterns will yield significant reductions in the demand for harvested land, with consequent lower pressure on the use of water, soil nutrients and energy, they also indicate that even small steps towards improving the use of available resources, require major changes, at country level, in the way that food is produced, transported and consumed.      The available policy options for inducing these changes are largely country-specific and require a large degree of coordination and consistency across multiple policy areas, with agriculture, health and education being the most obvious. Achieving an understanding of the policy instruments available to countries for inducing a change in diets within different contexts requires further research and policy experimentation. Policy instruments such as taxing meat products to discourage unhealthy diets, educational programmes, mandating corporate social responsibility and labelling standards, production disincentives for meats and production incentives for cereals, etc., need to be tested against the overall objective of promoting (and enabling) the adoption of sustainable diets. END BOXHealth and education policies to enhance nutrition securityThere is a strong consensus that better nutrition will also require pro-nutrition policies in other, related sectors. Public policies and programmes designed to improve health, water and sanitation services will be particularly important. Increasing individuals awareness of the benefits of healthier diets, through information campaigns and educational programmes, is also relevant. A multisectoral approach to improving the nutritional status of people, including in preventing overconsumption and obesity, is essential. Hence, health and educational policies need to incorporate nutrition-related considerations in their programmes. HealthNutrition and health are inextricable, as a good nutritional status can be achieved only within the context of overall conditions of good health. For instance, in developing countries, access to basic health services is often inadequate owing to an insufficient number of health centres and qualified personnel. The resulting poor health conditions and illnesses, such as measles and gastroenteritis, will then have a negative impact on nutritional status. Similarly, the lack of safe water and of adequate sanitation leads to many diseases and illnesses, while compromising the nutritional status of people.       Thus, health policies should include preventive health and hygiene measures, which are essential for good nutrition, as well as ensure that nutrition components are part of their programme. In developing countries, access to health-care facilities and services for the poor, particularly women and children, has positive impacts on the nutritional status of individuals (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2004). In particular, as has been emphasized on many occasions, the first thousand days of life are crucial for childrens survival, as well as being a determinant for their nutrition and health status as adults. For instance, infants and small children should be breastfed exclusively up to the age of six months. After those first six months and for up to two years, breastfeeding should be complemented with safe and nutritious foods for infants (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013).       Considering the negative effects of both under- and over-nutrition on health throughout the life course (see previous sect. on the multiple dimensions of malnutrition), health and nutrition must be part of a life-course approach, in particular for the prevention of chronic diseases. First, healthier diets and physical activity should be part of preventive measures to reduce negative health consequences in the long term. Second, national health policies need to strengthen health systems, enabling them to respond more effectively and equitably to the health-care needs of people throughout the life course and to prevent negative health consequences (World Health Organization, 2008). Information campaigns and educational programmes In the case of lower-income groups in developing countries, the income elasticity of demand for dietary energy is positive and greater than for other income groups (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012). However, as income increases, there is a tendency to purchase more expensive foods, based on taste preferences, which may not improve nutrition outcomes. In many cases, individuals are unaware of the health problems associated with consuming certain type of foods, as well as of the importance of certain micronutrients. In developed countries, people may be unaware of the health problems associated with a less diversified diet and consumption of specific foods. In countries where overweight and obesity have increased, diets have typically shifted towards higher intake of energy-dense foods which are high in fat, salt and sugars but low in vitamins, minerals and other micronutrients.      Thus, education programmes can improve the health and nutritional status of the population in general, and of women and children in particular. Women with better education are more aware of the importance of adequate diets and can secure access to better-paying jobs. Several studies have shown that women with higher income and greater bargaining power within the family exert a more positive influence on child nutrition, health and education outcomes (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013). In developed countries, it has been observed that poorly educated women are 2-3 times more likely to be overweight than those with high levels of education (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012). Although the link between education, knowledge and dietary intake is not clear, the impact of education and knowledge is most evident when those at highest risk are considered (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013).      Inculcating basic knowledge of good nutrition, including family nutrition practices, in primary and secondary schools, can help individuals make informed dietary choices. Nutrition education could be included in the school curriculum and offered in community centres targeting adults. Recent evaluations of various school-based nutrition education programmes in Italy and Portugal showed that those programmes had positive impacts in terms of both attitudes and consumption and health outcomes (ibid.). In particular, nutritional education for women has a positive impact in terms of dietary intake and malnutrition (ibid.). Yet, in many developing countries, gender discrimination preventing school enrolment of girls is still a challenge, which ultimately has negative impacts on nutrition outcomes.      In addition to education, information and nutrition advocacy can also have positive impacts on population conditions related to nutrition. Strategies aimed at influencing consumer choice based on enhanced consumer awareness and knowledge should also be considered, as they may lead to a change in consumption habits. Dietary guidelines constitute one example of the public information tools used in many countries which should be encouraged. Information and communications measures are particularly relevant to preventing obesity. However, nutrition-related messages must be appropriate in order to be effective. They should be delivered by health professionals, among others, through a variety of channels and over an extended period of time.Consumption patterns: reducing wasteGlobally, approximately one third of the total food produced for consumption amounting to 1.3 billion tons per year is lost or wasted (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012b). Because of food waste, an opportunity is lost to reduce malnutrition and significant unnecessary pressure is imposed on natural resources, including through greenhouse gas emissions caused by production of food. There are several sources of food wastage throughout the supply chain, from initial agricultural production down to final household consumption (figure IV.5). In the present section, food wastage occurring at the consumption end is examined, along with the underlying factors associated with different socioeconomic and agricultural development conditions.The amount of food wasted in developed countries is higher than that in developing countries. Recent estimations show that the weight of food wasted per capita by consumers in Europe and North America amounts to 95-115 kg/year, compared with the figure for sub-Saharan Africa and South and South-East Asia, which is only 6-11 kg/year (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012b).       In developed countries, food wastage occurs more frequently at the retail and consumer end, owing, in part, to management practices and consumption habits. In wealthier countries, sales agreements between producers and distributors may contribute to the wastage of quantities of food due to the application of quality standards. As much as 30 per cent of the total harvested food does not reach the marketplace as a result of quality selection and cosmetic considerations (Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 2013). Also, food production tends to exceed demand in developed countries as a precautionary measure, in order to ensure delivery of agreed quantities. This situation entails a financial loss for producers and additional pressure on natural resources.       In industrialized countries, once food production reaches the market, perishable products are displayed for a minimum period of time in supermarkets, reducing in-store wastage. However, of the remaining 70 per cent that reaches the marketplace, 30-50 per cent is wasted at home by the final consumer (Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 2013). Insufficient purchase planning and conservative expiration dates on labelling, as well as significant discounts when food is purchased in higher quantities, are the main factors explaining the large degree of waste at the consumer level.       In developing countries, the situation is relatively different, as waste may occur primarily at the producer level, owing to inadequate harvesting methods and at the marketplace, owing to inappropriate storage, rather than at home. At the producer level, premature harvesting of crops usually causes a loss in nutritional value and a significant portion is wasted, as it is not suitable for consumption. At the marketplace, waste also occurs when vendors keep food displayed in stalls for a long period of time, using unhealthy preservation methods. However, urban households keep wastage at minimum levels by buying small portions each time they purchase food.       In developed countries, the retail and consumption patterns will require profound cultural changes, particularly regarding preferences and rejection of food based on cosmetic characteristics. As surveys show, consumers are willing to buy such food as long as the taste is not affected (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011d). Raising awareness in the food industries, and among retailers and consumers, is a key element in ensuring that consumers are offered a broader range of quality products in retail stores. Further, a significant proportion of the food that is currently discarded but still suitable for consumption could be sold or donated to commercial or charity organizations.       Governments may have to implement policies designed to stimulate different marketing and food management practices which can modify retailer and consumer decisions, and ultimately reduce the amount of food wasted at the marketplace and at home. Such policies are particularly applicable to consumable fresh food products that do not reach the market owing to cosmetic considerations. Publicity, advocacy, education and even legislation can also be used to bring about ideological, cultural and behavioural changes so as to reduce high levels of retail and domestic food waste in the developed world. In addition, in wealthier countries, price incentives in retail spaces lead to overconsumption, which ultimately increases food waste and health issues linked to excessive caloric intake. As long as food market prices remain relatively low, there will be no incentives to alter behavioural practices.      In developing countries, as discussed previously (see sect. on increasing food availability), investments in infrastructure will be crucial to reducing food wastage. Public investments should focus on main infrastructures, such as roads and energy production. In parallel, the private sector investments could concentrate efforts on storage and cooling systems. At the same time, it is important that food chain operators be trained to improve production, handling and storage methods, in line with food safety standards. Increasing financing for the agricultural sectorThe transformation and development of the agricultural sector discussed in previous sections will require investments on a significant scale. There have been several studies on and estimations of the financing requirements for agricultural development. Considered within a long-term perspective, investment needs for primary agriculture and its downstream industries in developing countries were estimated at US$ 9.2 trillion (2009 dollars) over the 44-year period from 2005-2007 to 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009). This level of investments will have to be sourced from both the public and the private sector. The public sector should typically finance infrastructural needs as well as research and development. These investments would improve productivity in the agricultural sector and attract private investments, which will benefit from positive externalities. Yet, the policy environment must provide the right incentives for private investments. Risk protection and better access to credit markets, for example, can stimulate private investments, from smallholders in particular. The importance of increasing public investment in agricultureIn many developing countries, the share of agriculture in public expenditure has to increase in order to improve the agricultural system, as emphasized by the Secretary-Generals High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis (United Nations, 2008). The public sector needs to take the lead in those areas that offer little incentive for private investmentssuch as rural infrastructure, and research and development, as well as extension servicesto increase agricultural productivity. Scaling up investment in these agricultural public goods and services has the potential not only to improve agricultural productivity, but also to crowd in private investment. In addition, greater public investment in community capacity development and social infrastructure has been considered indispensable to improving the management of natural resources and the livelihoods of small-scale farms (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012).The main challenge, however, lies in the fact that public resources allocated to the agricultural sector have been falling short of the required levels, including in developing countries where food insecurity is higher and where smallholders need more support in order to engage with the market. Government spending on agriculture has decreased from the 1980s to the mid-2000s, representing only 6 per cent of total public expenditures (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2008). In Africa, for instance, despite the landmark decision of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, at the second ordinary session of the Union Assembly, held in July 2003, to adopt the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security, Governments have not increased their allocation of resources to the agricultural sector as expected. Heads of State and Government had committed to the allocation of at least 10 per cent of budgetary resources to agriculture and rural development within five years. The commitment to allocate the same percentage by 2015 to coincide with the deadline for reaching the Millennium Development Goal 1 target of halving hunger was renewed in 2009. However, in 2008, only 8 countries out of 45 allocated 10 per cent or more of their total budgetary resources to agriculture and rural development (figure IV.6). These countries were Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Malawi, Mali, the Niger and Senegal (Omilola and others, 2010). Six of these countries are least developed countries, and were at the same time the larger beneficiaries of official development assistance (ODA) and characterized by less favourable agriculture conditions (Benin and others, 2010).Major national emergencies, lack of peace and stability, HIV/AIDS and natural disasters were among the major challenges faced by Governments during the last decade, leading to fewer resources for agriculture. However, there are also several governance issues preventing more and better allocation of public resources to agriculture which need to be addressed. The lack of transparency and political will is an underlying factor leading to low levels of public spending in agriculture. Contrary to the common perception, low economic growth and low aggregate wealth in a country are not necessarily an impediment to allocating higher public spending to agriculture. For instance, in Africa, a small economy such as Malawi had already complied with the Maputo Declaration, allocating more than 13 per cent of the total public budget to agriculture (te Lintelo and others, 2013).  Another major challenge is the inadequacy of agricultural sector policy strategies, including diversion of public spending from long-term investment to agricultural subsidies. While subsidies, such as for energy, or fertilizer subsidies for agriculture, can help overcoming short-term market failures, they tend to remain in effect much beyond the original planned time frame, leading to inefficient use of resources. For instance, in Zambia more than half of the agriculture budget during fiscal year 2005 was spent on subsidies for fertilizers and crop marketing, while investment in infrastructure represented only 3 per cent of the budget. Moreover, only 29 per cent of farmers were buying fertilizers, namely, those who were wealthier and closer to roads (World Bank, 2008).  Incentives for private investmentInsufficient public investment in agriculture is a main barrier to improving and ensuring food and nutrition security. At the same time, low private investment, including from smallholders in their own farming activities, constitutes another major constraint on improving food production. Creating the right incentives and regulations is a main determinant for encouraging both large- and small-scale private investments, while improving smallholders livelihoods. There is scope for increasing production, food security and rural incomes with greater investments in small farms. In particular, if investment focuses on the production of food staples, rather than high-value products, there will be better opportunities to increase food security in highly insecure food countries. In Africa, for instance, it is estimated that the value of domestic and regional markets can amount to more than 50 billion dollars annually, more than the value of total international agricultural exports (World Bank, 2008; Sahan and Mikhail, 2012). Furthermore, diversifying small farms food production is the best strategy for improving rural households income and nutrition conditions.There are numerous obstacles preventing higher investment in small farms. The above-mentioned insufficiency of public goods and services limits potential returns to farmers investments. The second issue is related to the lack of price incentives for small-scale producers, in particular when there are price controls on food products which reduce their potential net revenue. A third issue is the lack of access by smallholders to formal insurance protection against risks, which, typically, include natural disasters, pest infestations and price volatility, leading to lower investments in small farms, as a safeguarding measure. An additional obstacleand, arguably, the most importantis the lack of access to credit markets. In many developing countries, agricultural financial services remain underdeveloped, in particular the supply of seasonal credit for small farms, preventing farm-level investments. In many cases, when credit is available, banks increase risk premiums and interest rates to prohibitive levels, as they perceive small-scale production as particularly risky. Thus, expanding rural financial institutions and creating specific financial products for small-scale farms will be a key determinant as regards boosting productivity in the agricultural sector. The public sector can not only supply specific insurance and financing products to farmers, but also stimulate the development of insurance and credit markets for smallholders (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010). Specific products could include leasing, matching grants, warehouse receipt systems, commodity-based financial products, and overdraft facilities for input dealers (United Nations, 2008).Private investments in agriculture, particularly international private investments, are needed and can play an important role in boosting productivity and ensuring food security, when directed towards strategic needs (Hallam, 2009). However, in order to increase the positive impact of these investments, Governments need to design policies and legislation that can create a more conducive climate for inclusive and sustainable investments. Direct incentives for instance, such as tax incentives, can encourage investments that directly support local smallholders. Contract farming can also lead to positive investment, when small-scale farmers are assisted in contract negotiation and dispute resolution (Sahan and Mikhail, 2012). The onus of increasing the positive impact of private investment is on recipient countries, even if a regulatory framework is often missing in developing countries. While international standards and voluntary actions can partly bridge the gap, it is still essential that national Governments create regulations and incentives to ensure a positive impact. For instance, as observed above, large-scale land acquisitions from foreign private investors must be regulated in order to maximize benefits for local communities. In relation to land, several mechanisms can be used, such as legal protection of all land rights and the inclusion of local communities in political decision-making processes (Sahan and Mikhail, 2012). Similarly, sustainable farming investments can also be encouraged with adequate incentives and regulations for protecting the environment. International support for agriculture The support of the international communitybilateral and multilateral organizations, international non-governmental organizations and other development partnerswill be crucial for the allocation of more resources to long-term investments in agriculture. In the last few decades, agriculture has been considerably neglected by donors and development partners. In the 1980s and 1990s, total ODA to agriculture exhibited a declining trend, as a consequence of structural adjustment programmes that favoured industrial sectors in developing countries. From the 1980s to 2008, aid to agriculture fell by 43 per cent (figure IV.7). In terms of total aid programmes, the share of aid to agriculture declined even more sharply, from 17 per cent in the 1980s to 6 per cent in 2008. Despite the long-term decline, bilateral aid to agriculture showed an upward trend in recent years, during the period 2003-2008. This recent trend coincided with the onset of the new millennium and commitments made by the donor community, in particular to Africa. In addition, in 2007-2008, the total annual average aid commitments to agriculture amounted to US$ 7.2 billion (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010), which represented a positive step towards increasing financing for agriculture in developing countries. Still, in 2008, the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis urged donor countries to double ODA for food assistance, other types of nutritional support and safety net programmes, and to increase the proportion of ODA to be invested in food security and agricultural development from the current 3 to 10 per cent within five years (and beyond if needed) so as to reverse the historic underinvestment in agriculture (United Nations, 2008). Further, global support of US$ 20 billion for agriculture was promised at the Group of Eight (G8) Summit, held in LAquila, Italy, from 8 to 10 July 2009 (see LAquila joint statement on global food security, para. 12).In order to maximize the positive impact of external aid on agriculture, countries that face food insecurity and small-scale farms should be prioritized. In line with this perspective, sub-Saharan Africa and South and Central Asia have received, respectively, 31 per cent and 22 per cent of the total aid flows to agriculture in 2007-2008 (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010). However, continuity and coherence of ODA for agriculture are also crucial for its effectiveness. In addition, new mechanisms in global governance of agriculture are needed to provide political support, coordinate across sectors and, in particular, ensure continuous and appropriate funding (World Bank, 2008). Concerted action is needed by the international community in addressing the issues of trade and global public goods (research and technology), as well as helping developing countries confront climate change challenges. In the case of climate change, for instance, it is accepted that wealthier countries bear the major responsibility for its emergence, while vulnerable farmers in developing countries suffer most of its consequences. Thus, within the context of the Marrakech Accords, comprising the decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at its seventh session, held at Marrakesh, Morocco, from 29 October to 10 November 2001, several funds were created to finance adaptation in vulnerable developing countries. However, as observed earlier, the international community is underinvesting in global public goods for food and agriculture, as these have only long-term pay-offs. Nevertheless, greater and better allocation of financial resources is possible, once the international community acknowledges that investing in sustainable agriculture is a means of ensuring global equity and stability. Chapter V: the post 2015 energy tranformation challenge Main messagesThe latest estimates, from independent and authoritative sources, confirm that trends in emissions are likely leading to increases in world temperature which could have catastrophic consequences. Even after accounting for recent mitigation policiesincluding expanded use of renewable energy sources and improvements in energy efficiencythe accumulated concentrations of emissions will be well above the safety mark of 450 parts per million of carbon dioxide equivalent by 2050. For sustainability to be attained, the timely transformation of the energy system should be an integral and core element of the post-2015 development agenda.       Pathways to an energy transformation for sustainable development are multiple: there is flexibility in the energy technologies that need to be available and in the sectors in which energy efficiency should improve, and there are options with respect to the economic, social and cultural envelopes that could contain the increase in emissions, while still  allowing for a rise in welfare.      Despite their variety, feasible sustainable pathways share some common ground. First, the sooner policies scale up, the greater the technological flexibility will be and the less costly mitigation will become. Second, policies increasing efficiency in the delivery of energy services can go a long way. Indeed, if it chooses to, the world can avoid the use of controversial technologies with high risks and high costs, including nuclear power and carbon capture and storage.      This Survey projects a certain degree of technological over-optimism in the assessment of sustainable pathways. While technology per se is not the main limiting factor, its implementation faces challenges. In this regard, our analysis is less sanguine about the economic, social and cultural hurdles to be overcome in implementing the decisive and coherent national policies that are called for, as well as in securing the commensurate level of international cooperation. The world needs a public investment-led big push, capable of catalysing private sector investment and innovation so as to sustainably transform the energy system.      This sustainable energy transformation is consistent with economic and social inclusion; moreover, policies promoting economic and social inclusion can, in some cases also result in reduced emissions. Universal access to clean cooking fuels and electricity can be consistent with measures to contain the increase of emissions and, pertinently, this can be achieved at a comparatively modest investment cost:* The investment necessary to render the energy system sustainable is, in principle, affordable. However, the full costing of investment needs calls for resource allocations several times larger than the direct energy investments that are needed to keep the world on a sustainable pathway. Additional investments needed to achieve universal access to modern energy by 2030 are, in comparison quite affordable.      The fact that the sustainable energy transformation will require the attainment of multiple and complex goals, ranging from growth, macroeconomic balances, and technology innovation and its diffusion to human development, indicates the great importance of coherence in the policies needed in order for the transformation to succeed. Industrial policies, technological innovation, transfer and adaptation, and energy plans based on integrated energy assessment will require decisive, ingenious and coherent national policymaking, backed up by strong international cooperation.IntroductionThe world economic system is in need of deep transformation as a means of re-establishing a balanced relationship with the Earths boundaries while accommodating the legitimate development aspirations of the billions of people who would like to have access to quality and nutritious food, decent clothing and shelter, health, good-quality education, water and sanitation, and modern amenities. At the heart of this transformation lies the revamping of the world energy system, as it is energy that underpins the production of the goods and services that sustain human life. The energy system harnesses natural resources and transforms them into energy carriers, to be used by the appliances and machinery that provide energy services, such as heat, refrigeration and transport. Providing energy services to current and future generations requires energy systems that sustainable, in terms of both the use of natural resources and the disposal and absorption of the pollutants associated with the generation and use of energy. To the extent that an energy system is engaged in have multiple interactions with the economy, society and the environment (including interrelations with other physical resource and commodity systems), the only way to build sustainability in the energy system is to introduce sustainable management of those economic, social and environmental interactions.       The transformation of the energy system should be a core element in any agenda for sustainable development that aims at improving the living standards of people within a framework of equity and environmental sustainability. Explicit energy goals (or targets) are needed to eradicate dependence on traditional use of biomass as a source of thermal energy; to improve access to reliable and adequate quality electricity; and to ensure that unreliable or low-quality energy sources do not compromise the opportunities of those among the working poor who are self-employed or run household enterprises.       Achieving these objectives entails confronting the challenge of formulating policies that adequately resolve the issue of potential trade-offs and take advantage of potential synergies. Policies need to explore possible synergies with other development goals, by promoting, for example, health, education, training and employment creation through improvement of workers skills in the areas of design, deployment and maintenance of sustainable energy systems.      The outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled The future we wantanchored in a balanced integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of developmentcalls for a holistic approach in accelerating the transformation of the energy system to support equitable and sustainable development.The evidence for climate change and human-activity generated emissionsA large number of scientific studies have examined current energy trends and found them to be outright sustainable. They do, however, offer alternatives and have proposed a variety of paths that has the potential to re-establish a balance between human activity and Earths carrying capacity. Presented below are some of the major institutional exercises focused on energy trends and alternative sustainable pathways.The room for effective action is shrinkingThe growing body of analytical evidence provided by the scientific community unmistakably confirms that current incremental policies will not suffice to keep human impact within the Earths boundaries. If current trends continue, the further infringement of those boundaries, will lead to a dangerous increase in the risk of devastating consequences. If one looks at the rise in the use of renewable energy, the advances made in reducing pollution in many cities, the increase in the number of protected areas, the implementation of policies to improve sustainable use of natural resources, and the adoption of international agreements to improve environmental sustainability, the world is probably greener today than it would have been if no actions had been taken. Certainly, the world is increasingly, using energy more efficiently and there has been a 25 per cent improvement over 1980 measures. Some countries, notably China, and some regions have achieved large improvements. However, even after taking into account all of these actions, the outlook remains grim. Simulations incorporating current economic and demographic trends, energy policies, emissions levels and current commitments indicate that present efforts do not suffice to maintain accumulated emissions within acceptable boundaries and safe temperature limits. The time for introducing policies and regulations that can effectively bring about a shift to a sustainable energy path is shrinking.      World Energy Outlook 2012 (International Energy Agency, 2012) considers two baseline scenarios and presents estimates extending to 2035. The current policies scenario only includes the implementation  of policies that had been adopted by mid-2012. The  new policies scenario includes all policies in the current policies scenario plus a cautious implementation of recently announced policy commitments and the expected impact of adopting new technologies (ibid.). In a sense, then, the second baseline scenario takes an optimistic view of recent policies and technology development, mainly because it assumes that they will be fully implemented. A comparison of these baseline scenarios highlights two important points. First, new policy and technology developments are important steps in the right direction, for they imply a noticeable lessening in the increase in emissions between 2010 and 2035 (figure V.1). Second, even after optimistically accounting for recent green developments, the world is still a long way from a sustainable pathway, as emissions will still be well above the sustainable prescribed level. While the current policies scenario implies a long-term average increase in global temperature of 5.3 C, the updated new policies baseline scenario softens the impact on world temperature by 1.7 C, yet still leads to a risky increase of 3.6C. Based on scientific assessments, it has been established that world temperature should not increase by more than 2 C.       A comprehensive review by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2011) of 16 global energy-economy and integrated assessment models found a remarkable increase in the use of renewable energy in many baseline scenarios. Based on the increases in the use of renewable sources of energy foreseen by many baseline scenarios, by 2030 the level of use of renewables will have doubled. Under other scenarios, the use of renewable energy will be 3 or even 4 times the current level. Yet, again, these baseline scenarios result in emissions implying dangerous increases in world temperature.      The baseline scenario presented in Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development Environmental Outlook to 2050 (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012) implies that concentrations of greenhouse gas emissions will rise to 685 parts per million (ppm) of carbon dioxide equivalent (ppm CO2e) by 2050 and to over 1,000 ppm of CO2e by 2100, well above the internationally agreed target of cumulative concentrations of required 450 ppm of CO2e by 2050 required to stabilize world temperature (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007). These increases in greenhouse gas emissions will lead to temperature hikes ranging between 2.0 C and 2.8 C by 2050 and between 3.7 C and 5.6 C by 2100. The predicted business-as-usual emissions are thus likely to trigger increases in world temperature with potentially disastrous consequences for the environment and peoples well-being: aggravated losses of biodiversity, increased pollution in cities, heightened competition for water and a doubling of the number of premature deaths.       The projections and reviews of scenarios undertaken by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2012) also suggest that current policies and underlying trends fall short of what is required to prevent risky increases in world temperature. UNEP scenarios are presented in conformity with countries emissions reduction pledges under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, i.e., from the time commitments were made to the year 2020. According to UNEP estimates, current commitments are insufficient and will likely lead to a rise in temperature of more than 4 C. To stay within the safe temperature range, the world needs to reduce emissions by another 14 gigatrons (Gt) of CO2e (GtCO2e)/year by 2020, beyond current commitments to reductions in emissions.  The many feasible paths to a sustainable energy transformation There has been progress in our understanding of the changes that will be required to achieve a sustainable energy transformation that keeps the Earth within safe boundaries. One overriding message from the hundreds of scenarios that have been produced by scientists is that the world can follow a large number of paths to achieving sustainability. The IPCC special report on renewables (2012)The IPCC special report on renewables (2011) looks at 164 scenarios presenting the results of policies aimed at increasing the role of renewables in the energy system. Under more than half of these policy scenarios, there is a significant increase in the use of renewables with figures ranging from 64 exajoules (EJ)/year to more than 173 EJ/year and in some instances to 400 EJ/year over current levels (figure V.2). The share of renewables in the energy mix will increase in these scenarios from 13 per cent in 2008 to more than 17 per cent and 27 per cent in 2030 and 2050, respectively. The most ambitious scenarios project renewables sources accounting for about 43 per cent and 77 per cent of total energy in 2030 and 2050, respectively.       The IPCC review suggests that scenarios aimed at controlling emissions more strictly require an energy mix with a higher share of renewables. To what extent renewables can contribute to the control of emissions is still somewhat uncertain, however. For any single level of emissions, there is a wide range of renewable energy combinations that are compatible with that level of emissions; such large variation simply reflects the difficulty in modelling the environmental impact of renewables, which in part stems from uncertainties surrounding the deployment of renewable technologies (see legend in figure V.2). While there is a need to increase our understanding of the interactions between renewable energy and emissions, the IPCC review suggests a large potential for increasing the use of renewables.United Nations Environment Programme report on bridging the emissions gapNoting the slow progress in international negotiations on reducing emissions, the UNEP report (2012) looks at scenarios where some important actions to curve emissions occur only after 2020. Comparing these scenarios with scenarios under which most of the significant environmental policy actions occur before 2020 helps highlight important trade-offs. The first observation is that under scenarios assuming strong mitigation only after 2020, there is obviously more flexibility given to the type of changes in the energy system that need to take place in the short term. The trade-off is that under these scenarios, there is greater pressure to accelerate progress after 2020, with the world becoming more dependent on technological breakthroughs to be able to achieve the required reduction in emissions. For example, the UNEP review (2012, p. 29) concludes that no later action scenario published up to 2012 can meet the target of controlling the rise in world temperature without bio-carbon capture and storage (United Nations Environmental Programme, 2012, p. 29). A similar trade-off applies to policy options and societal choices: the widening of options in the short term narrows the room for future policy action (because higher emissions increase the risk of rising temperature and climate changes). OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050 (2012) analyses the costs and benefits of an array of policies aimed at transforming the energy system and avoiding high climate change risks. The OECD core scenario makes several assumptions: (a) that mitigation options are fully flexible, (b)that all the necessary cooperation exists to implement an all-encompassing and harmonized global carbon market and (c) that least-cost mitigation options are adopted. The core scenario is set to achieve the target of keeping the CO2e concentration at 450 ppm. To achieve the target, this scenario simulates a set of policies that could achieve such a target, including actions to establish a global carbon price, followed by immediate use of least-cost mitigation options in all sectors and regions, and gradual progress in the decarbonization of the energy sector  stimulated by higher carbon prices, extensive use of low-cost advanced technologies, including biomass energy with carbon capture and storage. While the cost to the economy of keeping emissions in check under these assumptions would not be large, it would vary significantly across regions. Costs would entail reductions of 2050 gross domestic product (GDP) ranging from -2.1 per cent for OECD countries to 8per cent for Brazil, India, Indochina and China (BRIICS countries, excluding the Russian Federation), with other regions facing reductions of -4.4 per cent.          OECD explicitly probes the effects of policies designed to curb emissions and the impact that such policies would have on biodiversity, whose boundaries are among the Earths most severely infringed (chap. I sect. on megatrends). Under the OECD baseline scenario, by 2050 the world will have lost 10 per cent of biodiversity, over and above the already reduced level for the year 2010. The set of policies and technologies that lead to limiting emissions to 450 ppm of CO2e in the OECD core scenario are unfortunately incapable of addressing the loss in biodiversity. The OECD core scenario reduces the loss of biodiversity by 9.9 per cent relative to the biodiversity in baseline 2010, that is, there is a net gain of 0.1 percentage points over the baseline projection to year 2050. A more detailed look at the simulation helps reveal potential trade-offs. Most policies and positive climate change effects under this scenario reduce the loss of biodiversity by 1.5 percentage points with respect to the 2050 baseline projection, but more intensive use of bioenergy under this scenario effectively adds 1.4 percentage points to the loss of biodiversity. Combining these two figures yields the above-mentioned 0.1 percentage point net gain. Thus, the use of bio-energy to help reduce emissions involves a trade-off of increasing biodiversity loss. Simulations using technology combinations that rely less importantly on bio-energy result in larger net gains. On the other hand, complementary policies can be of great assistance. When the core 450 scenario is reinforced with increases in land productivity, ranging between 3 and 18 per cent depending on type of land and region, the net loss in biodiversity is reduced by 1.2 percentage points.Global Energy Assessment (2012)The Global Energy Assessment (2012) (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 2012) builds 60 scenarios that include fundamental changes in energy and development, e.g., policies related to the energy sector, changes in the user-end point demand for energy, and changes in the transport sector, as well as policies broadening access to modern energy, enhancing energy security and keeping emissions within safe levels. The 60 scenarios are organized around three sets of options. The first set of options includes different combinations of changes in the course of the evolution of the supply of and demand for energy. At one extreme, the world relies mainly on improvements in the supply of energy to meet the needs of a growing and increasingly more affluent world population: the supply path. At the other extreme, the world population is still growing and is becoming more affluent but in this case, measures are taken to improve efficiency in the use of energy: the efficiency path.  Between the two extremes, there is a mix of improvements in supply and demand: the mix path. These three combinations are thus defined as: high-supply/low-efficiency, low-supply/high-efficiency and mid-supply/mid-efficiency. Of particular relevance to an increasingly urbanized world (see chap III), each of these three configurations of demand- and supply-side changes can be deployed along with two different transport sectors systems: one that continues to rely on conventional technologies and fuels (liquid) and one that uses advanced technologies and fuels (hydrogen and electricity).       The set of three supply and demand possibilities and the set of two transport options as described, define six technological paths. For each of these six paths, the exercise considers 10 possible variations in the portfolio of technologies, e.g. one where all technologies are available, one comprising all but nuclear, one comprising all but carbon capture and storage (CCS), etc. In total, 60 alternative paths are considered. The results of running these 60 scenarios are measured with a checklist to determine whether or not they meet sustainability goals. Four sustainability goals are defined: (a) to attain almost universal access to electricity and clean cooking fuels by 2030; (b)to ensure that the majority of the worlds population live in areas that meet the air quality guidelines of the World Health Organization (WHO); (c) to limit global average temperature increase to 2 C (with a likelihood greater than 50 per cent); and (d) to limit energy trade and increase the diversity and resilience of the energy supply. Scenario results are subject to the test of meeting all four defined sustainability goals. A total of 41 out of the 60 scenarios successfully meet the test, underscoring the view that there are a variety of paths towards keeping emissions and the rise in temperature within safe limits.         The most important insight provided by this ensemble of scenarios is that the world can go a long way towards controlling emissions if there are adequate investments in energy efficiency. The 60 scenarios can be divided into 20 scenarios within the supply path, 20 scenarios within the efficiency path and 20 within the mix path. While all 20 scenarios that emphasize measures for efficiency in demand meet all four sustainability goals, 13 out of the 20 scenarios that assume a mix of supply and demand changes meet the goals and only 8 of the scenarios emphasizing the supply side pass the sustainability test.       The explanation for these results is that the increase in energy efficiency provides enough room for all combinations of the two transportation paths and all five technology portfolios to meet the sustainability goals. If gains in efficiency are small, however, the world becomes more dependent on the capacity to increase the supply of clean energy, which depends in turn on the ability to innovate and adopt new technologies. If substantial efficiency improvements are ruled out, the number of scenarios that meet all four sustainability goals are reduced to only two, regardless of whether or not it is possible to migrate from conventional to modern transport systems.       Another important insight that can be derived from this exercise is that the technologies with greater technological, economic and social uncertaintiesnuclear energy, carbon capture storage (CCS), and bio-energy with carbon capture storage (BECCS)are not indispensable for achieving the four Global Energy Assessment goals. That is, even if the world phases out nuclear energy and/or discards the option of carbon capture storage and bio-energy with carbon capture storage, the four Global Energy Assessment sustainable goals can still be achieved as long as it keeps the demand for energy low and renewable technologies are implemented as assumed in scenarios. The main lesson is that if the world cannot control the demand for energy with efficiency measures, then nuclear, carbon capture storage and bio-energy with carbon capture storage technologies will have to be accepted. Sustainable energy with economic and social inclusionSince the IPCC Fourth  Assessment Report review (2007), many energy and climate scenarios have included the assumption that countries GDP will converge towards the top. Take, for example, the Global Energy Assessment and OECD modellings. The Global Energy Assessment scenarios assume that the country or region with the lowest income will have a GDP per capita of 8,000 purchasing power parity (ppp) United States dollars by 2050 and US$ 26,000 in ppp prices by 2100. This means that regional income disparity, measured as the ratio of the top to the lowest income per capita, will drop from 17 in 2010 to 6 in 2050 and to 3 in 2100.7 The OECD modelling assumes that by 2050, the lowest country or region GDP per capita will be US$ 13,000 ppp dollars and the ratio of the top to the lowest income per capita will have decreased, in ppp terms, from 12 in 2010 to 6 in 2050. The OECD modelling, explicitly builds changes in GDP based on the effects of a set of growth drivers, including the age structure of the population, the labour-force participation and unemployment rates, and education attainment, among others. The procedure explicitly discusses the role of important interactions determining growth, such as the slowing-down effect that ageing has on growth and the upward effect that education attainment has on labour productivity and thereby on growth. The assumption of GDP convergence is driven mainly by the assumption of convergence in education.      The fact that these models include numerous scenarios where emissions meet the 450 ppm target and income convergence is still allowed for, implicitly demonstrates that environmental goals are consistent with inclusive economic growth. IPCC (2007) found that models assuming GDP convergence tend to yield lower emissions mainly because the increase in income is allowed to occur in countries where emissions per capita (emissions/population)  and the intensity of emissions (emissions/GDP) are lower because resources and technologies are allowed to flow to countries and regions where availability is more restricted. Hence, convergence of GDP per capita not only is consistent with, but will also actively contribute to, environmental sustainability.          The relevance of GDP convergence to environmental sustainability goes beyond the reduction of between-country inequalities. Within each country, appropriate and coherent policies promoting upward income convergence can result in great progress towards implementation of an inclusive agenda within the economic and social dimensions of a post-2015 vision of development. To the extent that social and economic inclusion indicators correlate with GDP per capita, reaching a GDP per capita floor of say 10,000 ppp dollars by 2050 might also mean that the incidence of one dollar-per-day income poverty would be about  5 per cent (figure V.3; see also World Bank (2012a), p. 5, figure 0.2). Similar patterns would apply to other indicators such as child mortality, female literacy, education attainment, health outcomes and access to water and sanitations, among others. All of this suggests that economic and social inclusion, including upward convergence of GDP, is consistent withand can even be a net contributor to the curbing of greenhouse gas emissions. Consistency, however, is not equivalent to sufficiency. Economic and social inclusion politices will have to be designed and implemented as the world transforms its energy system.      Income convergence allows for convergence in human development but does not assure it, particularly under conditions of persistent and, at times, aggravating inequalities (see chap. I). Climate change/energy/economy models have also looked at issues of energy and environment-related poverty.       We begin by recalling that the overall Global Energy Assessment exercise specifically included elimination of energy poverty among its four goals and found that 41 of its 60 scenarios fulfilled all four goals, i.e., universal access to electricity and clean cooking fuels by 2030; compliance of cities with WHO air quality guidelines; limiting the global average temperature increase to 2 C; and limiting energy trade and increasing the diversity and resilience of the energy supply. Although the 60 scenarios incorporate the economic and social inclusion dimensions of sustainable development and establish whether or not they are compatible with the 450 ppm target, the exercise does not indicate what specifically would be required to achieve economic and social inclusion in an environmentally sustainable path. To address this question, the Global Energy Assessment compared two scenarios, including policies to achieve universal access to clean fuels and stoves for cooking and access to electricity with one incorporating none of these policies. The analysis was carried out for three key regionssub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Pacific Asiawhere access to modern energy is a critical issue.       The results of the comparison indicate that with the absence of energy poverty policies, 2.4 billion people will still rely on solid fuels for cooking by 2030, (figureV.4), that is, 300 million more people than the 2.1 billion so reliant in 2005. The implementation of the most ambitious package providing clean energy fuel, which combines microfinancing and fuel subsidies to cover the upfront costs of enabling access to modern energy and the purchase of appliances (assuming a 50 per cent fuel subsidy in relation to market prices), has the potential to ensure access to modern energy of 1.9 billion of people who would otherwise still rely on solid fuels for cooking. This set of policies, however, will still leave 500 million people without access to clean cooking fuels.      Separately, the Global Energy Assessment looks at access to grid-electricity in the rural areas of three regions: sub-Saharan Africa, Pacific Asia and South Asia. The baseline scenario indicates that in the absence of access to electricity policies, between 70-85 per cent of the rural population of sub-Saharan Africa and 18-23 per cent of the rural population of Pacific and South Asia will still be deprived of electricity by 2030. Implementing policies aimed at providing universal access to clean cooking fuels and electricity in these three regions will have no visible impact on emissions. Actually, greenhouse gas emissions will be slightly lower than the emissions under the baseline scenario.      World Energy Outlook 2012 provides an interesting perspective on access to modern energy and the climate change implications thereof. The IEA core new policies baseline scenario predicts that by 2030, 1 billion people will still be without electricity and 2.6 billion people will lack clean cooking facilities. The simulation of a scenario with granting universal access to clean cooking fuel and electricity indicates that these policies can be implemented again resulting in a very low impact on the environment.      OECD Environment Outlook to 2050 examines the benefits of combining environmental policies and policies aimed at reaching the Millennium Development Goal of access to water and sanitation. The report presents a scenario where the number of people without access to improved water in 2005 will have been reduced to half by 2030, followed by universal access to an improved water source and basic sanitation by 2050. The benefits of such a scenario include prevention of premature deaths, better health conditions and economic rewards to such sectors as fisheries and tourism (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012, p.247).       The brief and selective review of sustainable pathways towards transforming the energy system has yielded the following insights: (a) long-term trends are not sustainable even if the effects of recent mitigation policies are taken into account; (b) transformative changes can follow multiple feasible paths; (c) transforming the energy system is consistent with increasing economic and social inclusion; (d) a closer look at available scenarios warrants the conclusion that not only is mitigation consistent with economic and social inclusion but, in some instances, it also benefits from economic and social inclusion; (e) all feasible paths require policies, resources and international cooperation well beyond current standards and trends. In sum, full sustainable development is possible, but it needs strong policy interventions at global and country levels. The challenge of transforming the energy systemSuccessful mitigation and sustainable development face multiple challenges. To begin with, there is the challenge of ensuring  that people and policymakers learn from scientific and factual evidence and modify their views and current consumption patterns accordingly. Yet, even if the world is fully convinced of the environmental risks of continuing current trends, the task is daunting. The task involves the timely transformation of the energy system. The accomplishment of this task involves a complex and potentially lengthy process. The energy system harnesses natural resources and transforms them into energy carriers to be used by the appliances and machinery that provide energy services, such as heat, refrigeration and transport, among others (see box V.1 on the energy system). Providing energy services to current and future generations requires sustainable energy systems. To the extent that energy systems have multiple interactions with the economy, society and the environment (including interrelations with other physical resource and commodity systems), the only way to build sustainability in the energy system is to introduce sustainable management of those economic, social and environmental interactions. In the present section, we discuss two challenges to the transformation of the energy system: the technological challenge and the economic, social and political challenge.The technology challengeIt is widely acknowledged that many of the technologies necessary for supporting sustainable development are already available. The challenge is how to improve these technologies, how to accelerate cost reductions and achieve meaningful changes, how to integrate them along coherent development paths that respond to specific local and sectoral needs, and how to provide incentives and mechanisms for rapid innovation, diffusions and knowledge-sharing (United Nations, 2011, p. ix).       Climate change-energy models, which look carefully at available and foreseeable technologies, confirm the view that technology is not the main obstacle. For example, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Renewables (2011), looked at four illustrative scenarios in which emissions were controlled and the use of renewables increased significantly, and discovered that in these cases only 2.5 per cent of the globally available technological potential was used (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2011, p. 23 and 796). The UNEP 2012 emissions gap report estimates that the technological potential for reducing emissions between now and 2020 to be anywhere between 14 and 20 GtCO2e, which is enough to accomplish the emissions reductions of 8-13 GtCO2e that still need to be achieved beyond current reduction commitments. These two examples confirm that current or foreseeable availability of technologies is not the obstacle to achieving environmental sustainability, but also suggest that a significant degree of uncertainty still pervades the assessment of technical possibilities. While the IPCC review suggests that scenarios portraying significant increases in renewables far from exhaust foreseen capabilities of technology, the UNEP report suggests the space of implementation is rather tight.      Climate change-energy models coincide in pointing out that implementing in the real world the modelled assumptions represents a daunting task. There are technical and engineering obstacles that need to be overcome in order to implement the new technologies (see United Nations, 2011, pp.54-58 and United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2012). Still more challenging are the unavoidable economic, social and cultural obstacles that will need to be overcome in order to implement new technologies that are to replace the currently dominant fuel-based technology envelop. Obstacles include not only the entrenched interests of the energy industry but also challenges associated with shifts in land use and changes in the economic tissue and its associated consumption patterns. Finally, one should not forget that implementation challenges are exacerbated by the fact that changes need to take place in a short period of time (United Nations, 2011).      The kinds of economic, social and cultural changes that might be involved in switching energy sources are suggested by the following illustration. A technically feasible large-scale plan intended to supply energy from solar sources to 1 billion people in Europe and North Africa and half a billion in North America will require an expanse of solar farms in the Sahara desert and North America equivalent in size to the State of Arizona. The economic, social and political challenges associated with changing land-use patterns so that such large extensions of land can be allocated to the generation of solar energy attest to the magnitude of the obstacles that need to be overcome when scaling up renewable energy alternatives (United Nations, 2011, pp.55-56; MacKay, 2009). Another illustration is provided by the seemingly simple substitution of fossil fuel-driven automobiles with electricity-propelled cars. Even if technically feasible and environmentally sound (see MacKay, 2009, pp. 126-132), such a change will not occur unless the retail network that supplies gasoline is altered and the auto repair sector revamped, changes that would require significant investments and might be strongly resisted by vested interests. However, such large investments might be made attractive if the full cost to the environment is properly internalized in the price of buying and using fossil fuel-driven cars.       This simple example also helps to illustrate the role of cultural factors. It is often suggested that a shift to electric automobiles would be out of the question until electric cars could perform at par with fossil fuel-driven cars, as if cultural norms were static and unchangeable. This claim ignores the fact that preferences could (and probably should) change in favour of clean transportation and that it might be possible to change behaviours, tastes and social views if consumers were confronted with prices for fossil-fuelled cars that fully reflected emissions and other environmental costs. If this was the case, many consumers might find the current performance of electric cars acceptable. In this regard, an example of a rapid change in preferences is reflected in the 2008 introduction of a policy combining bonuses and penalties in France. Reportedly, the introduction of the policy coincided with a sudden 5 per cent drop and subsequent reductions in new cars average CO2 emissions (Durremayer and others, p. 8; World Bank 2012a, p. 56).       The investment challengeDespite the sixfold increase in global investment in renewable energy in the period 2004-2011, investments leading to sustainable development still fall far short of what is needed. The range of estimates is large, reflecting uncertainties about costs that are still not well known; but the large range also reflects differences in approaches and modelling techniques. Despite uncertainties, estimates do suggest that needed investments are large. Synthesizing a compilation of the investment estimates of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), IEA, OECD, and UNEP, a report of the Green Growth Action Alliance (World Economic Forum, 2012) indicates that the additional investments needed to put the world on a sustainable path are at least US$ 0.7 trillion per year between 2010 and 2030 (World Economic Forum, 2013).       To obtain a rough idea of total additional investments in energy-related sectors, one can simply impute the proportional increase in known sectors to those we still do not know and give a range for variation. Total energy-related annual investments in sectors for which there is an estimate amount to US$ 2.1 trillion in a business-as-usual scenario. In addition to this, US$ 0.7 trillion annual investments are needed in these sectors, an increase of 33 per cent, to set the economy on a sustainable pathway. Now, total business-as-usual investments in sectors for which the report does not include an estimate of additional sustainable investments add up to US$ 2.9 trillion. Applying the same proportional increase of known sectors gives an additional investment of US$ 1.6 trillion; and given the sector variability in additional investments, one can think of a range of from US$1.1trillion to US$ 2.4 trillion (table V.1).       It is worth noting that these estimates confirm the view that investing makes good economic sense. The Green Growth Action Alliance reports that, for some sectors, total investments under a sustainable scenario might actually be lower than business-as-usual investments. For example, the IEA estimates compiled by the Green Growth Action Alliance suggest that annual green investments in power and transmission are 8 per cent lower than the business-as-usual figure (World Economic Forum, 2013, table 1.1). Investments might also be lower in, for example, infrastructure for the transport of oil and gas.      GGAA estimates, like any others, are contingent on the policy and technology assumptions of simulated scenarios. The Global Energy Assessment exercise provides useful insights on how assumptions about policies and availability of technologies can affect estimates of needed investments. The Global Energy Assessment estimates total energy supply-related investments at US$ 960 billion in 2010; a figure consistent with the Green Growth Action Alliance compilations (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 2012, chap.17, p. 1254). The annual average total energy investments in the baseline scenario is equal to US$ 1.8 trillion, while the mean of the annual total energy investments needed in sustainable pathways is US$ 2.4 trillion. This means the mean additional annual investment in the 41 scenarios is US$ 0.6 trillion (very close to the GGAA at-least figure of US$ 0.7 trillion). Now, additional sustainable investments vary significantly depending on the assumptions about efficiency demand, mode of transport and portfolio of technologies: the range of additional annual investments in the 41 scenarios starts at the low figure of US$ 0.14 trillion but rises up to US$ 1.16 trillion.       The main driver determining the magnitude of additional investments in the 41 scenarios is efficiency. Pathways stressing energy supply policies have investment tags ranging from US$ 0.72 trillion to US$ 1.16 trillion (figure V.5a). In contrast, pathways emphasizing efficiency tend to necessitate lower additional investments, ranging from US$ 0.14 trillion to US$ 0.65 trillion. Varying technology portfolios reveals interesting investment patterns. Confirming the importance of maintaining flexibility in technology choices, full portfolio pathways tend to have low additional investments (figure V.5b). Portfolios that discard carbon capture and storage technologies tend to have low additional investments, as these are expensive options. Running in the opposite direction, technology portfolios featuring restrictions in the capacity to use renewables or bio-energy raise the range of needed investments. The sharpest upward shift in the range of needed investment is associated with portfolios excluding sink technologies. More restricted portfolios tend to result in some of the highest investment tags, particularly portfolios with no bio-energy, no sink or limited bio-energy. One extreme case illustrates well the importance of maintaining flexibility in technology portfolios. A high-efficiency technology pathway featuring technology restrictions, no bio-carbon storage, no carbon sink technologies and restricted use of bio-energy, turns out to carry an additional investment ticket of US$ 1.08 trillion, way above the US$ 0.32 trillion median investment of efficiency pathways (figure V.5a).           Energy investments differ, of course, by region (figure V.5c). To explore regional investments needs, we should focus on proportional changes, for both baseline and additional sustainable investments might vary significant across regions. While total energy investment in 2010 represents about 2 per cent of global GDP, energy investments in developing countries represent about 3.5 per cent of GPD, but only 1.3 per cent of GDP in developed countries (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 2012 p. 1253). In the Western European Union region, for example, rates are below 1 per cent of GDP, but in the sub-Saharan African region rates are above 3.5 per cent; oil producing regions are characterized by high investment rates, above 5 per cent of GDP (own estimates based on the Global Energy Assessment online database). Additional investments needed to achieve sustainability, relative to the baseline, across the 11 regions and 41 scenarios vary between -18 and 156 per cent. Additional investments cluster in three regional groups: the first group showing high relative investments, comprises sub-Saharan Africa, Central and Eastern Europe and South Asia; the second group showing medium relative investments, includes economies of centrally planned Asia and China, Pacific OECD, other Pacific Asia, Western Europe and North America, and; the third group showing low relative investments, includes the Commonwealth of Independent States, Latin America and the Middle East and Northern Africa. Minimum and maximum investments by region also tend to cluster in these three groups, albeit imperfectly (figure V.6a). Caution should be exercised when interpreting these estimates. For example, negative regional investments tend to be associated with regions that currently engage heavily in the production and export of fossil fuels, which suggests that the global shift to non-fossil fuel sources of energy implies disinvestment in current production capacity. More generally, caution should also be exercised when interpreting the investment tags for developing regions, as there is a tendency to underestimate required investments in energy infrastructure and shelter in developing countries (OConnor, 2009).       The size of additional investments also varies with other factors, among which, timing is  crucial. According to UNEP, the total cost of mitigation policies that begin only after 2020 is 1015 per cent higher than the cost of policies that start mitigation promptly in 2013 (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012, p. 28).       A more significant increase in needed additional investments results from incorporating other investments beyond those directly related to energy. The Green Growth Action Alliance  report indicates that estimates do not include the investment needed to put existent infrastructure on a sustainable track. The Global Energy Assessment report estimates that there are additional needed investments in the demand side of energy ranging from US$ 0.1 trillion to US$ 0.7 trillion (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 2012, p. 1254). These investments include those related to services on engines in cars, boilers in building heating systems and compressors, fans and heating appliances in households, among others. Accounting for the full cost of demand-side energy technologies increases the investment figure by one order of magnitude, to a range between US$ 1 trillion and US$ 3.5 trillion (ibid. p. 1254). These include investments in innovation, market formation and diffusion (ibid., pp. 1691-1695 and 1713-1724).      In contrast, the cost of targeted investments to achieve economic and social inclusion is small. The Global Energy Assessment estimates that policies aimed at providing universal access to clean fuel cooking and electricity will require annual investments ranging between US$ 0.036 trillion and US$ 0.041 trillion (see table V.1 and the above discussion on inclusion). Similarly, IEA estimates at US$ 0.34 trillion the additional investments needed to achieve universal access to clean cooking fuel and electricity. The OECD scenarios simulating policies designed to achieve universal access to an improved water source and sanitation by 2050 find that those policies will require additional annual investments of about US$ 0.005 trillion. One main message stemming from the reviewed scenarios simulating policies designed to achieve energy inclusion is that the investment needed to implement them is well within reach at the global scale.Implementing sustainable developmentThere is an emerging consensus that the world needs to urgently undertake to achieve transformative changes so as to avert increases in greenhouse gas emissions, with potentially catastrophic consequences. Climate change-energy models have made invaluable contributions to our understanding of the range of possible means of transforming the energy system. Less is known about how to proceed in countries and how best to organize international cooperation so as to effectively transform energy systems in developed and developing countries. Based on analytical contributions, a good number of policy proposals addressing the challenges of sustainable development were put forward in anticipation of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. In the present section, we selectively look at three of those proposals and revisit the proposals broached in World Economic and Social Survey, 2009 (United Nations, 2009) and World Economic and Social Survey, 2011 (United Nations, 2011). The three proposals selected encompass the green energy strategies of Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2011), United Nations Environment Programme (2011) and World Bank (2012b). These strategies, which are comprehensive in their coverage of issues, aim at rationalizing the transition from the current state to an alternative path on which, the environment is taken fully into account. These exercises offer valuable insights on alternative means of moving towards sustainable development strategies. The emphasis is on the short term: green growth should focus on what needs to be done in the next 5 to 10 years. (World Bank, 2012a, p. 1). The World Economic and Social Survey (2009 and 2011) takes a more ambitious approach. It argues that the world needs a big-push investment-driven transformation of the energy system. We briefly highlight some of the arguments underlying these proposals.  The road to sustainable development pathwaysOECD proposes to tackle the challenges with an operational policy agenda that can help achieve concrete, measurable progress at the interface between the economy and the environment; a green growth agenda (OECD, 2011b, p. 11). Policymakers seeking to harmonize the economy and the environmental goals in a green policy agenda face three obstacles, namely: (a) low returns to green investment, which leads to (b) lack of investment and (c) slow innovation. To overcome these obstacles, OECD proposes that use be made of a green growth diagnostic tool which classifies the main obstacles to green growth into those causing low economic returns and those causing low capacity to appropriate generated returns, or low appropriability of returns (figure V.6). The first obstacle (low returns) is further categorized as a problem related to: (a) inertia, as reflected in, low returns to research and development and the presence of barriers to competition; or (b) low social returns, as reflected in infrastructure deficiencies and low human capital. The second obstacle, low appropriability of returns, is further specified as: (a) government failure, as reflected in policy unpredictability and perverse subsidies; or (b) market failure, as reflected in the existence of negative externalities and informational imperfections. Once the main obstacles have been identified, OECD proposes that effective institutional arrangements and policy packages be built for the transition towards green growth.       This policy package generates useful guidelines for building green-growth strategies for countries at different levels of development (see table V.2). For example, developed countries may consider enhancing the link between R&D and technological innovation, investing in low-carbon infrastructures and using market-based pricing of externalities. Developing countries, for their part, could focus on policies designed to enable a shift away from carbon-intensive infrastructure, the promotion of energy efficiency, strengthening government capacities and providing incentives for the development, diffusion and transfer of technology. Least developed countries might consider discouraging open-access to natural resources, increasing productivity in the use of natural resources, designing adaptation strategies and investing in infrastructure to support market access (OECD, 2011a, pp. 1-15;  see also OECD, 2011b).       The World Bank sees green growth as the pathway to sustainable development and a vital tool for achieving sustainable development (World Bank, 2012a, p.xi). It proposes a green growth strategy that rests on three pillars:       (a)  Maximizing local and immediate economic or social benefits and avoidance of the lock-in of economies in fossil fuel technologies for several decades (this pillar seeks to prevent irreversibility in the adoption of energy systems and reduce inertia);       (b)  Providing incentives to engage in smart decisionmaking. Examples of the measures covered in this pillar are green accounting (see box II.2), getting prices right so as to overcome behavioural biases, providing incentives and regulations to engage firms in green growth, and using regulations, innovation strategies and industrial policies;       (c) Addressing the problem of financing green growth through the adoption of innovative financing tools designed to tackle high upfront financing needs. The overall strategy allocates different priorities to developed and developing countries (World Bank, 2012a pp.15-22; see also World Bank, 2012b).       One example of the priority-setting that could emerge from this policy framework, mainly under the second pillar, would entail a focus by developing countries, particularly lowincome ones, on two actions: actions that create synergies across the environmental, social and economic dimensions of development; and actions that have high welfare benefits or do not carry large costs (figure V.7). The kind of synergies proposed would result, for example, from a focus on measures to reduce local pollution, a policy that could provide significant welfare benefits to poor families, by leading to improved health and hence improved labour productivity. As regards developed countries, the strategy suggests a concentration on policies that could exert a long-term impact on emissions.      UNEP closely associates green growth with a process that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities (United Nations Environment Programme, 2010 as quoted in United Nations Environment Programme, 2011 p. 102) and characterizes sustainable development as improving the quality of human life within the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems (IUCN/UNEP/WWF (1991, as quoted in United Nations Environment Programme, 2011). UNEP further identifies a series of enabling conditions for a green economy, including reducing subsidies that are harmful to the environment, targeting public investments to green sectors, implementing government policies to encourage innovation and growth and establishing aggressive environmental regulation, among others (United Nations Environment Programme, 2011, pp. 22-23).      World Economic and Social Survey 2009 and 2011 emphasize that prompt, integrated and decisive policies are needed to achieve sustainable development (see the discussion in United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2012). World Economic and Social Survey 2011 specifically views the green economy approach as being fully compatible with sustainable development. Consistent with the magnitude of the investments needed, their urgency, and the broad implications for the rest of the economy and society, the view is that only a strong jump-start can effectively and in a timely manner extract the economy away from the inertia of business as usual and move it towards the transformation of the energy system. Transformative changes would be initiated through a public investment-led big push and decisive public interventions to promote technological innovation and implementation. This approach is not intended to substitute marketson the contrary, it rests on the assumption that only clearly defined sustainable development policies can unleash the power of markets to bring about the needed energy transformation on time. As the World Economic and Social Survey acknowledges that a realistic and desirable path towards sustainable development must allow for rapid economic growth in the developing world, it argues that the transformation of the energy system must include policies crafted to allow developing countries to simultaneously build low-carbon energy systems and accelerate economic growth. It further argues that a carefully crafted public investment-led approach will not disrupt economic balances and could actually crowd in private investment. World Economic and Social Survey macroeconomic simulations of the big-push approach confirm the assumption implicit in climate-energy models that a low-carbon and converging sustainable development pathway is feasible (United Nations, 2009, particularly box IV.4).      The big-push approach is a realistic, well-grounded proposal which incorporates, inter alia, the historical lessons of the New Deal initiative (see United Nations, 2011 and United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2012). The challenge, however, is much bigger now. When compared with that of the mid-twentieth century, the world economy is currently not only larger, but also more affluent, interconnected and natural-resource thirsty (see chap. I of this publication). Public-led investment has proved capable of accomplishing large socioeconomic transformations which would not have been feasible through implementation of incremental policies. A high degree of realism will be needed to properly gauge the dimension and complexity of the obstacles that the world needs to overcome.  The enabling conditions for the transformation of the energy systemMaking low-carbon inclusive growth a reality requires putting in place the set of conditions needed to create an enabling environment. Schematically, these enablers can be organized into four groups: policy space and coherence; international financing; international cooperation; and enabling international institutions: rules and norms. First, the transformation of the energy system will require a policy-setting framework within which developing countries can design and implement industrial policies to accelerate growth, foster green sectors and diversify the industrial and service sectors. Industrial policies have been and continue to be used across a wide range of countries, but many developing countries are constrained by international regulations and practices, notably in the trade and property rights domains. Second, there is a need to make adequate international financing available to developingand, particularly least developedcountries; while domestic sources should be tapped to the extent possible, the size of investments required to promote sustainable development makes international finance indispensable. Third, designing national sustainable strategies demands the integration of complex processes across the macroeconomy, the energy sector, the deployment of technology, labour-market regulations, policies for social and economic inclusion, and the environment. Building national capacities and international cooperation in these areas will be important catalysts for the formulation of coherent sustainable national development strategies. Fourth, of particular importance is strengthening international cooperation to ensure that technological innovation and its adaptation occur where they are most needed and at the lowest possible cost. An important enabler will be a fluid process of technological innovation and adaptation lubricated by efficient technology transfer and cooperation at the regional and international levels.       The magnitude of the endeavour is such that neither Governments nor markets alone can tackle the desired energy transformation with success. While Governments and markets have been successful in increasing the worlds aggregate affluence, they now need to ensure that the entire world population enjoys equitable well-being while re-establishing a balance with respect to the Earths boundaries. This change in priorities will require a new institutional set-up to enable markets to carry out the required sustainable energy transformation. As the global trade system is an  important component of the institutional framework within which markets operate, the world trade system should adopt sustainability as one of its fundamental guiding principles. Meeting the challenge of building policy coherent rules and interventions at global, regional and national levels will be critical to accelerating the required transformation of energy systems. Coherent national policies for sustainable development While global models have contributed significantly to the debate by laying out a number of recommendations on policies and measures for a sustainable energy transformation, there is a need to gain a better understanding of the design and implementation of energy transformation strategies at country level and how to best forge and harness international cooperation. A number of country experiences can shed light on policy alternatives. In the present section, we review some concrete experiences that illustrate the complexity of policy challenges and provide further guidelines for policy design.       The experience in using carbon taxes to pursue green-economy objectives has by now a record spanning more than two decades, mainly involving developed countries. More recently, a number of studies on carbon taxes in developing countries also started to emerge, most of them sponsored by Governments, international organizations and academia. China and South Africa, for example, have been considering the implementation of carbon taxes, but concerns about negative social and economic impacts in different areas have delayed their introduction (see, for example, Mitigating circumstances, 2013; and Birdsal and MacDonald, 2013). Studies suggest that, while taxing carbon can contribute to curbing emissions, this seems to work better in combination with well-defined regulatory measures and complementary policies designed to offset (or compensate) the often regressive income distribution effects of carbon taxes.      Furthermore, carbon or carbon-related taxes might represent an important source of revenue, which raises the issue of how to make best use of them. A simulation exercise probing the effects of raising the price of oil through a tax on domestic consumption in Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (a gas exporting country), Costa Rica (a country where 90 per cent of electricity is hydro-generated) and Uganda (a country dependent on oil imports to satisfy its energy demand) demonstrates the possibility of using carbon-related public revenues to finance economic and social inclusion programmes. (see box V.2 entitled Taxing oil to invest in education) Under the simulation, taxes are increased up to the point where countries collect 2 additional percentage points of GDP in tax revenue. Simulations show that the introduction of this tax reduces oil consumption in productive sectors and among households, which has the effect of reducing emissions, but at the cost of decreasing GDP. Allocating additional revenues to investment helps to slow down the fall in GDP and, in some instances, even results in a net increase in GDP (figure V.8). Most importantly, the use of additional revenues to finance investments in education significantly improves education outcomes. Even though these simulations do not include the impact of higher education on labour productivity, it should be expected that better education would result in higher incomes for higher-skilled workers over the medium and long terms. This exercise clearly illustrates the possibilities of combining low-carbon growth policies with strategies for economic and social inclusion.      The reallocation of resources to investments with a long-term return, such as for infrastructure and education, should also include policies to enhance labour productivity. In addition to investments in formal education, investments in training and the adoption of the skills necessary to design, deploy and maintain sustainable energy systems are key components of a big-push approach to sustainable development.       Further insights centring on the challenge of pursuing sustainable development strategies can be derived from a series of studies that examined the economy-wide implications of accelerating the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals for education, health and sanitation under various financing strategies. These studies suggest that while important synergies arise from the simultaneous pursuit of these three goals, there are also noticeable trade-offs in relation to growth and macroeconomic balances. Simulation results indicate that the additional investment necessary to reach these goals are significant, in the order of 1-4 per cent of GDP (figureV.9).  In these studies, negative macroeconomic effects can be neutralized or even made positive, if countries finance additional investments with foreign grants.      In the World Economic and Social Survey 2011 presentation, the big-push public investment-led strategy does not substitute for private investment and market contributions. Public investments are used to trigger the private investment and market forces that have so far lain dormant and hence are unable to generate the type of changes needed if world demand is to remain within the Earths carrying capacity. However, policymaking also needs to deal with a host of market and public sector failures and to be able to elaborate well-crafted interventions, as proposed in the OECD, World Bank and UNEPs green economy strategies. To illustrate the unexpected ways in which public sector interventions can spur market forces, it is useful to look at how a nationally oriented environmental policy in Sweden later developed into a market-mediated regional trash recycling activity (see box V.3 on policies and markets).      The potential relevance of the big-push approach and its emphasis on comprehensive coherent policies and strong international cooperation is illustrated by the case of Bangladesh which has rightly identified adaptation as the issue of utmost concern when dealing with climate change. Without losing sight of adaptation, the country has also been active in the area of mitigation, with such policies as the promotion of solar renewable sources (United Nations, 2011). Furthermore, Bangladesh is considering an energy strategy aimed at guaranteeing the energy supply needed by the country to continue growing and improving energy security by reducing dependency on imports. One possible approach under consideration for achieving these goals entails basing the energy system on enhanced coal technologies. Use of enhanced coal technologies leads to a reduction in emissions relative to traditional coal technologies, but to an increase relative to pathways associated with renewable sources; and a more extensive use of renewables would reduce the locking in of the country to fossil fuel sources. In the absence of adequate financing and international support, however, Bangladesh should probably choose the enhanced coal energy pathway. Choosing a sustainable pathway might be realistic only under the conditions of a big-push strategy properly financed and assisted (see box V.4 on Bangladesh).       Policies designed to transform energy systems and deploy them in developing countries work best when they are comprehensive, strategic and systematic. Policymaking in these areas needs to overcome the tendency to oversimplify the planning framework in terms of its scope, to focus on a narrow set of energy options, and to ignore trends in other economic and social sectors. Policies will have to specify goals, establish standards for performance, exploit niche markets and adopt a portfolio approach rather than pick a few winning projects or technologies. Policies should be geared towards end users, with specific goals for energy services, markets and the portfolio of technologies to be considered. Given multiple interrelations, the policy focus should be on clusters and should be based on integrated assessments. Examples of integrated approaches to energy policies are the water-energy-food nexus (NEXUS) and the climate-land-energy-water (CLEW) interlinkage. A best-practice energy policy feeding into the national biofuel policy of Mauritius turns out to be inconsistent with respect to future water availability, the cost of extraction and the energy security goals of the country. These inconsistencies were revealed only by an integrated assessment of the biofuel policy which included the potential effects of climate-change on water precipitation (see box V.5 on Mauritius). Increasing the production of biofuels is a natural candidate for the role of addressing energy insecurity and rising greenhouse gas emissions. Burkina Faso, like many other developing countries, would do well to consider expanding the production of biofuels to address energy security concerns and cope with greenhouse gas emissions, even at the cost of accelerating the rapid deforestation that affects the country. However, an integrated assessment recommended the implementation of policies that intensify the use of land for agriculture production (see discussion in chap. III). Even if there are inevitable trade-offs, increasing the intensity of land use leads to net reductions in emissions, contained deforestation and improved energy security (see box V.6 on Burkina Faso).       Integrated energy assessment and planning constitute a critical tool for the design of sustainable strategies, particularly in developing countriesand even more so in those countries that are likely to be affected by climate variability. However, these countries rarely have the capacities needed to undertake such analysis. Widespread access to integrated energy assessment and planning tools should be part of the international cooperation framework for sustainable development. It is important to harness the expertise on energy systems acquired by a number of research institutions throughout the world to assist developing countries in the task of building sustainable energy systems. It will thus be important to establish a network of independent centres for energy systems analysis with a mandate to assist the design and implementation of sustainable energy plans in developing and least developed countries.      More broadly, significant investments will be needed in technological innovation and adaptation, supported by efficient technology transfers and cooperation at the regional and international levels (United Nations, 2011).  Sustainable energy systems in a global development agendaThe design of sustainable energy systems as part of national development strategies calls for capacities and skills that are not abundant in many countries of the world. Building such capacities will enable countries to undertake transformative energy plans that would otherwise be considered completely out of reach.       The transformation of the energy system should be a core element in a post-2015 development agenda. The four dimensions integrated in the UN-System view of the post-2015 development agenda provide a useful reference for framing the transformation of the energy system (System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2012).  Each of the four dimensions can be mapped to further detail for relevant energy transformative policies. For example, the environmental sustainability dimension can be directly linked to the promotion of renewables and energy efficiency, as well as linked with integrated energy policies (figure V.11). The inclusive economic development dimension can relate to policies for reducing dependence on traditional biomass energy and policies aimed at providing universal access to electricity, among others. The inclusive social development dimension can be mapped to integrated policies for ensuring access to modern energy and food security, and to strategies for integrating access to water and provisioning energy, for example. The dimension of peace and security can be detailed for policies designed to lessen dependence on energy imports or policies for diversifying sources of energy. Member States currently working to define the main threads of the post-2015 development agenda might take note of the importance of explicitly incorporating energy goals.  