World Economic and Social Survey 2016
Building resilience to climate change: an opportunity for reducing inequalities
Chapter I: Building resilience to climate change by addressing inequalities
Key Messages
* Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme weather and climate events affecting all countries in the world. Because of their geographical location however, developing countries are at higher risk. Left unattended climate hazards are likely to increase the incidence of poverty and inequalities, exacerbate food insecurity and health problems among other hardships that may reverse years of development efforts 
* Climate hazards have differential impacts on people and communities largely determined by deep rooted socio-economic inequalities that leave them disproportionately exposed and vulnerable to extreme weather and climate events. The universal consensus reached upon the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a unique opportunity to building climate change resilience by addressing the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty, marginalization and social exclusion and thus increase vulnerability to climate hazards
* Consistent with the ambition of the UN General Assembly resolution Transforming the World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, policies to build climate change resilience have to be part of a transformative agenda towards poverty eradication, human development and climate resilience 
I. The international consensus for sustainable development
In 2015, world leaders took significant steps to build sustainable development pathways with the promise of eradicating poverty, reversing environmental degradation and achieving equitable and inclusive societies. On 25 September 2015, heads of State and Government gathered in the United Nations Headquarters, in New York, to adopt the agenda that will drive global efforts towards sustainable development up until 2030, Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Previous and subsequent efforts gave impetus to the adoption of this agenda. 
On 27 July 2015, the General Assembly had endorsed the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development that put forward a global framework to mobilize resources and facilitate policy implementation for sustainable development (United Nations General Assembly, 2015b). With a specific focus on disaster risks, on 3 June 2015, the United Nations General Assembly had also endorsed the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,  2015-2030, agreed in the Third World Conference. This framework recognizes the primary responsibility of Governments to reduce disaster risk and loss of lives, and preserve livelihoods, which will be critical to avoid development reversals in the future. The new agenda for sustainable development also recognizes that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time whose adverse impacts undermine the ability of all countries to achieve sustainable development. This concern was taken up by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), whose 21stsession announced, on 12 December 2015, quantitative commitments to reduce their greenhouse gas (GHGs) emissions, the major driver of climate change, and support to adaptation efforts.
These historic agreements are part of a global consensus on the need to address the inextricable links between the human development and environmental agendas. They signal universal acknowledgement—from developed and developing countries—of the need for an integrated and coherent approach to tackle global development challenges, including consistent adaptation to climate change. Recognition of the urgency to move towards sustainable development pathways comes at times when “…warming of the climate is unequivocal… [and is] increasing the likelihood of severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems” (IPCC, 2014, pp.2, 8). 
The World Economic and Social Survey (WESS) 2016: “Climate change resilience: an opportunity for reducing inequalities” contributes to identify some of the implementations challenges of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Building consistency across the economic, social, environmental dimensions of development is not a simple task. Sustainable development policies need to recognize the multiple interactions across these dimensions, the trade-offs that emerge from pursuing competing objectives in the economic, social or environmental fields and the opportunities to build positive synergies across them.  
The relationship between the economic and social dimensions of development is nowadays better understood owing to the extensive body of research and the experience of countries in the last decades. The trickle down paradigm that prevailed in the 1980s was seriously challenged when new research and country experiences demonstrated that economic growth did not necessarily translate into human development. This understanding led to a major revision of development policies to improve the consistency between economic growth and human development objectives. Developing countries made major efforts to increase investments in education, health, water and sanitation and experimented with new regulations and incentives to redirect private investments towards job creation and larger development objectives. However, these efforts were more often than not disconnected from efforts to meet environmental goals (United Nations, 2016).
Hence, there is much less experience and policy guidance on the integration of the various aspects of the environment into development policy. Building consistency across the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development policy will be a core challenge. It will require greater technical capacities among policy makers to recognize the inter-linkages across the multiple dimensions of development. It will also require strengthening capacities to negotiate commonly agreed objectives building from individual group interests. 
The complexity in addressing the links between the human development and environmental agendas is compounded by the uncertainty surrounding the mega-trends that will shape development prospects and policy. Despite overall convergence in average per capita income across countries, within-country inequalities are increasing; globalization and technological change; demographic dynamics; rapid urbanization and the risks emerging from climate change will impose additional pressures towards increasing inequalities both between and within countries. These mega-trends will undoubtedly shape the type of interventions needed to address multiple development challenges in the decades to come.
WESS 2016, Climate Change Resilience: an opportunity to reduce inequalities seeks to contribute to this debate. From the specific angle of climate change resilience, the Survey helps to recognize the challenges of strengthening the capacity of countries and people to avoid development reversals from climate hazards. Due to the persistence of structural inequalities, there has been recognition that climate hazards have a differential impact on people and communities; it has been also recognized that the association between climate hazards and inequalities has not been sufficiently researched. From this recognition, the Survey tackles the issue of climate change resilience with a focus on the population groups and communities that are disproportionately vulnerable. It argues that, in the absence of far-reaching transformative policies at the national level, supported by effective global partnerships, building climate resilience will remain elusive and poverty and inequalities will likely exacerbate.
II. Climate change and variability and the impact of climate hazards
The UNFCCC defines climate change as a change in the climate attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is, in addition to natural climate variability, observed over comparable time periods.  Climate change takes place over a period of decades and centuries; what people experience in their daily life is climate variability and climate extremes.
There is consensus in the scientific community that climate change is increasing the frequency, intensity, spatial extent, duration, and timing of extreme weather and climate events, which results in unprecedented climate hazards (IPCC, 2012, p. 7). Climate hazards are understood as the potential occurrence of a climate-induced physical event that may cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, and environmental resources. The destruction generated by climate hazards when they hit countries and people with greater frequency, may derail years of development efforts.
For the 21st century, scenarios unambiguously predict continuing slow onset changes such as higher surface and ocean temperature, ocean acidification and global rise of sea level. Scenarios also predict increased or more intensified extreme weather related events, such as heat waves and precipitation extremes. In particular, scenarios predict most severe effects in tropical areas, where most developing countries are located.
Development trends are surrounded by large uncertainties emanating from the uncertainty in the estimation of future climate and compounded by the interaction of climate change with mega-trends related to demographic dynamics, urbanization, globalization, and technological progress. In order to somewhat address this uncertainty, the international research community has adopted a set of narratives that consider possible pathways for development, according to the estimation of future scenarios produced by different combinations of mega-trends. These narratives are known as Shared Socio-Economic Pathways (SSPs). Each pathway is a reference for describing plausible alternative trends in the evolution of society and ecosystems over a century timescale. Each SSP can lead to distinctive economic and environmental circumstances. Estimates show that income poverty and inequality are higher in those scenarios where proper adaptation is lacking (SSP4) and in those cases where there are little mitigation and adaptation efforts (SSP3) (box I.1).
Box I.1.Uncertainty on prospects for the global distribution of income in 2050 based on alternative development pathways
Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) were firstly proposed by Kriegler et al. (2012) to delineate development pathways for the world comprising details on population growth (by age, sex, and education), urbanization, and economic development (generally proxied by GDP growth). SSPs have served to create a correspondence between socio-economic pathways and Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). RCPs represent greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and concentration pathways for the world, under different levels of mitigation. Together, SSPs and RCPs help to establish the link between socio-economic challenges for mitigation and adaptation. The table summarizes the basic story lines for each of the five existing SSPs.
Alternative shapes of the global distribution of per capita income in the year 2050 based on different SSP assumptions have been determined using simulation results from the Global Income Distribution Dynamics database of the World Bank (Osorio-Rodarte, 2016; van der Mensbrugghe, 2015). As shown in the figure, depending on the path taken, the overall welfare, inequality and level of poverty varies significantly. In those cases where adaptation efforts are weak (SSP3 and SSP4), poverty incidence is highest.
Left unattended, the aforementioned manifestations of climate change are likely to increase poverty incidence and inequalities by slowing down economic growth; exacerbating food insecurity, health problems and heat stress; resulting in surface water scarcity and increased exposure to storms and precipitation extremes, coastal flooding, landslides, air pollution and droughts. They may also induce displacement of people and involuntary migration.
Weather-related disasters are becoming more frequent in all corners of the world, reaching 6.457 events in 2005-2015, which represents an average of 333 disasters per year. The disasters claimed more than 600,000 lives and affected about 4.2 billion people during the same period (table I.1). Floods feature as the major cause of deaths and affected lives of people most. Together with storms, millions, if not billions of people are exposed to water-related hazards. Land related disasters, such as droughts, landslides and wildfires, are other major factors affecting people’s lives and their livelihoods.
A. Uneven impacts across countries
Not all countries experience the effects of climate hazards on their human and natural systems in the same way and proportion. Scenarios unambiguously predict that tropical areas are at higher risk to climate hazards. According to the Notre Dame-Global Adaptation Index (ND-GAIN), for example, countries with the highest risk of climate change are concentrated in Africa and South and Southern East Asia where there is poor capacity to prevent (or even cope) with most negative impacts (figure I.1). Some high-income countries (United States, Italy and Japan) exhibit relatively high risk levels due to high exposure to climate hazards, but they possess greater capacity (resources) to manage risks.
In absolute terms, total economic losses owing to climate hazards are most significant for high income countries. However, because of the distribution of risks and the differences in adaptive capacity, the greater economic losses relative to national income are observed for countries with lower level of income. Low-income countries lost an estimated 5 percent of GDP during the 1995-2015 period (figure I.2).
Moreover, in countries at low income levels (represented by the red circle in Figure I.3), inequality is associated with higher vulnerability to climate change—which is represented by the lower values along the horizontal axis. At higher levels of income (red square), conversely, low inequality is associated with lower climate change vulnerability.
Countries with high reliance on agriculture, mostly least developed countries, are particularly vulnerable. Current agricultural practices are a major contributor to environmental degradation through GHG emissions and poor management of land and water resources. At the same time, agriculture is very sensitive to climate change. As temperature rises, crop productivity is predicted to increase at mid-high latitudes—and to decrease at lower latitudes. Warming, together with changes in water precipitation and unpredicted climate variability, affects the timing and length of growing seasons and yields, with strong impacts on farmers’ livelihoods and food security more generally (UN/DESA, 2011, p.p. 74-76). There is evidence for the period 1981-2003 that land productivity decreased in sub-Saharan Africa, South-East Asia and southern China, north-central Australia and in the pampas and swathes of boreal forest in Siberia and North America (Ibid).
According to IPCC projections, countries in Africa are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts. By 2020, between 75 and 250 million people in Africa are projected to be exposed to increased water stress due to climate change and yields in some countries could be reduced by up to 50 per cent as a consequence. Agricultural production, including access to food, in many African countries is projected to be severely compromised. By 2080, an increase of 5 to 8 per cent of arid and semi-arid land in Africa is projected under a range of climate scenarios. And the projected cost of adaptation could amount to 5 to 10 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
In the worst cases, climate change and the associated sea level rise threaten the very existence of some small island developing States (such as Kiribati and Tuvalu), because of the latent risks that their territories become submerged under water. Other island countries are facing severe drought and water shortages.
B. Uneven impacts across population groups
The impacts of climate hazards are not only uneven across countries but they are also felt differently across population groups. Identifying particularly vulnerable groups globally and at country level remains challenging. Current information systems are not adequate to follow trends at the intersection between climate related events and socio-economic vulnerabilities. People living in low lying coastal areas and dry lands, in mountain and remote areas and population groups whose livelihoods rely on products from the forest are particularly at risk, yet basic information with regards to population size, socio-economic characteristics and risk factors that may help to identify those remains in the form of very rough approximations.
1. Low lying coastal areas
The rapid increase in the number of people living near the coast is a manifestation of the demographic, urbanization and climatic trends mentioned above. Despite the increased frequency of water-related risks such as sea-level rise and coastal erosions, more and more people in both developing and developed countries have settled in low-lying coastal areas, exposing themselves to greater risks (see figure I.4). A study by the US Census Bureau shows that since 1960 there has been a steady increase in the population living in coastal areas of the United States and concludes that the trend is driven by social, economic and environmental factors and is expected to continue (Wilson and Fischetti, 2010). 
The fishing population was estimated to have increased to 43.5 million by 2006. “The absolute growth in numbers [is] largely explained by the wide expansion of the aquaculture sector. Fishers, aqua-culturists and those supplying services and goods to them assure the livelihoods and well-being of a total of about 520 million people, 7.9 per cent of the world’s population” (FAO, undated). However, exploitation and climate change are threatening collapse of fishing livelihoods (Jackson, 2001). This situation is problematic because the fishing industry has historically played a major role in providing food security and income, and more recently aquaculture has played a rapidly growing role. It is traditionally low-wage or subsistence based such that its demise would be expected to affect large population groups.
The problem is particularly acute for developing regions where, according to Neumann et al. (2015), 11 per cent (518 million out of 4,912 million) of the population was living in low-elevation coastal zones (that is, zones less than 10 meters above sea level) in 2000 (table I.2). Of this population, nearly 30 per cent (148 million) were living in a 100-year flood plain (that is, a plain that has a 1 per cent probability of being hit by a flood event in any given year. The same study predicts that 798 million people (about 11 per cent of the developing regions population) will live in a low-elevated coastal zone and 245 million in a 100-year flood plain in 2030. These estimates suggest greater exposure to climate hazards and thus larger climate-related human costs in the future if effective climate adaptation and mitigation policies are not in place. As of 2000, 87per cent of the flood plain population were in Asia. In Africa, particularly, the same authors warn that high rates of population growth and rapid urbanization (from 35 per cent in 2000 to 47 per cent urban in 2030) “will exacerbate the already high vulnerability of many African coast countries.” 
In Liberia, for example, the coastal population is generally poor with high rates of unemployment and their social indicators, such as access to health and education, are low (UNDP, 2010). A large proportion of the coastal community live in temporary or poorly constructed housing in unplanned or illegal settlements, with very little physical protection from storm surges. Climate-change induced sea-level rise, together with more frequent and intensified storms and sea surges can have catastrophic impacts on the lives and livelihoods of residents. 
Without proper adaptation policies and better infrastructure in place, more people are likely to expose themselves to climate hazards, particularly to floods, the major cause for deaths, injuries and displacements (recall table I.1).  In addition, economic damages are likely to become more significant because economic activities, physical assets and wealth will be more concentrated in the coastal area at the same time that the numbers of residents is on the rise.
2. Dry lands and mountain remote areas
Large vulnerable populations can also be found in dry lands and mountain and remote areas.  Populations in these areas largely comprise nomadic, semi-nomadic and sedentary agricultural inhabitants. Large areas of populated dry lands with growing subsistence populations particularly pose challenges to agricultural development and food security in Africa and large parts of central and southern Asia. It is estimated that nearly 2 billion inhabitants in the developing regions were vulnerable to desertification and drought in 1995, for which latest data are available and the number is considered to be increasing due to population growth and migration, as in the case of coastal zones. According to MDG reports for Ghana and Kenya, the proportion of the population in extreme poverty declined in many regions of these countries, but their poorest and most remote parts witnessed rising poverty rates (Johnston, 2016). 
3. Deforestation
According to the FAO, the world’s forest cover is about 4 billion hectares in 2015, covering about 30 per cent of the Earth’s total land area (FAO 2016).  FAO’s assessment reveals that deforestation accounted for the loss of approximately 13 million hectares per year between 2000 and 2005, while natural expansion of forests and forest plantations increased 5.7 million hectares per year during the same period.  In sum, an annual total net loss of forest cover is estimated at 7.3 million hectares per year.
Forests are estimated to contribute to the livelihoods of at least 1.6 billion people in the world, with some 60 million people, mainly indigenous communities, living within forests and another 350 million highly dependent on forests. The forest industry, both formal and informal, is roughly estimated to employ 50 million people in the world.
Indigenous people, in particular, are under siege as their livelihoods are seriously affected due to altering the ecosystem balances. Local human activities that are being undertaken in and near forests further accelerate deforestation and degradation. They mostly include unsustainable logging, conversion of forests into agricultural land, conversion of coastal mangrove forests for aquaculture, forest fires, mining, infrastructure and the expansion of human settlements.
Deforestation increases the risk of communities to disasters. Forest degradation lowers the capacity of forests to provide the community with livelihood resources to withstand and recover from disasters. Deforestation is known to cause severe floods, river basin flooding, flash floods, mudslides and landslides (Hammill et al., 2005).  Deforestation leads to an increased number of disasters and extensive damage.
The close relationship of indigenous people with their natural environment makes them particular sensitive to the effects of climate change (Baird, 2008). In the worst cases, their ways of life and even their existence are being threatened by climate change. For example, in the Arctic, where temperature rises are most noticeable, there are some 400,000 indigenous peoples, which include the Sami of northern Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia. Herding reindeer is a way of life for them. The Sami people noticed signs of climate change as early as the mid-1980s when winter rainfall increased. Higher temperatures and increased rainfalls began to make it difficult for reindeer to reach the lichen they eat. When temperatures drop, the lichen is covered by ice and many reindeer is likely to starve.  In addition, the thinning of the Arctic ice has made tracking reindeer herding more dangerous, as the local knowledge inherited about safe herding tracking is no longer useful. 
C. Uneven impacts within population groups
Although large population groups are exposed to climate hazards, as discussed, some people and communities within these groups are particularly vulnerable. Nepal, for example, a least developed country, has experienced increasing temperatures, erratic rain and snowfall and the unpredictable beginning of monsoon seasons. These climate related manifestations have caused delayed planting of crops and reduced water availability, leading to slow growth and decreased crop production. Erratic rain and snowfall are the hazards most concerned by all farmers because they have damaged crops during the harvesting season and, as a result, they have increased uncertainty in farming productivity. These hazards have had a direct impact on livelihoods as most of the primary crop production has been based on rain-fed cultivation, but, importantly, the impacts are not uniform among people and communities. The differential impact of climate hazards in Nepal emerge from a recent study (Gentle et al., 2014), which found that the severity of climate related impacts depends on the geographical location and the vulnerability of households that is determined by a number of socio-economic characteristics. Based on interviews conducted, the number of climate hazards experienced by households was largely concentrated among the poor. On average poor households experienced 2.63 climate hazards in the 6 years period of the study; better-off households experienced 1.76 hazards on average. Among poor households, 6.3 per cent of their members were injured or killed and 81.3 per cent experienced damages on their houses, land or livelihoods. For well-off households these percentages of incidence were 2.6 and 55.3 per cent, respectively.
In the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC, people are considered to be at risk when they are faced with potentially adverse consequences of an uncertain outcome and where something of value is at stake in the human and natural systems—such as human lives, livelihoods and health, economic, social and cultural assets and service flows out of them, ecosystems and species (IPCC, 2014). In this framework, the intersection between the occurrence of climate hazards and the exposure and vulnerability of people and natural systems to them is the central source of risk (figure I.5). Exposure refers to the presence of people (including their livelihoods), ecosystems and species, economic, social, or cultural assets in places that could be adversely affected by climate hazards. Vulnerability is defined as the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected, which encompasses a variety of concepts and elements such as sensitivity or susceptibility to harm, and lack of capacity to cope and adapt. Vulnerability and exposure are thus implicitly determined by the condition of poverty, marginalization and social exclusion affecting specific population groups; which in most cases are determined by pre-existent socio-economic inequalities.
Except for a few countries at very low levels of development where poor living conditions are the general norm, in most cases, poverty, marginalization and social exclusion are the result of deep entrenched inequalities in access to physical and financial assets; opportunities in the access to quality health services, education and employment, as well as through voice and political participation; and, in the norms that perpetuate discrimination. These are structural inequalities because of the long-lasting, pervasive inequalities in outcomes they lead to, which we observe in many societies. Cultural, institutional and political regimes that define differential rights to people according to different status, be it gender, tribal, ethnic or racial markers, have reproduced these inequalities over time. Such unequal relationships are usually reproduced by unequal representation in decision-making processes in the society.
Structural inequalities are rooted in social norms or codes that define, for example, a specific gender-based division of labour within and outside the household, and in (formal or informal) contracts that establish dependency relationships between tenants and landlords for example. Unfair (often unwritten) codes against women perpetuate gender divisions, and unequal control of assets. Such perpetuated inequalities can also be found in ethnic, tribal or racial divisions as well as geographical segregation between urban and rural areas for example. Structural inequalities prevent those in the disadvantageous status from fully participating in socio-economic and political activities in society leading to situations of poverty, marginalization and social exclusion.
Structural inequalities matter when examining impacts of climate hazards on people and communities. People and communities whose livelihoods depend on natural resources with few options to diversify their income sources; without appropriate access to insurance and financial markets; with low levels of education and inadequate access to health services; among many other manifestations of poverty and inequality, are relatively more exposed and vulnerable to climate hazards. 
Building climate change resilience, to be effective, must address the processes underlying such structural inequalities. In the absence of effective actions, climate hazards are likely to exacerbate these inequalities leading to increasing poverty, marginalization and social exclusion.
III. Climate change resilience in the agenda for sustainable development
Building climate resilience hence provides policy makers with an opportunity to address the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty, marginalization and social exclusion, and thus increase the risks to climate hazards. Actions to build climate resilience cannot wait. The evidence presented above clearly points to the great economic, human and environmental losses that climate hazards have brought about and, left unattended, these manifestations are likely to continue. Recent data suggest that the world has already warmed 0.85 degrees Celsius from pre-industrial levels and will continue to warm even if GHG emissions were completely halted right now. Thus, the consequences from a warmer planet will continue to challenge the capacity of countries to prevent devastating impacts on people and ecosystems. 
Building climate resilience will then demand strengthening the capacity to cope and adapt, including through addressing the processes underlying structural inequalities. Relative to mitigation, adaptation has received less attention in the discussions around climate change, and only recently efforts towards adaptation are being incorporated into the global policy agenda. There are a number of reasons for this: i) adaptation is the typical case of a public good which requires explicit public interventions to produce it at socially desirable levels; ii) adaptation is complex and difficult to address as it requires actions in the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development, depending on the specific context of each country; and, iii) there is no clear metrics to assess adaptation impacts; that is, unlike mitigation that has a clearly defined metrics in tones of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, assessing adaptation efforts require a larger number of indicators closely related to wider development efforts.
Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes the inexorable need of adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate hazards and addressing inequalities. The integrated nature of these challenges and the capacity of integrated policies to generate much needed transformative changes to address them will be at the centre of the 2030 Agenda’s implementation. 
A. Inter-related challenges
The 17 goals and 169 targets contained in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda, explicitly elaborate on the inter-linkages across the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development that are relevant for this Survey. More specifically, they provide the framework to the implementation of policies and plans to address the underlying causes of poverty, vulnerability and climate change risk.
This is owing to the recognition that all challenges are interrelated. For example, SDG 13 endorses the urgency of taking action to combat climate change and its impacts by calling for actions to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate hazards; to integrate climate change measures into national policies; and to improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning. The inter-linkages between climate change and other dimensions of development are also well reflected in other SDG goals. If the frequency and intensity of climate hazards increase, it will be harder for countries to end poverty and hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, promote sustainable agriculture, and ensure healthy lives, among others (goals 1 through 3). Furthermore, the sustainability of water and energy systems (goals 6 and 7) and the safety and resilience of infrastructure, cities and human settlements (goals 9 and 11) will be at stake. Likewise, the impact of climate hazards undermines the ability of countries to achieve sustained growth and development and will make it harder to achieve full employment and decent work (goal 8). 
In building climate change resilience one of the most critical policy challenges will be acting upon the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty and increase the vulnerability and exposure of people and communities to climate hazards. SDG 10 explicitly addresses the goal of reducing inequality within and among countries, including targets to improve the income of the bottom 40 per cent of the population; promoting the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic status; eliminating discriminatory laws, policies, and practices; and achieving fiscal, wage and social protection policies for greater equality. With references to universality, many other targets in the SDG framework provide the basis to reducing inequality in its multiple dimensions, from access to key basic services such as health, education, water, sanitation and energy (goals 3-4 and 6-8), gender (goal 5) and inclusive economic growth (goal 8).
Meeting all these goals will require truly transformative policies to address structural inequalities and avoid development reversals at a time when climate hazards continue to be a source of poverty and increased inequalities. 
B. Transformative policies for climate resilience
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda brings a high level of complexity to policy decision making. Building coherence across the various dimensions of development requires better information systems, improved analytical capacities to bring the scientific evidence into policy making and greater capacity to build political consensus around priority policy areas. The title of the General Assembly resolution: Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development introduces the level of ambition that should drive development efforts in the next 15 years. Implementation of this agenda will require profound changes on the vision and the policies required to drive sustainable development efforts. In building resilience to climate change, one of the most critical challenges will be acting upon the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty and increase the vulnerability and exposure of people to climate hazards. Without truly transformative policies to address structural inequalities, climate hazards will continue to be a source of poverty and greater inequalities. 
A transformative agenda to build climate change resilience requires, at least, three fundamental changes in the policy making processes: i) the adoption of a longer term strategic vision of development; ii) an integrated and balanced approach to address the inter-linkages among the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development; and iii) improved capacity of policy making systems to incorporate a wider spectrum of interests (stakeholders) in support of inclusive decision making, particularly vulnerable population groups traditionally excluded from political and decision making processes.
The broad international consensus that underpins the 2030 Agenda provides a unique opportunity to strengthen the policy-making systems in a way that can effectively lead the transformation required for sustainable development, including climate resilience. The challenge, going forward, is on the adoption of national policies that, consistent with the ambition of the 2030 Agenda, will drive efforts towards poverty eradication, human development and climate resilience.
Moderating or avoiding risks associated with climate change involves both mitigation (stopping future warming) and adaptation (finding better or safer ways to live in the warming planet).  Unquestionably, the only way to prevent the adverse consequence of climate change on human and natural systems is through mitigation.  Effective policies for adaptation however, are urgently needed and may help the double purpose of preventing the negative impacts from climate hazards and to slow down climate change. The consequences of a warming planet will persist in the next decades, perhaps centuries, even if GHG emissions were completely halted immediately, due to the cumulative total emissions of CO2 up to now (IPCC, 2013). Thus, policies for adaption towards a climate resilient future are an immediate imperative, especially in the context of developing countries, where the impacts of climate change are already causing large human and economic losses as shown above.
Climate-related policies have long been biased towards mitigation and only a small share of the climate financing has been directed to adaptation. Since the publication of the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC (IPCC, 2007), greater attention, albeit not as sufficient as needed, is being placed to the wider economic and social inequalities that determine vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards and thus, to the need to bring disaster risk management, human development and climate resilience into coherent national sustainable development policies (Noble et al., 2014, p. 836).
From past country experiences there is an extensive literature on alternative interventions in response to extreme climate hazards. There is less experience and recognition of the challenges posed by slow setting events and by the accumulation of weather related hazards, both of which can have devastating consequences on livelihoods. In the absence of government support even small changes in temperature or in rain and wind patterns can push people into poverty traps (IPCC, 2014, p. 802-806). Those most exposed and vulnerable are also those who are already economically and socially disadvantaged and those least likely to have access to support systems.
Adaptation as the process of adjustment to actual or potential climate and its impacts on human systems with the objective of decreasing or avoiding risks must be placed in the largest development context of each country, which is the only way to ponder the transformative changes needed. The structural inequalities that shape livelihood trajectories are specific to national and local contexts. Effective adaptation must recognize and act upon the economic, social and environmental stressors that increase the exposure and vulnerability of people and their livelihoods to climate hazards (IPCC, 2014, p. 818).
To the extent that climate change presents a public goods problem (one that produces socially undesirable results), public policies have an important role to play in the provision of public goods for adaptation. Information and accurate climate forecasts; public infrastructure; flood control systems; early warning systems; knowledge and technology are essential pubic goods for adaptation but given their public good nature, they cannot be adequately provided by the private sector. 
In the presence of large development gaps and incomplete markets, public policies also have an important role to play in creating the incentives and regulations for the private sector to increase provision of the goods and services that facilitate climate change adaptation among vulnerable groups. Inadequate access to credit and insurance markets constrain people’s options to invest and protect their assets when affected by shocks. Creating the incentives to expand access to credit and insurance markets are examples of areas where government incentives would contribute to reducing the structural inequalities that constrain the capacity of people to diversify livelihoods and to adapt to climate change. 
Climate change resilience defined as the capacity of social, economic and environmental systems to respond or reorganize to maintain its essential functions, identity and structure, while maintaining its capacity for adaptation, learning and transformation, may drive the way towards sustainable development, as long as the structural inequalities that drive poverty, social exclusion and vulnerability are reduced (box I.2).
Climate resilience refers to a dynamic process of “bouncing forward” (as opposed to "bouncing back to what it was"), reacting to crises by moving up to a new state that is more sustainable in the current environment. (Shaw (2012), p.309)  This view of resilience building process is often called evolutionary resilience as it is not a return to normality, but rather the ability of complex human and natural systems to change, adapt and crucially transform in response to climate hazards (Davoudi, 2012).
Evolutionary resilience advocates that the very nature of systems may change over time with or without an external disturbance, and small-scale changes in systems can amplify and cascade into major shifts. The tools used on evolutionary resilience-building are used to facilitate the creation of flexible social processes and institutions with multi-layered governance structures (including participation of all stakeholders) that allow for learning, adaptive capacity and assessment of development options.
IV. Organization of chapters 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will require in-depth review of the national policy frameworks that will drive the world towards sustainability.  With high confidence, one of the conclusions from the IPCC report in 2014 is that, as a result of a changing climate “…livelihoods, well-being, poverty alleviation and development are already undermined and will continue to be eroded into the future..” (p.816).  WESS 2016 seeks to improve understanding about the complex challenge of preventing adverse impacts, and in some cases, development reversals from climate hazards at the same time as closing existing socio-economic development gaps. 
Following this introduction, Chapter II reviews the literature on the impact of climate change on human systems and stresses the need to advance understanding about the link between climate change and inequalities. The chapter builds on the idea that climate hazards and inequalities are locked in a vicious cycle, whereby climate hazards affect disproportionately people afflicted by socio-economic vulnerability. If resources are not adequate to recover from climate hazards, inequality, in its multiple dimensions, will deepen as a result.  Using country studies documented in the specialized literature, the chapter reviews the economic, social and political channels through which climate hazards affect human lives and livelihoods. It argues that the magnitude of impacts from climate hazards depends on the level of exposure, susceptibility to damage and capacity to cope and recovery of people; largely determined by pre-existent socio-economic inequalities. The review of the literature in the chapter serves to highlight the need to improve understanding about the links between climate hazards and inequalities, both conceptually and empirically through the production of better data and information on the intersection of climate risks and socio-economic vulnerabilities and through the development of integrated methodologies to assess climate change risks.
Chapter III introduces the methodologies used in integrated climate change assessments. To the extent that the occurrence and the impacts from climate change have a high degree of uncertainty, integrated assessments provide robust estimates of plausible outcomes and policy options, when taking into account the inter-linkages across the environmental, economic and social dimensions of development. The chapter argues for the need to further the use of these methodologies to sharpen the analysis in three inter-related areas: i) on issues related to adaptation and resilience to climate hazards; ii) on a broader analysis of the economy-wide feasibility of policies for climate resilience; and iii) on a systematic analysis of inequalities. Adoption of these methodologies, as part of policy decision making processes would improve the knowledge base and the policy options in countries seeking to build climate change resilience as an integral part of sustainable development policies.   
Chapter IV introduces the complexity of policy decision making processes when pursuing multiple objectives. To the extent that pre-existent inequalities impose differential impacts on people and communities, policies to build climate change resilience and sustainable development require addressing immediate needs but also the structural inequalities that impose disproportionate exposure and vulnerability to climate hazards. The chapter argues for the need to improve substantive policy integration and coherence with a focus on livelihoods, including broader participation of all stakeholders to identify development objectives, build synergies, and address the underlying causes of vulnerability
Chapter V will explore international cooperation in three areas: international financing for climate change adaptation; the development of improved systems of information and data sharing and strengthened cooperation to expedite technology transfer and support to capacity development.

Chapter II: Interlinkages between Climate Change and Inequality
Main messages
1. Climate hazards and inequalities are locked in a vicious cycle. Climate hazards affect disproportionately the poor and vulnerable groups by:  (i) increasing their exposure to their occurrence; (ii) increasing their susceptibility to damage; and (iii) decreasing their ability to cope with and recover from the damages caused when they occurred.
2. Existing exposure and vulnerability have been shaped by historical inequalities. Structural factors, left unattended, will perpetuate this vicious cycle by limiting the access of disadvantaged groups to much needed private, public and social resources to cope with and recover from climate related shocks.
3. Exposure to climate hazards is influenced by inequalities in livelihoods and asset positions, political and administrative restrictions, and entrenched patterns of social exclusion. 
4. Susceptibility to climate hazards depends on economic status and the existence of public and social support structures and infrastructure. Given the same level of exposure, disadvantaged groups are more susceptible to damage from adverse effects of climate change. People living in poverty are also more susceptible to the diseases that many climate hazards help to spread, including malaria and water borne diseases that cause diarrhoea.
5. Groups that are disadvantaged in terms of economic status and access to public and social support systems have lower capacity to cope and recover from climate hazards. People in such groups have less resources to rebuild their livelihoods, have fewer assets to sell, have less access to public services, and are part of social networks that are in similar conditions. 
6. Public policies have an important role to play in addressing the structural determinants of inequality that increase the exposure and vulnerability of people to climate hazards. Transformative policies are needed to break the vicious cycle between inequalities and climate change. 
I. Introduction
Proper recognition of the challenges of strengthening the capacity of countries and people to avoid development reversals from climate hazards stars with understanding the interlinkages between climate hazards and inequalities. Not all inequalities and their root causes are the same; they are multi-dimensional and some more than others need to be most quickly addressed to build resilience to climate hazards. 
      As this chapter shows, this discussion is much needed. A brief review of the evolution of the discussion of climate change impacts notes that, in the beginning, this discussion was focused mostly on the physical impact (on nature). With time, however, the social impact of climate change received more attention, and evidence regarding the relationship between climate change and poverty began to emerge. Even so, the interlinkages between climate change (and hazards) and multi-dimensional inequalities are yet to be fully explored. The role of underlying structural causes of inequalities is also poorly understood. The objective of this chapter is to bridge these gaps. This in turn provides the foundation for the discussion of the policy challenges confronted by governments to build resilience to climate hazards.
      Having reviewed this problematic, the chapter proceeds from an analytical framework based on the hypothesis that climate change and inequalities are locked in a vicious cycle, whereby initial socio-economic inequalities determine disproportionate adverse effects from climate hazards, resulting in greater inequality. It is further argued that disadvantaged groups have greater exposure and susceptibility to climate hazards, as well as more limited capacity to cope and recover. 
      In the following sections the chapter reviews the evidence regarding the multiple dimensions of inequality (in relation to income, assets, political power, gender, age, race, ethnicity, religion, among others) that are behind differential impacts of climate hazards on people and communities. This general evidence is, subsequently, complemented with findings emanating from three case studies. The experience of hurricane Katrina in the United States shows how intersecting inequalities increased the exposure and susceptibility of low income, predominantly African-American population to hurricanes, and how it proved more difficult for them to cope and recover during and after hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans. The experience of Bangladesh shows how multiple intersecting inequalities force vulnerable population groups to live in flood and cyclone prone areas and suffer disproportionately when these climate hazards actually materialize. Last but not least, the Sahel region of Africa, which is suffering from severe water loss and desertification, clearly shows how disadvantaged groups suffer from greater exposure and susceptibility and how they also have less means to cope and recover. 
      The last section summarizes the main findings. 
II. The social impact of climate change
The discussion of climate change was originally focused on its physical impact. Relatively less attention was being paid on the implications of this physical impact for the lives, livelihoods and social positions of the affected people. As Skoufias (2012, p. 2) put it, “while the eyes of the world have been riveted on polar bears, Antarctic penguins, and other endangered inhabitants of the Earth’s shrinking ice caps, relatively few researchers have turned serious attention – until recent years – to quantify the prospective long-term effects of climate change on human welfare.” Part of the problem was that it took time to develop and test the methodological techniques that later on made it possible to broaden the focus and complementarily assess, in an integrated manner, socio-economic impacts as well (see chapter III).
A. Impact on poverty and livelihoods
Over time the broader social impacts of climate change and their feedback effects got more attention. New studies emerge as models detecting biophysical impacts began to be integrated with socio-economic modelling techniques (chapter III). An early study looking in this regard is the report brought out by the World Bank (2002) and presented at the 8th conference of the UNFCCC. It noted that climate change was making achievement of MDGs difficult by reducing access to drinking water, reduction of food security, and through adverse health effects. 
      Other studies followed up on the issue. The Stern report (2007) noted that climate change was expected to increase poverty owing to its effects on agriculture, flooding, malnutrition, water resources and health. The 2007/2008 Human Development Report (HDR) devoted a chapter to the discussion of vulnerability and risks arising from climate change (UNDP, 2008). The interaction between climate change and human development has also been analysed in Carvajal (2007), ECA (2007) and Hughes et al. (2012). Previous IPCC reports draw upon this discussion. 
      The World Bank’s Global Monitoring Report 2008, titled “MDGs and the Environment: Agenda for Inclusive and Sustainable Development,” pointed again to potential impacts of climate change on poverty and development (World Bank, 2008). Brainard et al. (eds.) (2009) look into a wide range of impacts of climate change on poverty. Some recent studies examined the issue using cross-country data. Skoufias et al. (2011) provides a review of several such studies, taking note of the different methodologies used, different units of analysis adopted, and various policy suggestions offered.
      Some studies focused on impact of climate change on poverty and livelihoods in particular countries. For example, Paavola (2008) focused on the Morogoro region of Tanzania; Somanathan and Somanathan (2009) on India; and Gentle and Narayan (2012) on mountain communities in Nepal. Many studies focused on poverty impacts in specific sectors, such as agriculture (see, for example, Ahmed et al., 2009; Hertel et al., 2010; Hertel and Rosch, 2010; and Müller et al., 2011) or in particular areas, such as urban areas (see for example, Satterthwaite et al., 2007; Douglas et al., 2008; and Hardoy and Pandiella, 2009). These papers cover a broad range of issues related to climate change, including crop and structural damage, reduced agricultural output and higher food prices, reduced food security, increased unemployment, general uncertainty, involuntary migration, potential maladaptation, the need for responsive adaptation, rising social inequality, differences in exposure and susceptibility to hazards. 
      From broad evidence of the effects of climate change on poverty, research gradually moved to investigating the mechanisms through which these effects work. The concept of Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSP), introduced in chapter I, began to be used to consider the human development aspects of climate change under different pathways. Using SSPs integrated with other methodological techniques, Hallegatte et al. (2014) identify prices, assets, productivity and opportunities as key four channels through which households may move in and out of poverty, and further examine the effect of climate change on each of these. 
      The contribution of the Working Group II to the IPCC periodical Assessment Reports (AR) also gradually increased its focus on the human dimensions of the climate change impact. Working Group II’s contribution to AR5 (particularly Chapter 13) provides an extensive review of the evidence, both statistical and anecdotal, and from all parts of the world, regarding the dynamic interaction between climate change, livelihoods, and poverty. Leichenko and Silva (2014) provide a synthesis, noting that the connections between climate change and poverty are, “complex, multifaceted, and context-specific.” Hallegatte et al. (2016) provides comprehensive guidance on joint solutions so that poverty reduction policies and climate change mitigation and adaptation policies can reinforce each other. Because of the complexity surrounding the physical and socio-economic impacts of climate change, it took time to develop the integrated climate impact assessment methodologies that have supported all these studies (see chapter III).
B. From poverty and inequality to structural inequalities 
Not surprisingly, the discussion of the impact of climate change on poverty has more recently extended to the impact of climate change on inequalities. AR4 already noted that “socially and economically disadvantaged and marginalized people are disproportionately affected by climate change” (IPCC 2014, p. 796). Similarly, Skoufias (2012, p. 6) notes that “climate change impacts tend to be regressive, falling more heavily on the poor than the rich.” In the context of the effects of climate change on Brazil, the study notes that “there is significant variation, with already poor regions being more affected than prosperous regions” (Skoufias, 2012, p. 5). In Bolivia, climate-related shocks sting labour productivity or destroy public infrastructure could potentially increase poverty (see chapter III, Box III.2).
      Despite the progress above, the discussion of the interlinkages between climate change and inequalities suffers from several important deficiencies. 
      First, most studies noted above treat inequality as a secondary issue; the focus of concern continues to be on poverty. Few studies incorporate equity considerations and the methodologies are generally not suited to trace impacts on specific groups that are particularly vulnerable (see Table III.1 of Chapter III for more details). Poverty and inequality are certainly interrelated. Given a level of income, a more unequal distribution is likely to increase poverty. Similarly, an increase in poverty, given a level of income, is likely to be associated with increasing inequality. Furthermore, while studies focused on poverty take note of income and assets, inequality is multidimensional and includes inequality with respect to gender, age, ethnicity, race, religion, culture, political power, access to basic services (such as health and education), voice and political participation. The interaction among these different dimensions of inequality is behind the differential impact of climate hazards across population groups. The studies focused on poverty or even those that have tried to address equity issues within the climate change discussion do not capture these complex interactions. 
      However, as explained in Chapter I, it is important to go beyond a narrow, monetary concept of inequality towards a broad understanding of multiple inequalities and their structural causes. Even in countries with not much income poverty—as is the case in many developed countries—climate hazards have a disproportionate impact on individuals and communities facing other forms of discrimination along racial, ethnics, and others. In countries where poverty is widespread, the people living in poverty suffer disproportionately from climate hazards not only because of poverty but also because of their unequal standing in the society. 
      References to inequalities are more frequent in the AR5 WGII report. Its overall conclusion is that climate change exacerbates inequalities (IPCC 2014, p. 796). It notes that socially and geographically disadvantaged people – including people facing discrimination based on gender, age, race, class, caste, indigeneity and disability – are particularly negatively affected by climate hazards (IPCC, 2014, p. 796). Exacerbation of inequalities placing this people in disadvantage can happen through disproportionate erosion of physical, human, and social assets. AR5 WGII finds evidence with regard to each. Even climate change adaptation expenditure is often found to be driven more by wealth than by need, so that these expenditures end up aggravating income and wealth inequality both within and between countries (Georgeson and Maslin et al. 2016). In addition, some adaptation measures shift risks onto populations already facing greater exposure and susceptibility to climate hazards (Lebel and Sinh, 2009)
      Second, the evidence on the relationship between climate change and inequalities provided so far is often indirect. In many cases, the discussion remains limited to general statements, or reference to inequality is only contextual (see chapter III). Often the evidence provided is location and impact specific, and extrapolations are made on its basis. Relatively few studies have attempted to examine directly the effect of climate change on inequalities. 
      Third and most importantly, there is a lack of a unifying analytical framework necessary for the discussion of the relationship between climate change and inequalities—in in spite of the advanced state of the analytical techniques to assess impacts and policies (see chapter III). As a result, the evidence presented has a scattershot character. AR5 itself recognizes this deficiency, noting that “despite the recognition of these complex interactions [between climate change and inequality], the literature shows no single conceptual framework that captures them concurrently” (IPCC, 2014, p. 803, italics added).
      This chapter puts forward a unifying analytical framework to systematize the evidence of the links between different dimensions of inequality and climate change, which provides critical information for the assessment of impacts and for policy making. The description of this framework is supported gathering and systematizing evidence, as much as possible, given the information available in the literature. This approach will provide useful guidance to start closing the gulf between climate change policy and development (IPCC, p. 816).
III. Analytical framework 
A. Links between climate hazards and inequalities
The evidence gathered so far suggests that climate change and structural inequalities are locked in a vicious cycle, whereby climate hazards aggravate the pre-existing socio-economic inequalities that define poverty, marginalization and social exclusion. Structural inequalities increase the exposure and vulnerability of certain groups of people and communities to climate hazards. Greater exposure and vulnerability impose disproportionate loses on the lives and livelihoods of disadvantaged people and communities. If left unattended, the stress imposed by climate hazards will worsen inequalities (in physical, financial, human, social and cultural assets), thus perpetuating the vicious cycle between climate change and inequalities (figure II.1, inner loop). 
      The above portrayal of the relationship between climate change and inequalities treats climate hazards as exogenous, remaining outside the causal relationship. However, research has shown that inequality also aggravates climate change mainly through the promotion of unsustainable production and consumption patterns. For example, Dorling (2010a,b) shows that, among developed countries, those with higher income inequality tend to have higher per capita levels of consumption and waste generation, leading to greater levels of GHG emission. Uneven power relations also lead to the perpetuation of GHG-intensive consumption and production patterns, thus aggravating climate change (Boyce 1994 and 2003).
      The outer loop of figure II.1 incorporates this feedback effect of inequality on climate change, making climate change endogenous to the cycle. Despite the importance of the feedback effect of inequality on climate, this chapter – and this Survey in general – does not focus on it. Instead, the main focus is to elucidate and provide evidence with regard to the cycle presented by the inner loop of figure II.1. 
B. Inequalities increase risk to climate hazards
IPCC defines climate change “risk” as the intersection between “exposure” and “vulnerability” (see chapter I, figure I.5).  Within “vulnerability”, however, it distinguishes two aspects. One is the “propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected by climate hazards.” For short, we call this “susceptibility” to damages by climate hazards. The other aspect is the “ability to cope with and recover” from the damages. Evidence and introspection show that structural inequalities increase the exposure and susceptibility of certain groups of people to climate hazards, and decrease their ability to cope with and recover from damages.
      The three effects distinguished above are interrelated. However, while “exposure” and “susceptibility” refer to situations and processes that are ex-ante in nature, the “ability to cope and recover” refers to situations and processes ex-post (i.e. when climate hazards have already materialized). 
      Structural inequalities increase the exposure of some groups of people to climate hazards when living in areas that are more prone to climate hazards, such as flooding, erosion, cyclones, etc. There are several reasons of why this is the case, usually associated to the cost of housing and in other contexts combined with political and administrative restrictions arising from discriminatory policies. Greater exposure to climate hazards often leads to greater susceptibility. This is the case for example of people in flooding areas living in houses built with flimsy materials and often poor drainage infrastructure. Finally, inequalities decrease the ability of disadvantaged groups to cope and recover if they lack insurance and public service provision is insufficient to assist their recovery.
C. Multidimensional drivers of inequality 
Greater exposure and vulnerability of people to climate hazards is largely influenced by economic, political, and social inequalities. In unequal societies, there are large differences in the capacity of people to avoid devastating impacts from climate hazards. There are people who can protect themselves from climate hazards through their control of capital which allows them to have choices in investment (Stiglitz, 2012; Dabla-Norris et al., 2015), accumulate wealth (Piketty, 2014), withstand the effects of aggregate demand fluctuations (Carvalho and Rezai, 2014), influence politics and policies (Page et al. 2013; Gilens and Page, 2014), and have more control over their participation in the labour force (particularly for women) (Gonzalez et al., 2015) and employment decisions (Dabla-Norris et al., 2015). By contrast, people with limited economic resources (including people living in poverty) have less capacity to influence their participation in the labour market and to protect themselves, cope and recover from climate hazards. 
      The political channel reinforces inequalities; disadvantaged groups have less access to public resources (health, education, infrastructure, access to the judicial system, etc.) and fewer opportunities to participate in and to influence policy decisions. The availability and quality of public services is usually skewed against vulnerable population groups and they receive relatively less public resources to deal with climate hazards (Silva, 2016). The existence of entrenched inequalities in the access to power and political representation leads to public policies that leave people vulnerable and more exposed to climate hazards.
      The social channel interacts with the other two channels to limit both private and public resources. In particular, marginalization and social exclusion leads to a reduction of social capital and access to community resources. The social channel works in a number of ways, including through the establishment of social norms, such as appropriate occupations for women or minorities, and through the effects of discrimination and exclusion. Certain groups are able to exercise control over common property based on their social position vis-à-vis other marginalized groups. As noted above, these norms and distinctions also interact with the other channels by determining who is deemed able to participate in economic and political activities. This curtailing of access thereby limits the possibilities for marginalized individuals and groups to build up own resources and also to access public resources. 
      The following sections present the empirical evidence in the literature on the relationship between pre-existent socio-economic inequalities and their impact in defining the exposure, susceptibility, and ability to cope and recover of people and communities at disadvantage. This evidence often concentrates on extreme weather events which have sharp cut-off points regarding their timing, making them suitable for “before-and-after” impact studies. By contrast, slow-onset hazards—which can also have devastating consequences on livelihoods—are more diffuse and difficult to capture as they are often blurred by other economic and social processes, which still possess a major challenge in the policy literature and practice. 
IV. Inequalities and exposure to climate hazards 
Exposure to adverse effects of climate change is generally determined by location of dwelling and work. Economic, political, as well as social channels of influence of inequality play a role in determining the location and livelihood. Livelihoods and asset position determine whether people can afford to move away from areas of risk. This problem of exposure is acute in densely-populated and land-scarce countries (e.g., Bangladesh, and others), and applies to both rural and urban areas. As households with higher incomes bid up the price of real estate, those with lower incomes are forced into smaller spaces or into more exposed areas. 
      Inequality also exists in the administrative regulations that influence the area of residence of some people and their exposure to climate hazards prone areas (UN Habitat 2003). For example, not only economic but also administrative restrictions led to the concentration of large numbers of disadvantaged people in Irrawaddy delta that was hard hit by the cyclone Nargis in 2008 (Mutter, 2015). 
      Often economic and political factors interact and combine to influence the location decision and exposure outcome. For example, economic and racial factors combined in creating the large concentration of poor African American people in the low lying districts of New Orleans before hurricane Katrina (ibid.). Groups that are subject to discrimination are frequently forced to live in marginal areas as a result of restrictions on the available land and housing units. This may occur as a result of official or unofficial restrictions, or through other socially constructed methods. For example, the practice of “redlining” in the United States resulted in many African American families being restricted in the neighbourhoods where they could buy or rent a house and also impacted their ability to secure credit for housing. 
      Finally, in the case of slums, there are interaction effects as social exclusion may drive some groups into slums and then the fact of slum dwelling itself becomes the basis for further social exclusion (Arimah, 2011). 
A. Demographic trends that influence exposure 
A significant part of the population in developing regions live in “low-elevation coastal zone” and 100-year flood plain, and their number is increasing in both absolute terms and as proportion of the population (Neumann et al., 2015; see also chapter I). A large percentage of the populations of low elevation coastal zones are rural – 84 per cent in Africa, 80 per cent in Asia, 71 per cent in Latin America and the Caribbean and 93 per cent in the least developed countries. Rural areas are in general poorer, more remote and tend to be marginalized, particularly with respect to access to services and infrastructure. In general, coastal and near-shore habitats are expected to be exposed to greater effects on their ecosystems as a result of climate change and climate variability (Barbier, 2015). It is also instructive that more people now live in deltas, which are frequently subject to flooding of both types -- coastal flooding due to sea level rise and river flooding due to higher precipitation (see chapter I, table I.2). Researchers find that more of the people living in the precarious parts of the deltas belong to disadvantaged groups (Lou et al., 2015; Brouwer et al., 2007). Generally, it is people living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups who find themselves compelled to live in these areas, despite being aware of the inherent risks of these exposed locations. 
      In addition to flooding and erosion, the people living in coastal areas and in deltas also suffer from salinity intrusion, a process that is exacerbated by climate change (Dasgupta et al., 2014; Rabbani et al., 2013). Salinization can cause notable decrease in agricultural productivity. Increased aridity leading to greater needs for irrigation can bring about secondary salinization, aggravating the impact (Pitman and Läuchli, 2002). Shameem et al. (2014) estimate that 70 per cent of farmers in some coastal areas partially or fully ceased farming due to high levels of salinity. Due to their concentration in coastal areas and deltas, disadvantaged groups are thus more exposed to salinity intrusion caused by climate change.
      Greater exposure of disadvantaged groups to climate hazards is not limited to rural areas. Similar phenomena can be observed in urban areas too. An example of this can be observed in Dhaka, Bangladesh, a city whose slum dwellers Braun and ABheure (2011) find to be more likely to be living in areas prone to natural hazards. There are similar findings from Morin et al. (2016) for Manila, Philippines. In general, many slums are located in low-lying land at high risk of flooding. Petley (2010), Painter (2007), and Sepúlveda and Petley (2015) report that in many countries, including those in South and East Asia and in Latin America and the Caribbean, disadvantaged groups are found to set up their dwellings along risky hill slopes, exposing them to mudslides that are becoming more frequent due to climate change. 
      About 40 per cent of the Earth’s land surface and 29 per cent of the world’s population live in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid aridity zones, which are facing additional challenges due to climate changes. There is a larger concentration of poor and other disadvantaged groups of people (such as pastoralists and ethnic minorities) in these areas (WRI, 1997). 
      Two thirds of the global population are estimated to live under conditions where water is severely scarce for at least one month of the year (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2016). This scarcity is expected to increase as the climate changes. For example, the number of people exposed to droughts could rise by between 9 and 17 per cent by 2030 under scenarios where emissions growth rates are not reduced (Winsemius et al., 2015). Drought exposure is higher in rural versus urban areas (43 per cent versus 32 per cent, respectively). This implies greater exposure to drought for disadvantaged groups, who make up a larger portion of the rural population. Climate change is also expected to increase the frequency and intensity of heatwaves, with particular effects on the elderly, who are more susceptible, as further explained below (Kovats and Hajat, 2008; Luber and McGeehin, 2008; IPCC, 2014). 
      Cross-country data also point to greater exposure of disadvantaged people to water scarcity. According to Christenson et al. (2014), the exposure to water scarcity is much greater in countries with lower human development indexes (HDI) than in countries with high values of HDI (50 per cent of low HDI countries exposed versus 14 per cent of very high HDI countries). Given the higher rates of households engaged in agricultural production in rural areas and low income countries, further increase in the exposure of these households to droughts can be expected. 
B. Gender, livelihood patterns, and exposure
Inequalities that are rooted in gender differences play a role in determining exposure to climate hazards. The norms, social role, and socio-economic status imposed on women add to other forms of inequality that make women particularly exposure and vulnerability to climate hazards (Neumayer and Plümper 2007). In other words, it is the intersection of various dimensions of inequalities, including those associated with gender, that produce the differential outcome, as noticed by Perez et al. (2015) above. 
      Women often face lower asset positions. This is particularly the case in rural areas, were access to land tenure and formal rental land markets tend to be more restricted to women. This leads women farmers to work on more marginal land which is exposed to greater climate related hazards (Perez et al., 2015).  More broadly, in many countries large shares of working age spouses are not economically active at all, or if they work part time they do not get paid. In the context of Bolivia, for example, this is the single most important factor associated with high vulnerability to shocks, not least those from climate (see chapter III, box III.3).
      Similarly, certain occupations make people more exposed to climate hazards. For example, fishing communities living near the rivers and the coast are more exposed to flooding, erosion, cyclones, and other such climate hazards. These communities are particularly vulnerable to climate hazards in the absence of effective adaptation. There is also evidence that culturally defined farming responsibilities for women in Nepal limit their ability to adapt to climate change by adjusting their livelihoods, thereby increasing their exposure to future climate hazards (Silva, 2016). 
V. Inequalities and susceptibility to climate hazards
Even if they had the same level of exposure as the rest of the population, disadvantaged groups would generally be relatively more susceptible to damage from adverse effects of climate hazards. For example, of the people living in the same floodplain, those with houses constructed of flimsy materials are more susceptible to damage from flood than those with houses made of sturdy materials. Similarly, in an arid area, people having air conditioning are less susceptible to health damages than those who do not have air conditioning. 
      For example, Wodon et al. (2014) report that households in the lowest income bracket in five MENA countries—Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Syria, and Yemen—experienced higher losses of income, crops, livestock and fish caught as a result of adverse effects of climate change than did the rich households. Lost income reported for the lowest income households was more than double the rate for the richest (46 vs 21 per cent). Similarly, Gentle et al. (2014) find that poor households in the middle hills region of Nepal are more susceptible to damages from climate hazards than the wealthy households. Hill and Mejia-Mantilla (2015) show that the farmers belonging to the lowest income bracket in Uganda lost greater shares of income from limited rainfall than the average farmer because of limited options for changing crop patterns, limited ability to apply water saving technology, and limited access to agricultural extension services and water storage sources. Patankar (2015) shows that families belonging to low income brackets in Mumbai require repeated repairs to their homes to secure them against flood damage, and the cumulative cost often prove much greater as proportion of their income than it is the case for the rich. It is notable that despite lower levels of exposure to Hurricane Mitch in Honduras by households belonging to the lowest income bracket, relative to those belonging to higher income brackets, the former reported considerably higher asset loss than the latter—31 per cent versus only 11 per cent (Carter et al., 2007). 
      Inequality in access to formal financial markets makes people particularly vulnerable to shocks, including those from climate related events, if they cannot build diversified asset portfolios and have restricted access to savings and insurance instruments. As a result they are forced to direct the bulk of their savings into single assets. For example, low-income urban people tend to have their savings in the form of housing stock, which is vulnerable to floods (Moser, 2007). Similarly, low-income rural people often have their savings in the form of livestock, which are susceptible to droughts (Nkedianye et al., 2011). This contrasts with the situation of the wealthier households, who are able to diversify their assets, both spatially and financially and are therefore less susceptible to damage from the adverse effects of climate change. Thus, owners of financial assets may face similar drought exposure as the low-income rural poor, who have their assets in the form of livestock. However, since financial assets are far less likely to be affected by lack of water than is the case with livestock, the financial asset owners are less susceptible to damage caused by decline in water availability. The greater levels of damage as well as the more limited diversification of savings and assets feed into greater inequality of assets as a result of climate hazards. Greater susceptibility of disadvantaged groups can therefore lead to widening of future inequality, as children of families living in poverty are left with diminished assets and future capacities. Not surprisingly, asset ownership is an important aspect in understanding, through climate impact assessments, unequal effects of climate change and the effectiveness of adaptation strategies (see chapter III).
      Comparing the impact of flood hazards on street children of residents of low-income urban settlements and of wealthier neighbourhoods in Manila, Philippines, Zoleta-Nantes (2002) finds that the susceptibility of lower income households is compounded by limited access to government and community resources, including water and sanitation and health services.
      In parts of Punjab, Pakistan, there has been institutional neglect of some areas that are vulnerable to flooding. The justification has been that those areas should not be prioritized for development because of the risk from flooding. As a result these communities are marginalized which compounds their susceptibility (and in some cases exposure) to future impacts from flooding (Sindhu et al., 2009). 
A. Gender and age inequalities and susceptibility
A study of Turkana pastoralists found that gender, marital status, length of residency in a region, level of education and lack of access to extension services and early warning information were dominant factors in determining susceptibility, particularly given that the population is predominantly below the poverty line. These factors led households headed by women, along with those with low educational levels, shorter times of residency and less access to extension services and early warning system to be disproportionately susceptible to adverse effects of climate change (Silva, 2016). 
      Macchi et al. (2014) note that lower caste families, women and other marginal groups in Himalayan villages in northwest India and Nepal are more susceptible to climate change effects and are also less able to adapt. Using household surveys and village focus group studies conducted across nine countries in Africa, Perez et al. (2015) find that there are a number of issues affecting women that make them more susceptible to impacts from climate change than men. Among such issues are: limited control of land (in terms of both quantity and quality of land); less secure tenure; less access to common property resources; less cash to obtain goods or services; and less access to formally registered, public and private external organisations that foster agriculture and livestock production. These issues arise from feedback effects between social norms that limit women’s participation in some economic and social activities and the generally lower socioeconomic status of women that result from those limitations. The lower socioeconomic status then limits the ability of the women to access other services or to accumulate resources that would be beneficial in counteracting those social norms. The women thus get caught in a “disadvantage trap.” Sherwood (2013) finds that prolonged drought did create such traps for women in Gituamba, Kenya. In some locations, apart from the issues above, marital status for women can be a driver of unequal access to resources. For example, Silva (2016) finds that widows and divorced women in many parts of rural Tanzania had less access to water resources. Similarly, IPCC (2014, p. 796) notes that climate hazards increase and heighten existing gender inequalities. This happens because in many cases the women have to perform tasks that are more exposed to climate (such as fetching water from afar or gathering fuelwood from forests) (Egeru et al., 2014). 
      Apart from gender, age proved to be another important determinant of susceptibility to the damages caused by climate effects. For example, IPCC reports that flood related mortality in Nepal among girls was twice as high as for women (13.3 per 1000 girls). Similarly, the mortality was also higher for boys than for men (IPCC, 2014, p. 807-808). These differential impacts apply across a variety of disadvantaged groups. For example, it was found in Vietnam that the elderly, widows, and disabled people, in addition to single mothers and women-headed households with small children, were most vulnerable to floods and storms and slow-onset events such as recurrent droughts (IPCC, 2014, p. 808-809). One of the main reasons for differential susceptibility across age groups is the difference in the ability to withstand disease and other adverse health effects of climate change, as discussed in more detail later. 
B. Ethnic inequalities and susceptibility 
The degree of susceptibility often depends on ethnicity and race. Matin et al. (2014) provide evidence showing that dominant ethnic groups are able to control resource management and resource use at the expense of other ethnic groups, exacerbating susceptibility of the latter. In Myanmar, poor and minority farmers who make up the bulk of the population in the Irrawaddy delta -- an area that was significantly more exposed to Cyclone Nargis in 2008 -- were more susceptible to damages due to lack of effective warning systems and infrastructure. It is no wonder therefore that they suffered the most in terms of lost lives, incomes and assets as a result of the cyclone Nargis (Mutter, 2015). In this case, the lack of effective warning systems was in part a result of discrimination in resource allocation faced by these ethnic groups (ibid.). 
      IPCC (2014) notes the important role of social positions of different groups in determining the susceptibility to the impact of climate change. For example, in many places in Latin America, Afro-Latinos and indigenous groups were found to have a higher degree of susceptibility to climate effects (IPCC, 2014, p. 810). Moreover, differential susceptibility to effects of climate change across different races is found in both developing and developed countries, although in both cases low income status is often intertwined with race and ethnicity status.
C. Susceptibility to health damages 
One of the important ways in which inequality increases susceptibility of disadvantaged groups is through health effects of climate hazards. Hallegatte et al. (2016) finds that people living in poverty are more susceptible to the diseases that many climate hazards help to spread, including malaria and water borne diseases that cause diarrhoea. This may be due to several reasons. For example, they may be forced to live closer to malaria breeding grounds. They may not have access to piped water sources, forcing them to drink water containing pathogens during floods. For example, residents of low-income slums in Mumbai report greater levels of flooding during the monsoon season, resulting in increased reports of diseases (ibid.). Similarly, disadvantaged people suffer more adverse health effects from heatwaves and high temperatures, because they cannot afford heat alleviating amenities, including air conditioning.
      Children and the elderly are particularly affected by the adverse health effects of climate hazards. This is not surprising, given their relative fragility. Hallegatte et al. (2016) reports greater incidence in ailments among children following floods in Ho Chi Minh City. Kovats and Akhtar (2008) point to outbreaks of leptospirosis among children following flooding in Mumbai. Lloyd et al. (2011) estimate that effects of climate change on crop yields will lead to increases in undernutrition resulting in higher rates of child stunting, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. 
      Heatwaves have notable effects on the elderly, particularly as they are already more likely to suffer from chronic illnesses, such as coronary heart disease or respiratory diseases that can be exacerbated by heat (Hutton, 2008). Elderly people are also more susceptible to greater health effects from floods and are less able to relocate in the event of disasters (Hutton, 2008). For example, elderly residents of Limpopo, South Africa, lacked access to the necessary labour to construct their houses to withstand flooding and therefore their dwellings suffered greater damage (Khandlhela and May, 2006). 
      Effects on health were noted as a particular concern with regards to impacts of climate change on indigenous populations -- already located in marginal areas – in Latin America. This occurred through changes that allowed diseases to spread in areas where they could not previously thrive. As a result, rates of respiratory and diarrhoeal diseases increased. Climate change also affected adversely the nutritional status of these populations, aggravating the health outcomes for them (Kronik and Verner, 2010). Time devoted to household labour by women also increases as a result of climate hazards and this has direct effect on child nutrition (Silva, 2016). 
      The greater susceptibility to health effects frequently undermines the income and asset position of disadvantaged groups in both short run and long run. In the short run, they may suffer from loss of productivity, employment and income. An example for Bolivia shows that income poverty increases when climate-related productivity shocks strike, as labour wages (on which disadvantaged groups rely most) are hit adversely not only in absolute terms but also relative to the rents of other factors of production (see chapter III, box III.2). In the long run, disadvantaged groups suffer from loss of human capital (from lost school days, the development of chronic conditions such as stunting, and from general health and growth impacts, even future morbidity and higher mortality) (Somanathan et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016; Zivin and Neidell, 2014).

VI. Inequalities and the ability to cope and recover
Ability to cope and recover is the third channel through which inequality aggravates the impact of climate change for the disadvantaged groups. As noted earlier, while “exposure” and “susceptibility” refer to ex-ante situation and processes, “coping and recovery” refer to ex-post situation and processes. Inequality implies fewer resources for disadvantaged groups to undertake coping and recovery measures. These resources can generally take four forms: (i) households’ own resources, (ii) community resources, (iii) resources either provided by non-government organisations (NGOs) or private companies or citizens, and (iv) public resources provided by the government. Disadvantaged groups are likely to be lacking in some, if not all of these resources that are necessary for coping and recovery. As a result, their situation worsens further. 
A. Recovery trajectories
The recovery trajectory of different groups matters in this analysis. In the wake of a climate hazard, the rate of recovery can be an important factor in inequality. If both rich and poor households recover at the same rate, the welfare gap may remain constant (see figure II.2, panel (a)). On the other hand, if either rich households are able to recover faster and increase their income further (see panel (b)) or poorer households see their welfare growth decline (see panel (c)), then the welfare gap will increase. 
      There is considerable evidence that people affected by multiple inequalities see slower recoveries from more pronounced impacts (Verner, 2010; Carter et al, 2007; Kraay and McKenzie, 2014; Ravallion and Jalan, 2001). These differential recovery rates contribute to increasing the welfare gap and inequality. Lack of resources forces people living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups to cope with climate hazards in such detrimental ways as to put their future adaptive capacity at risk (Barbier, 2010; Barrett et al., 2011; McDowell and Hess, 2012). Inequality reduces different types of resources thus affecting the coping and recovery ability of disadvantaged groups, as explained as follows.
B. Coping capacity using own resources
Differences in an individual or household’s own resources are obviously an important factor in the ability to cope and recover from climate hazards. Thus, the ability to accumulate assets can play an important role in the ability to cope and recover. For example, it was noticed that the ability to accumulate land and livestock played an important role in the ability to diversify income sources and improve adaptive capacity to climate hazards among farmers in northern Burkina Faso. Increasing land prices and growing land scarcity limited younger farmers’ ability to accumulate resources adding to intergenerational poverty (Silva, 2016). It has been shown for Zimbabwe’s region of Nkayi that farms without cattle are much poorer and without adaptation they will be in an even worse condition than before climate change and much poorer than the farms with cattle (see chapter III).
1. The importance of insurance
An important issue related to coping and recovery is that of insurance. Availability of insurance plays an important role in how different groups of the population can deal with the climate hazards when these have actually materialized; alas, not all groups have the same access to insurance. Lack of own resources often prevent people living in poverty and disadvantaged groups from buying necessary insurance. For example, Verner (2010) reports that asset losses by households with higher income levels in Latin America are much more likely to be insured that those of low-income households. 
      Micro-insurance is a possible way of extending coverage of insurance to those on the lower end of the asset and income distributions (Mosely, 2015). This modality of insurance is generally targeted toward disadvantaged groups and tends to focus on particular risks, most frequently those related to health. More recently, it has been extended to crops, but based not on actual crop damage (whose estimates can be subjective, causing problems of moral hazard), but on objective information regarding weather (such as rainfall), on which crop production crucially depends. Beneficial impacts of these schemes have been reported; for example, the BASIX rainfall insurance scheme operated in India has been shown to increase both investments by clients and stability of income. However, unlike micro-credit schemes, micro-insurance schemes still face formidable challenges and are yet to attain wide coverage.
2. Choice between physical and human capital 
In coping with climate hazards, people living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups often face a difficult choice between protecting their human capital (health and education) and preserving their physical capital. In view of absence of health insurance, these households face large expenses when hit by diseases in the wake of climate hazards. To meet these expenses, they often sell physical assets and this undermines their future income earning ability (Clark and Dercon, 2015). For example, it has been reported that poor households in Ethiopia were forced to sell assets during periods when their finances were stressed by drought, whereas that was not the case for the more well-off households (Little et al, 2006). After the famines in Ethiopia in 1984-1985, it took a decade for asset-poor households to bring livestock holding levels back to pre-famine levels (Dercon, 2004). On the other hand, sometimes poor households reduce their consumption in order to resist asset sales and preserve productive assets (Carter et al., 2007). This reduction in consumption, however, can have deleterious health and education outcomes, particularly for children. As mentioned above, this can also to perpetuation of inequality for future generations (Baez et al, 2010; Mancini and Yang, 2009). 
      Similarly, if children are taken out of school in order to cope with climate hazards, even if this is only as a result of a temporary shock, it can have long-term effect on their education. For example, it was found in Mexico that such children were 30 per cent less likely to complete primary school than those children that stayed in school (de Janvry et al., 2006). In sub-Saharan Africa, asset-poor households are more likely to provide their children with lower-quality nutrition and are less likely to take sick children to medical consultations following weather shocks. This can have long term impacts on these children and their prospects for development (Hallegatte et al., 2016). In addition, lower income households that have been exposed to weather related risks have been found to be more risk averse, which can impact their future income and asset accumulation. These households tend to reduce investment in productive assets and choose low-risk, low return activities (ibid.). All of these patterns are linked to worse outcomes for disadvantaged households which may as a result translate into a deterioration of inequality.
C. Common property, eco-system, and social resources
Common property resources shared by the community can be an important part of coping and recovery. People living in poverty may treat access to ecosystems as a de facto asset in that they may use goods derived from local ecosystems, such as crops, timber and fish, either for self-consumption or for the purpose of smoothing income shocks (Barbier, 2010). For example, coastal populations in Bangladesh with closer proximity to mangrove reserves were better able to cope in the wake of Cyclone Aila (Akter and Mallik, 2013). Women’s more limited access to common property resources has been noted to be a factor that aggravates their situation in the wake of climate change hazards (Perez et al., 2015).
      A survey of literature on climate change and ecosystem services shows that resource stocks such as fish and timber that are continuously growing are less sensitive to weather fluctuations than annual crops (Howe et al., 2013). The use of these types of ecosystem resources therefore can act as coping mechanisms for periods of reduced income. Effects of climate change on these ecosystems will therefore affect the livelihood and coping capacity of the low-income people who rely on them to generate income, thus exacerbating inequality. It has been reported that households in tropical and subtropical smallholder systems derive considerable fractions of their incomes from ecosystems, ranging from around 55 per cent in South Asia to 75 per cent in Sub-Saharan Africa. In these communities in Latin America, South Asia and East Asia, the top quintile relies on these services to a lesser degree than all other quintiles, meaning that the highest income residents are least exposed to effects on these ecosystems (Noack et al, 2015). At the same time, over-extraction of fish and timber can lead to resource exhaustion and damage of the ecosystems (Hallegatte et al., 2016).
      The availability and access to social capital can provide households that have limited access to other resources with the means to cope with climate hazards. For example, Braun and Aßheure (2011) find that social capital plays an important role in the ability to cope with floods in Dhaka, Bangladesh. There is also evidence that pre-existing power imbalances within villages may result in adaptation responses that exacerbate inequalities. Households with less land in Malawi often adapt to climate hazards by working as farm labourers for wealthier families, often under exploitative conditions, which then increases local-level inequality and reinforces subsequent susceptibility of the labouring households to erratic rainfall, droughts and flooding (Silva, 2016). 
D. The role of public resources
The use of public resources for coping and recovery is frequently a function of political dynamics of the society and which groups are in a position to direct resources to their communities. For example, the most productive and well connected families in villages in Malawi were the main recipients of climate adaptation funds, whereas there was more limited access for women and less connected households (Silva, 2016). Similar phenomena were observed in the wake of hurricane Katarina in New Orleans, where resources for recovery were directed to areas with wealthier and whiter populations, despite greater damage in some other areas (see the Box below for more details). 
      There is also evidence that adaptation efforts are often driven to a greater degree by wealth than by need. This can be observed from comparison of the adaptation spending in wealthier with that in poorer cities, despite greater vulnerability in the latter (see chapter V for further details). In addition, the outcomes of adaptation may reinforce existing social inequalities. For example, local chiefs in Mozambique were able to maintain disproportionate access to prime land, capital and social power in post-flood resettlement locations (Silva 2016). Furthermore, resources for adaptation that might engender future coping capacities, such as research on crop varieties may be dominated by more socially or politically connected, or wealthier groups. For example, research into saline tolerant rice crops in Sri Lanka has been directed towards large scale rice growers with less attention to marginalized groups such as Hambantota farmers (Weragoda et al., 2009). 
VII. Illustrative case studies
The evidence above demonstrates there is association between climate change and inequality. Due to the multidimensional drivers of inequality, low-income and other disadvantaged groups of the society are more exposed, more susceptible and less capable of coping and recovering in the face of climate hazards. In order to illustrate the way the multiple inequalities intercept thus shaping differential impacts, it is necessary to spend more time on concrete cases. This section presents three case studies taken from the experience of hurricane Katarina in the United States; the experience of floods in Bangladesh; and the desertification process in the Sahel region of Africa. 
A. Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans
The experience of Hurricane Katrina shows how income and racial inequalities combined to increase the exposure and susceptibility and decreased the ability to cope and recover of disadvantaged groups comprising mostly the poor African American residents of the city. 
1. Exposure
The impact of the hurricane fell disproportionately on African American and non-white populations, even when the higher proportion of non-white people as a share of the overall population is taken into account (Brookings, 2005; Logan, 2006). Economic and racial inequalities combined to cause African American people living in poverty to comprise the majority of the residents living in low-lying vulnerable parts of the New Orleans city. By contrast, the wealthier and white residents were more likely to live literally on higher ground (figures A1 through A3 in Appendix A1). Both economic and politically mediated influences of inequality, including discriminatory practices, combined to produce this particular spatial distribution of the population. People who were in areas damaged by the Hurricane were twice as likely to be African-American (Brookings, 2005). 
      Katrina also illustrates the role of inequality shaped by the political route. For example, the districts inhabited primarily by white wealthy households had better protective infrastructure, even if their elevation was also low. By contrast, less attention was paid to protection of the areas inhabited by the African-Americans living in poverty. In fact, it can be argued that the Industrial Canal that runs along the west of the Lower 9th Ward was constructed  in that particular location because of limited political power of the residents of that area. While other critical infrastructure failed in the hurricane, parts of the Industrial Canal were among the first to fail (Mutter, 2015). In addition, the majority of the city’s public housing projects, which housed predominantly poor and African-American populations, were built in areas that are below sea level and were damaged by the storm (Logan, 2006). 
2. Susceptibility
African-Americans living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups were also more susceptible to damages caused by Hurricane Katrina. The housing stock in New Orleans is considerably older than average, with 41 per cent of houses in 2013 being built before 1949, partly as a result of historic preservation laws (Shrinath et al, 2014). Houses of African-Americans living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups were not only old but also fragile, so that these were totally damaged by the inundation. In addition, a considerable portion of the population of the city lived in renter-occupied housing units, which were more susceptible to damage, and this rate was higher among low-income and African-American households (Masozera et al., 2006; Logan, 2006). 
      The New Orleans experience also brought to fore the susceptibility differential across age groups. Overall, the elderly people were the most impacted by the Hurricane as they were less able to relocate and were more susceptible to the health related impacts. More elderly white residents were killed, but when demographic differences are taken into account, elderly African-Americans were proportionally the most affected (Mutter, 2015).
      In general, poorer and minority populations were less able (and in some cases less willing) to relocate given the pre-storm warnings and were therefore more likely to suffer injuries and death. The lack of ownership or access to means of transportation was one significant factor of the probability of evacuation and relocation (Colton, 2006; Masozera et al., 2006). Another significant factor was financial and social resources necessary to secure a dwelling to which to relocate. As a result of all these factors, low-income and African-American inhabitants of New Orleans suffered greater degrees of loss and damage than the wealthier and white households.
3. Coping and Recovery 
The New Orleans experience also illustrates how the capacity to cope and recover depends on existing inequalities. The low-income African-Americans had much less resources to cope with and recover from the damages suffered. They had less access to health services and transportation. They were also less likely to have flood insurance compared to wealthier residents (Mutter, 2015; Finch et al., 2010; Masozera et al., 2006). 
      Left unattended, the lack of capacity to cope and recover—as a result of existing inequalities—may result in more inequality. In fact, the public initiatives and policies in the wake of hurricane Katarina in many cases aggravated inequalities. The slow rescue efforts exacerbated the damages and overall impacts of hurricane Katarina for the low-income and other disadvantaged groups of New Orleans. Post-storm recovery efforts, particularly the broad city-level planning efforts accentuated inequality. The focus of rebuilding efforts tended to be on wealthier areas. A large-scale plan to rezone parts of the city and build new developments neglected the poorer and minority residents’ neighbourhoods and their infrastructure and service needs (Mutter, 2015). Furthermore, households with low income and low credit ratings (both of which apply to a greater degree to African Americans in New Orleans) were much more likely to have their disaster recovery related home loan applications rejected (Masozera et al., 2006). 
      As a consequence of the above, there were considerable demographic shifts as a result of the Hurricane. While many people of all ethnicities fled the impacts of the storm – both pre- and post-storm – there were significant differences in return rates (figure II.3). Almost 100,000 African-American residents had not returned to Orleans Parish (the city of New Orleans, not the New Orleans metro area) by 2013, versus around 11,500 white residents. This changed the racial composition of the city. The proportion of African-Americans in the city’s population declined from 66.7 per cent in 2000 to 59.1 per cent in 2013 (Shrinath et al. 2014). Social vulnerability and rates of flooding were related with rates of return (as measured three years after the hurricane). Low levels of flooding and low social vulnerability was correlated with higher rates of return (93-100 per cent), while  high levels of flooding and high social vulnerability were associated with much lower rates of return (50 per cent) (Finch et al., 2010). 
      The demographic shift that New Orleans witnessed in the wake of the hurricane Katarina is in part an outcome of reinforcing relationship between recovery planning and return of residents. It also provides an example of self-fulling expectations. Residents of poorer and more predominantly African-American neighbourhoods were less likely to expect their services return and their infrastructure repaired quickly. This resulted in fewer people returning to these areas. This then justified limiting the expenditures on these areas by those planning recovery efforts. Thus what was expected did actually happen (Figure 9). 
      The recovery efforts instead concentrated on inhabited by wealthier and white populations. For example, the Lakeview neighbourhood (see Appendix II.1, figure A1, upper left) is also one of the neighbourhoods with the lowest elevation in Orleans Parish, and yet it was able to recover much quickly than other areas. This is in part due to the relative wealth of that neighbourhood. The ability to return to the city also had more persistent effects, as those that were able to return had better labour market outcomes than non-returnees (Groen and Polivka, 2008). The initial inequality thus perpetuated and even worsened.
      Some have argued that those who did not return were better off in their new locations, in terms of employment, education, and healthcare opportunities (Deryugina et al. 2014, Sacerdote 2012). It is true that when done properly with policy guidance, relocation to more prosperous areas can be beneficial (see the Moving to Opportunity (MOT) programme in Chicago). Whether that is the case for more of the inhabitants of New Orleans who relocated for good or they are simply unable to return because their original neighbourhoods have either become uninhabitable or gentrified (pricing them out) is something that needs further investigation. Meanwhile, there is evidence that income inequality in New Orleans – measured by the ratio of income of the top 5 per cent to that of the bottom 20 per cent -- has increased between 2000 and 2013 (Plyer et al. 2015).
      The experience of New Orleans in the wake of hurricane Katarina also highlights the role of the political channel in aggravating inequalities. The recovery of New Orleans was a process that was heavily influenced by public policies. The fact that these policies ended up creating a more unequal city shows the uneven distribution of voice and political influence whereby some people in New Orleans facing various forms of inequality had less access to the political processes. 
B. Flooding in Bangladesh
The experience of floods in Bangladesh provides another illustration of how the effects of climate change are aggravated by inequalities. Bangladesh is facing two types of flooding. One is the “inland flooding” by rivers. The other is “coastal flooding” caused by cyclones and hurricanes and also by the general sea level rise. In both cases, it is the disadvantaged groups of the country who are suffering disproportionate impacts. 
      Being a delta, overflow of rivers on to the floodplains is a natural and expected phenomenon in Bangladesh (Appendix A.1, figure A4). However, climate change is aggravating inland flooding in several ways. First it is leading to increased volume of summer rainfall (see figure A5 on flooding levels during the 1998 flood) (Islam et al., 2014). Second, the rising sea level is reducing the gradient, slowing down the pace of recession of floodwater. Rising sea level is also causing coastal flooding and erosion. Climate change is also aggravating coastal flooding by increasing the number, scope, and intensity of the cyclones hitting its coast and by raising the sea level (Rana et al., 2011). While the entire country is the victim of these adverse effects, it is the people living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups of the society who are bearing the brunt. Inequality increases their exposure and susceptibility and reduces their ability to cope and recover. 
1. Exposure
An estimated 20 to 25 per cent of the country is flooded in a normal year, and up to 60 per cent of the country can be flooded under a “100-year” flood event (as happened in 1998). Bangladesh is notably exposed with 20.3 per cent of its population, amounting to almost 30.5 million people, expected to be affected by river floods in a given year with 4.75 per cent of its GDP affected by inland flooding. Number of people exposed to normal flooding is expected to increase to 90.1 million people by 2030 under moderate climate change, with 20 million of that increase coming from population growth and socio-economic change, and 30.6 million from climate change (Luo et al., 2015). Under a scenario with a 2°C increase by 2100, the combination of sea level rise and storm surges means that by 2040 an average 10-year return cyclone in Bangladesh could flood an area 80 per cent greater than what would currently be flooded (World Bank, 2013). Roughly the same number of people were exposed to storm surge related coastal flooding during cyclone Sidr in 2007 as are exposed to yearly river floods, and that could increase significantly under a scenario of combined climate change and population growth (Dasgupta, and others, 2010). 
      In general, low-income and other disadvantaged groups face greater exposure to flooding as a result of their settling in more flood-prone areas. For example, 25 per cent of poor households were exposed to the effects of Cyclone Aila in 2009, versus 14 per cent of non-poor households (Akter and Mallick, 2013). In case of the 1998 flood, 75 per cent of people living in poverty were exposed to the floods, compared to 71 per cent of the non-poor (del Ninno et al., 2001).
      Given the ethnic homogeneity of its population, discrimination of political and administrative nature plays a less an important role in forcing people in Bangladesh to live in areas prone to flooding, either inland riverine or coastal. The compulsion therefore is mostly economic. Land is scarce in Bangladesh, the most densely populated country of the world. As a result, the low-income people flock to lands that are most risk prone and hence in less demand by the more advantaged sections of the population. 
      Similarly economic factors force people to live in flood-prone parts of the urban areas. Examining the factors leading people to migrate from rural areas to the slums of Dhaka city, Ullah (2004) finds that the search for employment, lack of land, easier access to the informal sector and overall extreme poverty are the most relevant. Similarly, UNICEF (2009) notes that lack of comprehensive land planning coupled with the pressures of economic migration have led to considerable expansion of the slum populations in Bangladesh. In most cases the slums are located in relatively low-lying areas that are exposed to flooding. 
2. Susceptibility
People living in poverty and other disadvantaged groups of Bangladesh are not only more exposed to floods, they are also more susceptible to the damages that flood cause. Forty-two per cent of people living in poverty report loss of household income as a result of flooding versus 17 per cent for the non-poor (Brouwer et al. 2007). People living in poverty also reported greater number of houses with structural damage in the wake of Cyclone Aila. Furthermore, people living in poverty also reported higher levels of damage in dollar terms. This paradoxical outcome was the result of the fact that houses of people living in poverty were constructed using very flimsy materials, so that these houses suffered considerably greater damage than those of the richer households’ houses that are built of sturdier materials (Hallegatte et al., 2016). 
      Flooding can be damaging in multiple ways. For example, flooding may wash away crops and livestock, in addition to destroying the houses. The disadvantaged groups suffer disproportionately from these other effects too. In addition, they suffer more from the indirect market based effects. For instance, many of the disadvantaged groups living in flood-prone areas are fishing communities. They take an additional hit to their incomes when fish prices fall as a result of increased available made by the flood waters (Rahman et al., 2009). 
      Low-income and other disadvantaged groups living in flood-prone areas also suffer more injuries and deaths, thus hurting both their current income as well as their future income earning potential, thus aggravating inequality (Rahman et al. 2009). For example, in the wake of the 1998 floods, there were higher reported rates of diarrhoea among groups with lower income, lower levels of education and lower quality housing. This was in part due to the fact that these groups did not have access to tap water and thus had to drink contaminated floodwater (Hashizume et al., 2008). 
      During Cyclone Aila, the majority of the victims were children and the elderly, groups that both have difficulty with quick mobility (Rabbani and Huq, 2016). In addition, salinization that accompanies coastal flooding and sea level rise has important effects on the spread of waterborne diseases, which, as noted above, already disproportionately affect lower income and disadvantaged groups (ibid.). Rabbani et al. (2009) argue that women are the most susceptible group in flood prone areas owing to the fact that some of their socially determined livelihood activities such as cleaning, washing and taking care of children and the elderly make them disproportionately susceptible to the effect of contaminated water. Also, issues of land tenure and elite capture of resources are important factors in susceptibility in the flood-prone areas of Bangladesh (ibid.).
3. Coping and recovery 
The Bangladesh experience shows that, along with greater exposure and susceptibility, people living in poverty and other disadvantage groups also have less ability to cope and recover. For example, in the wake of the 1998 floods, poorer households were forced to borrow greater fractions of their income and at higher rates than wealthier households in order to survive and rebuild (del Ninno et al., 2001). This resulted in greater debt burdens, thus limiting their efforts to build up assets and human and physical capital. Human capital formation by the disadvantaged groups has also been greatly affected in coastal regions as schools have been shut down in the wake of cyclones and storm surges (Rabbani and Huq, 2016). 
      In view of their limited ability to cope and recover, people living in poverty and disadvantaged groups in flood-prone areas of Bangladesh often have to face the choice between the options of selling assets or reducing consumption. Poor households who were exposed to 1998 flood reduced their calorie intake by 11 per cent. As a result, 48 per cent of poor households reported to be food insecure as opposed to 16 per cent of all households (del Ninno et al., 2001). Thus they end up losing either their physical capital or their human capital. 
      In addition, people living in poverty have fewer options for food storage than the wealthier groups, limiting their available food in the wake of flood and cyclones. This has particular impacts on women and girls, as gender plays an important role in household food distribution (Rabbani and Huq, 2016). Rabbani et al. (2009) find that during periods of flooding, women consume less food and water in order to prioritize the consumption of men and children. 
      Thus, because of existing inequalities the disadvantaged people in Bangladesh tend to be more concentrated in flood-prone inland and coastal areas, suffer more damage, and end up in a further disadvantaged position because of lack of ability to cope and recover. 
C. Water scarcity and desertification in the Sahel region
The Sahel region of Africa covers a swath of land across northern Africa, running from Senegal in the west to the horn of Africa in the east. Its boundaries are generally accepted to run along the southern edge of the Sahara desert to the north and the Sudanian savannah to the south. It is predominantly a semi-arid landscape, parts of which suffer from frequent droughts. 
      The region suffered a dramatic change in climate between the early 1970s and the late 1990s, with a decline in average rainfall of more than 20 per cent (Hulme et al., 2001) (see Appendix A1, figure A6). While initially the change in climate was attributed to overgrazing and other direct human effects on land degradation leading to desertification, more recently it has been established that the change in rainfall was largely owing to broader changes in global surface temperatures (Brooks, 2006). Desertification is estimated to be spreading on the southern edge of the Sahel by 6 to 10 km per year (Silva, 2016). Water stress on the region is expected to increase as a result of climate change (ibid.).
      The region is also notable for having considerable climate variability with relatively extreme shifts between wetter and drier periods. Much of the region also has a high frequency of droughts, over longer time scales (see Appendix A1, figure A7). Despite these trends, there is still considerable debate as to the prospects for the effects of climate change, with some areas expected to see increased desertification, other areas expected to see increased rainfall, and some areas uncertain (Met Office Hadley Centre 2010). 
1. Exposure
Much of the agricultural activity in this area is rain-fed, particularly for asset and income poor farmers. The changes in rainfall noted above have also been accompanied by greater climate variability, particularly increases in summertime and wintertime maximum temperatures (Ben Mohamed, 2009). The evidence for greater exposure to droughts by poorer households in the Sahel region varies by country, with Ethiopia, Nigeria and Senegal showing notable increases and Burkina Faso and Niger showing minor and moderate non-poor biases, respectively (Winsemius et al., 2015). The percentages of people exposed to drought overall are expected to rise considerably across much of West Africa under high emissions scenarios (ibid.). At the same time, some parts of the Sahel are expected to see increases in rainfall – which will likely result in expansion of agriculture and further displacement of pastoralists (Brooks, 2006). In other areas, such as in Mali, changes in rainfall patterns are anticipated to increase exposure for significant portions of the population as certain areas become more arid, with notable effects on livelihoods and undernutrition (Jankowska et al., 2012). Pastoralist populations, for example the Tuareg in Niger, are also subject to high levels of location-based exposure to climate change impacts (Silva, 2016). Poor access to labour markets by these populations, coupled with rural locations of livelihoods, limit the ability of some of these populations from relocating to less exposed locations (ibid.).
2. Susceptibility
The Sahel is also relatively unique in its coexisting populations of households deriving their livelihoods from agriculture and a sizeable pastoralist population. Overall, the considerable portions of the population in the region are engaged in these or related activities. For example, it is estimated that 90 per cent of all land under cultivation in Mali devoted to subsistence farming and nearly 80 per cent of the labour force is devoted to either agriculture or fishing (Holthuijzen and Maximillian, 2011). Pastoral communities, which tend to be located in the northern part of the Sahel, appear to be particularly susceptible to climate change owing to greater levels of exposure, more limited coping capacity and instability of their livelihoods (Heinrigs, 2010). In addition, these groups are also susceptible to impacts from desertification as a result of the interaction between climate change and local land use practices (Hein et al., 2009).
      In general, poor farmers tend to be more susceptible to the effects of desertification given their more limited ability to mobilize the necessary resources to adapt to lower levels of rainfall. Existing unequal arrangements that already prioritize water access by private landholders over family farmers means that reductions in available water due to climate change will only exacerbate this inequality (Cotula, 2006). In addition, imbalances in political power have resulted in unstable land tenure and institutional and market failures that reinforce marginalization for some groups (Silva, 2016). Desertification, increased droughts and land degradation have been implicated in increased income inequality as well as decreases in food security (Abdi et al., 2013). Many households in the region also rely exclusively on agricultural income, which, given the predominantly rain-fed nature of agriculture in the region, makes them particularly susceptible to climate change and climate variability impacts (Heinrigs, 2010). Lower income households, those with fewer assets, worse health and less education along with those headed by women, have all been shown to be more susceptible to the effects of climate variability and climate change, particularly desertification (Adepetu and Berthe, 2007). In addition, in the Sahel region, home to significant populations of pastoralists, these groups are also susceptible to impacts from desertification, both as a result of climate change and from local land use practices (Hein et al., 2009). Even within pastoralist populations socioeconomic stratification is increasing, with distance from infrastructure and access to natural resources as driving factors (ibid.).
3. Coping and recovery ability
It is interesting to note that there are hypotheses that attribute the rise of pastoralism in the region as an adaptive mechanism to, “respond to a rapidly changing, and increasingly unpredictable environment,” (Marshall and Hildebrand, 2002, cited in Brooks, 2006) and past movements appear to be driven by “arid crises” (di Lernia, 2006, cited in Brooks, 2006). Pastoralists in some countries have been marginalized as part of efforts towards economic development (Holthuijzen and Maximillian, 2011). There is notable horizontal inequality between some minority pastoralist populations (such as the Tuareg and Fula and other Arab-berber groups) and majority agricultural ethnic groups (Sub-Saharan tribes such as the Mande), for example, in Mali (Straus, 2011). Tuareg communities in Niger have experienced long-standing marginalization, amplified by French colonial policies that privileged agricultural communities’ access to land. Furthermore, the effectiveness of traditional strategies for coping with extreme weather in these communities have become less effective with climate change, have exacerbated already tenuous positions (Silva, 2016). In addition, population growth and urbanization have increased pressure on food supplies leading to projections of food insecurity for more than 40 per cent of the population (Verhagen, and others, 2003). 
      In general, in the West African Sahel, “[w]ealthier and larger farm households are more likely to be in a position to implement adaptive strategies, such as storage of food, technical measures to increase and stabilize food production, either by expansion of the land resources or by intensification, or outside agriculture through marketing of non-agricultural products, or selling services and/or labor to reduce or avoid future likelihood of stress and food shortages”,  (Dietz et al., 2004 in Sissoko et al., 2011). 
      In food producing regions in Burkina Faso, adverse rainfall conditions contributed to household participation in non-farm activities (D’haen et al., 2014)  - an adaptive response, but also a change in livelihoods having other potential spillover effects. Wealthier households in Burkina Faso take advantage of these circumstances by gaining access to cheaper and more flexible farm labour supplied by poorer households who are experiencing hardship (Silva, 2016). Climate change is also anticipated to have effects on the location and viability of particular livelihoods. For example, changing rainfall patterns is expected change which crops are viable and which households are vulnerable in Mali (Jankowska et al., 2012). With wealthier households better able to diversify their crop mixture as well as with increased access to water sources, this can be expected to exacerbate inequality. In general, those who were able to diversify their incomes saw increases in wealth, pointing to this as a worthwhile strategy (Mertz, and others, 2011). At the same time, despite other agricultural adaptation measures, thirty nine per cent of the Burkinabe population remains susceptible to considerable impacts from rainfall variation, forcing migration as another adaptation (Barbier et al., 2009). There are also instances of divergent coping and adaptation strategies of different populations. In Niger methods of coping that are favourable to agricultural populations have been detrimental to pastoralists with agricultural activities near pastoralist water resources prioritized (Snorek et al., 2014). Thus in the Sahel region climate change is aggravating many horizontal inequalities in addition to aggravation of inequality in terms of income and assets.
VIII. Final note
This chapter reveals the interlinkages between the various dimensions of inequality and climate change. It conceptualizes the evidence regarding the relationship between the two in the form of a vicious cycle, whereby initial inequalities make disadvantaged groups suffer disproportionate loss in their livelihoods, resulting in greater subsequent inequalities. It shows that structural inequalities exerts this influence through three concrete processes, namely (i) increased exposure of disadvantaged groups to climate hazards, (ii) increased susceptibility to damage, and (iii) decreased ability to cope with and recover from the damage. 
      The upshot is that structural inequalities need to be at the forefront of the understanding of vulnerability to climate hazards—as represented by the concepts of exposure and susceptibility—and the capacity to cope with and recover when they occur. To sharpen the understanding of the “climate change–inequality” nexus, prompting the required action, policy makers and all potentially affected stakeholders will have to rely on comprehensive assessments that challenge the traditional expertise of development thinking and policy. Ex-ante evaluations to determine the degree of vulnerability to climate hazards as well as policies that build resilience and capacity to cope and recover from hazards then they occur, be it autonomously or through policies, or both, will be critical for sustainable policy making in the years to come. Existing integrated climate impact assessments that rely on rigorous quantitative methodologies will prove critical to help confront this challenge should they prove accommodating to the role of inequalities in the climate change discussion, as further explained in the next chapter.

Chapter III: Bringing inequalities to the forefront of climate assessments 
Main messages
* Natural and social scientists have adopted an integrated approach to assess the complexity of climate impacts and policy responses in the face of them. They are integrating a suite of models that capture the multiple inter-linkages across and within the environmental, economic and social dimensions of development. They use these models to generate a cascade of scenarios about potential impacts of climate projections, with and without policies, for the world or at lower geographical levels.
* The focus of this approach needs to be sharpened by moving away from the narrow focus on long-term climate change and mitigation, to a broader analysis that includes adaptation, resilience, climate variability and extreme weather events, and from the standard accounting of the costs and benefits of typically a single policy, to a broader analysis of economy-wide feasibility of policies for climate resilience. Moreover, the analysis of inequalities should be at the forefront of the assessments.
* Existing modelling frameworks can be deployed to address inequalities through the analysis of impacts of climate hazards and policies on: livelihoods that rely on climate sensitive natural resources; the distribution of income on the basis of ownership and employment of production factors; human capital and access to public services; households whose socio-economic characteristics make them particularly vulnerable; and inequalities and vulnerabilities that stakeholders feel make them less resilient.
* Countries have much to gain from enhancing their technical capacities to develop and use integrated climate impact assessments for policy decision making. Better use of these methodologies require improvements in: governance to ensure assessments play a critical role in policy making, statistical and modelling capacity to develop assessments, and communication of scenario results to encourage policy dialogue with all stakeholders. Strengthening their statistical and modelling capacity also requires strengthening international collaboration to improve data sources and methodologies.
I. Introduction
Development policies have gained much better understanding about the links between the economic and social dimensions of development, but it took several years and improved capacities to move away from the narrow focus on economic growth as the main source of development. New data and analytical capacities have been developed to understand the characteristics of households and the sources of people’s vulnerability to economic shocks. New state capacities have also been developed to improve the policy frameworks that enhance consistency between economic and social policies. Environmental concerns, more generally, and the impact of climate change on people’s livelihoods in particular, require additional efforts to strengthen governments’ capacities to improve understanding of the new challenges and improved policy frameworks to design and implement coherent policies across the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development simultaneously. It is thus important to bring together the different methodologies available to support integrated assessments of development challenges, including impacts from climate change.
Climate-resilient development is a complex proposition. It requires good information systems that provide the data and statistics necessary to identify people at risk in their geographical contexts. But it also requires improved integrated assessments to understand possible impacts of climate change on people and their livelihoods, including good analysis of policy options to build resilience. Assessments supporting this process require scientific knowledge across disciplines from the natural and social sciences, as well as local knowledge. This is a challenge that goes beyond the traditional expertise of the development community and the scientists working on their own disciplines.
Given this complexity, natural and social scientists have adopted an integrated approach to climate impact assessments. Computer-based models are the backbone of this approach: a whole suite of them are being integrated to generate and assess scenarios about potential impacts of climate projections, with and without policy responses, for the world or at lower geographical levels. 
The approach is quantitative in nature because numerical estimation is needed for understanding the magnitude of potential impacts from climate hazards, which is critical for assessing the type of policy responses required. Modelled-based scenarios are uncertain for many reasons, including the fact that available climate projections themselves are uncertain. It is also the case that even the most sophisticated models represent an imperfect simplification of complex realities. Albeit imperfect, the approach serves the purpose of establishing a range of plausible impact scenarios which is critical to have a sense of the magnitude of risks to which vulnerable groups are exposed to. New methodologies to systematically incorporate the opinions from relevant stakeholders in modelling specification are helping to improve the interpretation of results and to reduce the uncertainty in the results. Scenarios are being used to develop narrative storylines that help decision makers to plan policy interventions to reduce adverse impacts from a changing climate. Whether this ex-ante assessment of policy options influences actual decision making will depend on the extent to which public sector institutions are able to adopt evidence based methodologies (see chapter IV).
	The use of integrated impact assessments, as a tool for policy making, is in its infancy. Most countries do not possess the capacity to use modelling tools as part of routine policy making assessments. Deploying these methodologies requires large data sources from different disciplines and sound technical capacity to run these analytical tools. 
The holistic nature of the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development is increasing the demand for integrated assessment tools, as the basis for coherent policy decisions. These methodologies are particularly useful to understand the range of impacts from climate change and to assess policy options for climate resilience development. In responding to the need to expand the use of these methodologies to support policy decision making, there is an urgent need to sharpen the focus in three directions. First, it is important to move away from the narrow focus on long-term climate change and mitigation and expand the focus to include assessments of climate variability and extreme weather events impacts; as well as expanding the assessment of policy questions to include adaptation and resilience. Second, there is a need to deepen the analysis of broader economy-wide feasibility of policies for climate resilience; as opposed to the limited accounting of the costs and benefits of climate policies. Third, few integrated climate impact assessments have addressed inequalities in ways that contribute to understanding the way in which inequalities exacerbate vulnerability to climate hazards and the policy options that would contribute to address structural inequalities towards climate resilience development.
This chapter addresses these three considerations focusing on inequalities. It examines different ways in which existing modelling frameworks can be deployed to trace effects from climate hazards and can be used to assess policy options to address different sources of inequality. This chapter will show the way integrated climate impact assessments can be used in response to questions such as:
* What are potential impacts of climate hazards on livelihoods? Do existing inequalities exacerbate these impacts? Are inequalities aggravated by climate hazards?
* What are policy options that, by addressing existing inequalities, contribute to building climate resilience? Are these policies economically feasible?
The next section describes the integrated approach to climate impact assessments as it is mostly applied in practice; focusing on its analytical steps, strengths and weaknesses. This description lays out the ground for understanding, in the subsequent section, the ways in which modelling frameworks are deployed to explore analytical dimensions of inequality. The last section summarises and spells out the key challenges going forward to make the integrated approach to climate impact assessments more accessible and applicable, particularly in developing countries where adaptation and building resilience to climate hazards is most urgent. 
II. Integrated approach to climate impact assessments
Modelling tools can be deployed to bring inequalities to the forefront of the analysis within the contours of the existing integrated approach to climate impact assessments. To explain how this is achieved, it is first necessary to understand the analytical steps, strengths and weaknesses of this integrated approach as it is typically implemented in practice. It is particularly important to understand the extent to which inequalities have featured (or not) in integrated climate impact assessments. 
A. Analytical steps and strengths
The integrated approach to climate impact assessments possesses a number of strengths. It relies on the expertise from natural and social scientists across different disciplines and a sound science-policy interface. It integrates modelling tools to understand the multiple inter-linkages across and within the environmental, economic and social dimensions of development. It helps to estimate climate-related impacts and ponder policy responses. A thorough description of this approach as typically taken in assessments of climate change (that is, focusing exclusively on long-term climate impacts) is presented in box III.1. 
Figure III.1 simplifies the cascade of analytical steps taken in this approach, but it also depicts critical extensions to incorporate climate variability and extreme weather events in the analysis, as well as engage stakeholders in the process of assessment. 
Global climate models are first used to project changes in climate over relatively large spatial and temporal scales, typically in temperature and precipitation. These climate projections are influenced by scenarios of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and concentration pathways for the world, under different levels of mitigation, as given by so-called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). Examples of this type of projections have been presented in chapter I when discussing the challenges of climate change.
Climate projections are subsequently “downscaled” through global biophysical models to simulate how they impact natural resource systems (land, energy, water). At this stage, an objective of the analysis may be to determine how changes in natural resource systems affect a particular area or sector without much socio-economic detail. 
Global economic models are incorporated next, in order to generate scenarios that more fully translate changes in natural resource systems into changes in socio-economic systems. At this step, Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs)—which were introduced in chapter I—are used to inform the scenarios, by adding details on population growth (by age, sex, and education), urbanization, and economic development (generally proxied by GDP growth). These details are otherwise not specified in global economic models.
This cascade of global impact scenarios is further downscaled if the purpose is to understand potential impacts and vulnerabilities at lower geographical levels. In this case, additional biophysical and economic models are deployed for countries, regions or sectors. Once all scenarios of impacts and vulnerabilities associated with climate projections have been detected and assessed (at the different geographical scales), additional scenarios can be run to assess alternative policy responses to reduce adverse impacts.
Scenarios can also be reassessed to reduce the uncertainty in their results. Major sources of uncertainty include climate change scenarios under different levels of mitigation; climate variability; model simplifications that imperfectly represent reality; socio-economic projections; transformation of global data across various scales of time and space and across natural and social sciences; and, data constraints, particularly at the local level. With regard to model simplifications, in particular, models rely, implicitly or explicitly, on assumptions about behaviour, even though behavioural responses are critical for adaptation.  There are techniques that help minimise uncertainty in scenarios. In the field of climate, however, uncertainty tends to be “deep”. Hence, it is becoming a practice to interpret the outcomes of scenarios less quantitatively, by getting opinions from policy makers and other relevant stakeholders. These opinions help understand, if not improve, the scenarios being generated (figure III.1, right-hand side). Uncertainty makes it necessary to recognize that integrated climate impact assessments do not provide predictions of the future; rather, they provide information about a plausible range of future outcomes that policy makers may like to keep in mind.
Integrated climate impact assessments, as typically implemented in practice, also possess a narrow focus. Strengthening the use of these methodologies to extend the analysis to issues related to adaptation, resilience, climate variability, extreme weather events, macroeconomic feasibility of policies, and inequalities would provide valuable information for policy decision making.
B. Emphasis on mitigation and long-term climate change
Climate impact assessments have focused more on mitigation and long-term climate change; less attention has been paid to adaptation, resilience, climate variability and extreme weather events. The focus on mitigation finds explanation in the difficulty of measuring adaptation using widely accepted indicators. Adaptation and resilience have no common reference metrics in the same way that tonnes of GHGs or radiative forcing values are for mitigation and for that reason these concepts have not featured prominently in planning (Noble et al., 2014).
Nevertheless, the lack of common reference metrics for adaptation and resilience need not prevent sharpening the adaptation and resilience focus in assessments for two reasons. First, integrated climate impact assessments are multi-metric in nature because of the multiplicity of integrated models across different disciplines upon which they rely. Second, adaptation and resilience arguably need to be understood in a development policy context because they evoke positive and broad development goals (e.g., education, livelihood improvements, food security, health, infrastructure development, and so forth) (Berkes, 2007; Moss et al., 2012), which are in many instances necessary to bring about transformative changes (see chapter I). Looked the other way around, adaptation and resilience are important for development: the risks posed by climate events affect the long-term efficiency with which development resources are invested and development objectives achieved (Lal et al., 2012). Development and transformative policies that enable climate resilience can thus be subjected to analysis in integrated climate impact assessments. 
	From a methodological point of view, there is no reason to exclusively focus on long-term climate change either. Irrespective of whether a specific event can be attributed to climate change, there is ample evidence of the severity of impacts from climate extremes and variability on people and livelihoods (see chapters I and II). This evidence provides a sense of magnitude of potential shocks from extremes on natural resource and socio-economic systems. It is information that is easily used in designing scenarios for integrated climate impact assessments. In this case, the sequence of analytical steps may begin with imposing an exogenous change (hereafter, “shock” for simplicity) on national, regional or sectoral models, without necessarily linking with global models (figure III.1, right-hand side). This makes it possible to estimate the sensitivity of outcomes to climate variability and extreme weather events as well as evaluate the necessary policy responses. 
C. Insufficient analysis of macroeconomic feasibility of policies
Integrated climate impact assessments rely on a suite of economic models to translate climate and biophysical impacts into socio-economic impacts. However, there has been a tendency of using economic models to apply a standard accounting of the costs and benefits of climate policy, typically a single project or intervention, without necessarily aiming at an understanding of the economy-wide repercussions and macroeconomic feasibility of the policy. As a result, some economic models have been more widely used than others—particularly those that are aggregate and simpler in their data requirements and estimation techniques.
Some of the most frequently used economic models take prices as given and do not trace resource allocation effects (e.g., reduced-form econometric models). Other economic models do allow for changes in resource allocation (e.g., microeconomic structural models and land-use models), but they possess insufficient details on how prices are determined in different markets. In practice, however, prices in the different markets of the economy change over time, particularly in contexts characterised by changing climatic conditions. Furthermore, price changes can prompt resource allocation that may in some instances represent autonomous adaptation strategies.  Without resource allocation effects, it is also difficult to evaluate the macroeconomic feasibility of policies. The allocation of funds to finance the implementation of policies aiming at climate resilience can for example crowd out other climate and non-climate investments with unintended consequences for the economy, which would be a case of policy incoherence or maladaptation (see chapter IV). 
It is important to keep these considerations in mind when assessing the macroeconomic feasibility of policies for climate resilience, which presupposes the use of more comprehensive economic modelling frameworks. Market equilibrium models are better suited for assessments that consider the wider costs and benefits of climate policies for the national economy as a whole. Partial equilibrium (PE) and computable general equilibrium (CGE) models help simulate the effects of ‘shocks’ or changes in productivity, policy or other factors such as climate on various economic outcomes, including market equilibrium prices, production, productivity, consumption, trade and land use. CGE models, or economy-wide models for simplicity, are particularly suited to trace effects working through the different markets of the economy (i.e., factors, commodities, foreign exchange), under given macroeconomic constraints. Economy-wide models are thus better suited to assess the economic and financial feasibility of policies for climate resilience; as such, they should be at the core of integrated climate impact assessments—possibly interacting with other economic models. 
D. Tendency to exclude or inadequately address inequalities 
Even though inequalities exacerbate the vulnerability and exposure of disadvantaged groups to climate hazards, they are often overlooked in integrated climate impact assessments. Few climate impact assessments incorporate equity considerations and the methodologies are generally not suited to trace impacts on specific groups that are particularly vulnerable. This explains that fact that, as noted in chapter II, the discussion on the social impact of climate change has been limited, and the interlinkages between climate change and inequality are yet to be fully explored. 
Equity considerations in relevant studies are limited to the analysis of the “social cost of carbon”—which is equivalent to the expected present value damage of CO2 emissions along a business-as-usual scenario. This type of analysis is explicit, if not entirely theoretical, about how the costs and benefits of mitigation policy are distributed, which is an important limitation. The analysis assumes certain mitigation policy is considered to be socially desirable vis-à-vis alternative mitigation policies (generally leaving out adaptation policies), because those who gain can in principle be better off if they compensate those negatively impacted by the policy, which does not occur in practice. 
Another important assumption in existing studies is that a dollar to a poor person is the same as a dollar to a rich person, such that it is possible to add up monetised welfare losses across disparate incomes. “Equity weights” have been introduced to “relax” this unrealistic assumption, which has significantly changed the results of the calculation of the social cost of an incremental emission (Anthoff et al., 2009). This has been an important step to suggest that equity should be a prime concern in climate policy. However, due to data restrictions, equity weights tend to be constructed based on average per capita income of regions rather than individuals. Furthermore, approaches to equity weighing can also be rendered inappropriate from a national decision maker’s point of view, because domestic impacts of global emissions are not valued at domestic values (Anthoff and Tol, 2010). 
Not only is mitigation the focus of these studies but their approaches to equity (i.e., “social cost of carbon” and “equity weights”) are rendered inadequate to trace impacts on specific groups that are particularly vulnerable to climate hazards. Other than this literature, there is a serious gap in addressing inequalities in the integrated climate impact assessments, even in the few assessments that focus on adaptation. 
The fifth IPCC Assessment Report (AR5) suggests that few assessments examine how inequalities shape differential vulnerabilities to climate change (Olsson et al., 2014). A review of 13 economic assessments of adaptation options in this report, spanning from 2006 to 2013, corroborates this observation (table III.1). Only two of the studies address issues of health that matter for inequality, although inequality is not a central theme. One analysis is on diarrheal diseases and puts emphasis on the major burdens among the poor and evaluates different policy options to address this vulnerability. The other study evaluates adaptation options that reduce undernourishment, a potentially serious public health problem that can deprive generations from opportunities. Some studies provide analysis on the effects of climate change on food security and livelihoods of the rural poor, or consider different farm types, but without making explicit reference to inequalities. Another study considers inequalities only contextually. It is also interesting to note that few studies address the macroeconomic repercussions of adaptation policies. Also, although several methodologies are deployed, the use of simulation analysis predominates.
III. Analytical dimensions of inequalities in climate impact assessments
Given the flexibility in combining modelling tools, inequalities can feature more prominently in integrated climate impact assessments. Existing modelling frameworks can be deployed and integrated to explore four dimensions of analysis of inequalities. Table III.2 summarises the main characteristics of these dimensions, including sources of inequality and the main strengths and weaknesses of the modelling frameworks that need to be deployed to address each of them. The remainder of this section discusses the four analytical dimensions of inequalities in more detail, staying within the contours of the integrated approach to climate impact assessments. It presents findings from existing analyses to explain the main strengths and weaknesses of the modelling frameworks—rather than theoretical descriptions of them—and to show how policies that specifically address inequalities and are economically feasible function as enablers of climate resilience. At the end of the section, the discussion turns to the role of stakeholders in providing information and know-how that improve modelling results in general, and provide insights with regard to inequalities and vulnerabilities that hamper their resilience in particular.
E. Livelihoods and climate sensitive natural resources 
Livelihoods that dependent on climate sensitive natural resources—such as land, water or energy—are largely exposed to climate hazards (see chapter II). In the presence of poverty and multidimensional inequalities, large groups of people and communities making a living in climate sensitive environments also face high vulnerability to climate hazards. To understand how such vulnerability can translate into actual impacts on the economy and inequality, it is first necessary to deploy an analysis on the impacts of climate hazards on climate sensitive natural resources. 
This type of analysis begins with biophysical models (land, water and energy systems models) that help translate climate projections (from climate models under assumptions of GHG emissions and concentration pathways and different levels of mitigation) into changes in natural resource systems. This analysis may be aimed at assessing adaptation strategies. For example, Bhave et al. (2016) downscale regional scenarios of future climatic change through a water systems model, in order to estimate impacts on water availability in the Kangsabati river basin, in India. In assessing policy options they find that increasing forest cover addresses adaptation requirements more suitably than constructing check dams. Different studies in Cervigni et al. (2016) use an energy systems model to channel the impacts of a wide range of future climate scenarios on hydropower and irrigation expansion plans in Africa’s main river basins (Congo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Senegal, Volta, and Zambezi). These studies suggest that hydropower infrastructure in these African countries needs to be developed irrespective of the scenario of water availability. 
Each natural resource systems model (whether for land, water or energy) is useful in its own right. However, a more holistic approach whereby these systems are integrated is more useful: it makes it possible to understand how changes in one resource may impact other resources as well as how natural resources can be allocated more efficiently to meet demands for crops, water and energy services, or to adapt more broadly. A number of studies speak well about the advantages of using the Water, Energy, and Food Security Nexus (NEXUS) and the Climate, Land, Energy and Water Systems (CLEWS) frameworks, which integrate different natural resource systems models. 
IRENA (2015) reports findings from a number of case studies exploring the NEXUS. One of the studies shows that half of China’s proposed coal-fired power plants, which require significant water for cooling, are located in areas already affected by water stress, creating potential conflicts between power plant operators and other water users. In India, where nearly 20 per cent of electricity generation capacity is used for agricultural water pumping, lower-than-usual rainfall accompanied by decreasing water tables is putting tremendous stress on the electricity system during peak seasons. These two examples are useful to show the functionality of the NEXUS approach in providing important policy insights. That is, water is constrained by climate change and faces competing allocations between energy generation and other uses such as farming. The scarcity of water may hamper the livelihoods of farmers who may not easily find alternative ways to cope with the changes. 
Another example is in the island of Mauritius, where important policy concerns have been addressed using the CLEWS framework (Howells et al., 2013). Facing a recent loss of export competitiveness of the sugar industry, the Government has considered two policy objectives: developing bio-ethanol production to reduce GHG emissions and cutting energy imports. These objectives may have important implications for livelihoods because achieving them implies diverting sugarcane production away from export markets towards domestic processing of bio-ethanol, in an island where sugarcane plantations cover 80 to 90 per cent of cultivated land. The CLEWS analysis shows that the two policy objectives can be achieved, but not without important trade-offs. In recent years, lower rainfall has led to water shortages on the island. Under scenarios of climate change, lower rainfall implies supplying water needs of sugarcane production through irrigation to maintain bio-ethanol production. This ultimately leads to a gradual drawdown of storage levels in reservoirs, and if the demand for more energy to desalinate water for irrigation is met with coal-fired power generation as planned, then the GHG benefits of the bio-ethanol policy are eroded by increased emissions from the power sector. Higher coal imports also have a negative impact on energy security. Hence, the benefits of the policy are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The island faces two possibilities. Sugarcane producers will eventually have to scale back production (which would jeopardize the livelihood of populations that rely on this production) or they will have to resort to expensive water desalination (which would have detrimental environmental impacts). The CLEWS analysis has prompted the Government to start thinking about how to adapt to these challenges. 
This holistic approach to natural resource systems analysis is perhaps the first entry point to the analysis of inequalities in integrated climate impact assessments. It allows for knowing with some precision how climate sensitive natural resources are affected by climate hazards, with and without adaptation policies. It also provides information on how the livelihoods that depend on those resources are affected. However, additional socio-economic analysis out of the boundaries of the natural resource systems analysis is required to understand the distributional impacts of climate hazards and the policy options to reduce the exposure and vulnerability of people to them. 
In the Mauritius CLEWS analysis, for example, under the scenario where sugar cane producers would scale back production owing to climate change, unemployment, welfare and perhaps income distribution would likely be affected. The effects would likely be detrimental to the population that owns factors of production employed in the bio-ethanol industry, be these labour, capital or land. However, these impacts are not quantifiable with the CLEWS methodology (or a NEXUS approach for that matter) and without further analysis with other tools such impacts remain mostly conjectural. Complementary use of socio-economic modelling tools would help bridge this methodological gap. Economy-wide models, albeit their limitations, are particularly suited to channel changes in climate sensitive natural resources—as detected through natural resource systems models—throughout the economy. 
F. Ownership of production factors and income distribution
Economic models in general, and economy-wide models in particular, come in handy to further channelling the impacts of climate hazards on natural resources throughout the economy. At this level of analysis, it is possible to gauge the extent to which income is affected and how this income is distributed according to the ownership of production factors (labour, land, capital). These factors are a part of the physical and human assets that chapter II regards as sources of inequality, from which income and its accumulation (savings) are derived. Disadvantaged groups suffer disproportionate loss of income associated with these factors as a result of climate hazards, making inequality worse. Nonetheless, as noted in Ch. II, there are institutional and political factors that may have influenced the ownership of production factors across different groups; this is clearly and issue beyond the scope of modelling.   
The use of economy-wide models is particularly justified because the direct impacts on assets may in turn result in indirect impacts if there is disruption of economic activity which results in unemployment of production factors. For disadvantaged groups, a small but adverse change in the employment of the production factors upon which their livelihoods rely (generally labour, but also land in some cases), will likely exacerbate their vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards. The impact of climate hazards, however, propagate through the entire economy; poverty and distributional impacts will be the result of the multiple direct and indirect effects of the initial shock. 
To illustrate the functionality of the economy-wide framework, consider the following example for Bolivia, a country that has been studied extensively due to its exposure to climate hazards. Scenarios are developed to analyse the impact of hypothetical climate shocks that may eventually affect labour productivity (through the impact of climate change on workers’ health) or destroy public infrastructure (through an extreme weather event). The analysis shows that these shocks have impacts throughout the economy, including through the employment of production factors (see box III.2). Labour wages are hit adversely, both in absolute terms as well as relative to capital. Households whose livelihoods rely on labour income, who are generally the most vulnerable groups, lose out in the process. Additional scenarios show that scaling up public investments helps to cope with the simulated climate shocks, but the policy may come with macroeconomic hardships, depending on how the investments are financed. The policy can thus bring about unintended consequences that may exacerbate existing inequalities through the effects on economic growth and employment. This type of analysis is quite useful to assess both potential impacts from climate hazards and the macroeconomic feasibility of policies for climate resilience, as well as the possibility of maladaptation (see chapter IV).
This type of analysis also permits to identify situations where there may not only be losers but also winners, which can also be informative in policy making. For example, the same analysis for Bolivia shows that, in an alternative scenario where the world price of food increases presumably as a result of climate change, farmers and food producers are favourably affected—in detriment to other producers whose economic activity becomes relatively less profitable (box III.2). Unskilled non-salaried workers benefit most from the food price shock because of the large presence of unskilled small farmers and self-employed workers in food production. The shock actually improves the livelihoods of households that rely on unskilled non-salaried labour, in detriment to other households. The inequality impact of the climate shock through food prices is actually favourable in this particular case. 
< Box III.2 around here; see box at the end >
      Another interesting example comes from a recent integrated climate impact assessment, under the auspices of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) (Andersen et al., 2016). The analysis estimates the impact of crop-yield losses in the order of 10-30 per cent over the next half century due to climate change, and the impact of how this changes global prices. The study finds that such significant shock would not translate into proportional income losses for farmers or the population in general. Farmers in Peru, Brazil and Mexico, for example, adapt autonomously (e.g., modifying planting dates to maximize crop yields, switching to more climate-resilient crops, or moving to different agro-climatic zones) and reallocate resources in response to changing market conditions. As a result, the final effects of climate change tend to be smaller than the initial crop-yield shock and the net effects on income of different household groups are modest in either direction. In Mexico, for example, 80 different household types were analysed (differentiated by gender of the head, agro-ecological zone, and income decile), but impacts were very similar for them all, with tiny losses in welfare between 0.1 and 0.3 per cent. Interestingly, this small effect on income across income deciles is robust to the choice of climate model (figure III.2). 
The IFPRI study was not aimed at analysing adaptation policies, but the results of a study such as this would be useful to inform policy making. It suggests that farmers autonomously try and adapt to climate change in the long-run. Policies could thus accelerate this adaption process: for example, through public investments in infrastructure that boost productivity (as in the example of Bolivia above), fiscal incentives (as further explained below), incentives to adopt climate resilient technologies, and so forth. Further analysis of planned adaptation strategies, for example in farming, may be explored by integrating more disaggregated models, for example crop and livestock models at the regional level, as further shown below. 
The analysis of the income that is generated (mostly through the employment of production factors) and its distribution across different household groups, as described above, albeit useful, is insufficient. It is useful because households located at the lowest deciles of a distribution are those that tend to possess relatively less ownership of factors of production and assets in general. They are generally, albeit not always, adversely affected by climate hazards. Changes in the income of these households can be compared with changes in the income of households located at higher income brackets. But this approach of comparing changes in incomes between households groups (classified by income deciles, or even other dimensions such as geographical area, education of the head, and so on) is still quite aggregate. As such, it misses out much of possible changes in income distribution within the household groups, which can ultimately affect the wellbeing of vulnerable households. The economy-wide analysis alone is also not well suited to address other forms of inequality, including inequalities that are determined by certain configurations of socio-economic characteristics such as gender, age, race, religion, ethnicity, and many others. Before describing the necessary methodological extensions to bridge this methodological limitation, it is important to understand how economy-wide models are further exploited to address human development issues that may also act as sources of inequality.
G. Human capital and access to public services and resources
In coping with climate hazards, the poor and disadvantaged groups often face difficult choices between protecting their human capital (health and education), or preserving their physical capital or even their consumption levels (see chapter II). These groups face these choices because they possess an income constraint and may also possess insufficient access to basic public services and resources which acts as another source of inequality.
The economy-wide framework, as described up until now, misses out important aspects with regard to human capital, but this need not be the case. The example on Bolivia shows that investments in health can contribute to offset the impact of climate change on labour productivity (through the effect on workers’ health), but there is no explicit accounting of how this policy improves health indicators over time. Such accounting is critical in the evaluation of policies that build climate resilience through investing in human development. 
Many studies rely on long-term (econometric) estimations to gauge how climate change might affect human development over time. For example, climate change has been found to reduce life expectancy in Peru (Andersen et al., 2009), depress people’s incomes in Chile (Andersen and Verner, 2010), and encourage within-country migration in Bolivia (Andersen et al., 2010), among others. Some economists argue that these estimations in a way capture the various economic adjustments or adaptations that occur in response to climate change, and can be interpreted as a type of ‘analog’ approach to climate impact assessment (Antle and Valdivia, 2016). But, on the other hand, these estimations have significant limitations. The models used (generally reduced-form econometric models) do not represent many of the outcomes of interest to policy decision makers such as price changes and costs of adaptation. They cannot be used to estimate the effects of adaptation distinct from the effects of climate change either. These models implicitly hold prices and all other non-climate factors constant, and cannot account for the effects of possible changes in socio-economic conditions. 
	Issues of human development can more adequately be addressed within the contours of the economy-wide modelling approach. In this case, the models need to specify different human development indicators as a function of socio-economic determinants such as, for example, household income; private and public spending in education, health, water and sanitation; and, public infrastructure. These indicators enhance the multi-metric nature of integrated climate impact assessments and bring inequality in access to basic services to the forefront of the analysis. Economy-wide analyses with these characteristics do exist but they have not featured prominently in climate impact assessments. 
An economy-wide analysis for Bolivia, Costa Rica and Uganda presenting such characteristics explores the scope to scale-up public investments in human development, by raising public revenue through an implicit carbon tax (Sánchez and Zepeda, 2016). Scenarios show that the impact of the fiscal policy could hurt the economy, but this unintended consequence could be offset by allocating public expenditure to invest either in public infrastructure (that increases access to schools or health centres) or in education. In either case the economy grew more with the implicit carbon tax, and primary completion rates as well as child and mortality rates improved, signalling a reduction in unequal access to basic public services. Clearly, these are scenarios of sustainable development policy coherence that can inform decision making for example if objectives are to mitigate, build resilience and reduce inequalities at the same time.
Additional examples are in economy-wide modelling analyses for 27 countries from different developing regions which find that scaling public spending more aggressively in primary education, health, and water and sanitation would have allowed for more timely achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (Sánchez et al., 2010; Sánchez and Vos, 2013). However, these analyses further show that achieving the human development goals would not have come without macroeconomic hardships: economic growth was found to be impacted either negatively or very mildly owing to the effects on aggregate demand of using one source of financing or another. Some of the financing options were found to jeopardize fiscal sustainability. This evidence is consistent with the results shown for Bolivia above (recall box III.2). Again, this type of analysis is useful to ponder trade-offs between building resilience through more equal access to basic public services and economic growth.
There are also other important inter-temporal trade-offs to consider in an economy-wide framework. Most human development investments pay off in the long term, so the impact on inequality may come with an important lag. Sánchez and Cicowiez (2014) estimate that past investments in education, health, water and sanitation during the period in which the MDGs were implemented, could lead to GDP growth gains in the range of 0.2-1.0 percentage points between 2015 and 2030. These authors also find that these potential long-term payoffs would be larger had the economies been more capable to absorb the new human capital (see additional evidence below). A key message from this analysis is that a lack of transformative change may prevent similar policies to achieve better results, in terms of both ensuring that workers, by being adequately employed, become more resilient to shocks, and in terms of reducing inequality. It would have been difficult to arrive at these policy insights without deploying an economy-wide model with human development dimensions. 
H. Socio-economic characteristics at the household level 
Gender, race, ethnicity, religion, and other socio-economic characteristics of the population, alone or combined can form inequalities with dominant and important roles in defining the vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards (see chapter II). Analysis at the micro level through better use of household surveys add value in identifying households whose vulnerability is determined by specific socio-economic characteristics. The analysis can be developed using a panel of household surveys or a single survey. Using a panel of data from the Ethiopian Rural Household Survey (1994-2004), Dercon et al. (2005) find that female headed households are particularly vulnerable to drought shocks. An analysis using Bolivia’s household survey for 2011 finds that households that are particularly at risk of being vulnerable to shocks (due to low levels and diversification of income) are young households with high dependency burdens, which prevents the mother from working. In this household survey, 18.6 per cent of all female heads or spouses had a child before turning 20 years of age. Other sources of vulnerability include the number of persons in the household, whether the household lives in urban areas (because in Bolivia income is more diversified in rural areas), being part of an indigenous community, and others (box III.3).
< Box III.3 around here; see box at the end >
Information extracted from household surveys is descriptive in nature but provides bases for policy analysis through microsimulations. For example, a microsimulation of an evenly distributed cash transfer in Bolivia in the amount of 80 Bolivianos (Bs.) per person per month (equivalent to USD 0.38 per day) shows that, although this is not enough to survive, it reduces and increases vulnerability and resilience, respectively (table III.3). If the transfer is targeted specifically to the poor, the monthly transfer increases substantially (to Bs. 175) without increasing the total costs of the programme. Such targeting greatly increases the effectiveness of the programme in reducing vulnerability and increasing resilience even more. The poor in this case were identified using descriptive information provided by the household survey.
More complex policy scenarios can be evaluated. For example, consider a scenario where young women do not have children before they are 20 years old and instead these women work for a minimum wage (Bs. 815 per month). It is implicitly assumed that instead of raising children in their teens, these women were able to get more education and now have more time to work. The results show an increase in per capita income, a reduction in the share of vulnerable households, and an increase in the share of resilient households. Although this policy does not achieve as impressive results as the cash transfer to all people living in poverty, it requires a much lower investment of public resources (less than 1 per cent of the costs of the cash transfer programme). In contrast, the simulated universal cash transfer requires a public spending in the order of 5 per cent of GDP, which would have to be financed without introducing macro-economic instability in the country.
	Combining the use of economy-wide models and microsimulations provides important information to assess policy options to reduce vulnerability. The analysis typically begins with understanding the macroeconomic repercussions of the policy and its financial and macroeconomic feasibility. Subsequently, key information on employment and income changes emanating from the economy-wide analysis is passed on to the household survey to determine distributive impacts through the microsimulation model (Vos and Sánchez, 2010). The main strength of this approach is that effects are quantified for the “full” income distribution (that is, at a disaggregated level), not across different types of households groups as it would be the case of using an economy-wide model alone.
This approach of integrating economy-wide models and microsimulations needs to become a systematic component in climate impact assessments. Only until recently have Ruijven et al. (2015) reviewed methods for including income distribution in economy-wide models for long-term climate change research. But some existing studies provide interesting illustration about the usefulness of the approach. The approach has been applied to assess impacts and feasibility of cash transfer programmes targeting households living in poverty in Latin American countries (Cicowiez and Sánchez, 2011). These transfers are found to unambiguously reduce income inequality?as measured by the Gini coefficient of income per capita; but the fiscal sustainability of these programmes depends largely on the extent to which governments are able to finance them and overcome fiscal constraints, requiring sustained economic growth. 
I. Inequalities and vulnerabilities through the lens of the stakeholders 
Modelling frameworks as those described above help generate useful scenarios to inform policymakers but they are all characterised by uncertainty. This has prompted analysts and researchers to work with stakeholders whose feedback is proving useful to design and reassess scenarios, thus helping reduce uncertainty. This feedback is critical because stakeholders can provide information about factors that exacerbate their vulnerability and exposure to climate risks as well as adaptation options that they believe may help them built resilience. 
The benefits of engaging stakeholders in scenario design and policy dialogue are well documented. In considering adaptation to future flood risk in the Thames Estuary, the United Kingdom Environment Agency applied four scenarios over three time periods to flood management. Through a wide consultation process, it was determined that improving the current infrastructure continues to be the preferred strategy until 2070, when construction of an outer barrage may become justifiable, especially as economic and climate change conditions change over time (O’Brien et al., 2012). For the analysis on water availability and climate change in India’s Kangsabati river basin discussed above, the authors used multi-level stakeholder workshops to identify and prioritize adaptation options that were subsequently evaluated using a water systems model (Bhave et al., 2016). Another study has examined climate impacts and adaptation for the crop sector in four eastern European and Central Asian countries, whose scenarios considered non-market and socially contingent effects including information from a stakeholder consultation process (Sutton et al., 2013).
The Agricultural Model Inter-comparison and Improvement Project (AgMIP) is perhaps one of the best examples of initiatives relying on stakeholders for scenario design. AgMIP developed the Regional Integrated Assessment (RIA) framework and the concept of “Representative Agricultural Pathways” (RAPs). The RIA framework links global and regional scenarios essentially along the lines of the integrated approach discussed above (box III.1), although a number of features of this framework stand out. Using farm survey data for regions, the framework studies heterogeneous populations of farm households whose livelihoods depend on agricultural systems. RAPs are one of the outstanding features; they add further details about the future non-climate conditions to which farm households may be exposed and also help project detail on inputs that generally do not exist in models. 
In developing the regional studies with the AgMIP-RIA framework, research teams have on-going interactions and activities with stakeholders over the life of the project (figure III.4). Specific milestones are accomplished by or during the AgMIP regional workshops. Two groups of stakeholders participate: higher-level decision makers and experts, and communities of farmers. The interactions with these stakeholders are particularly important for scenario design, following several cycles and each cycle containing several steps to come up with RAPs (starting in the mid-term workshops). 
The AgMIP-RIA framework is being used by regional teams in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia to assess climate change impacts, vulnerability and the potential for adaptations identified by the research teams and stakeholders to facilitate adaptation to climate change. For these assessments the regional teams (researchers and stakeholders) have devised RAPs for each of the regions (Valdivia et al., 2015). Thus, they have identified several key indicators to describe the future biophysical and socio-economic conditions. For example, soil degradation and the thinking that it will increase have consistently been identified as a major issue by all the teams. However, the magnitude of change varies across cases; for example, the magnitude of soil degradation is small in cases where there is more government investment in agriculture, promotion of better soil conservation activities, and increased fertilizer use. Other important trends in key indicators have been identified as well; but what is important to highlight at this point is that knowledge from stakeholders has been critical to capture a great deal of heterogeneity in key indicators and trends among the regions’ farm population. This is a key factor in modelling how systems are impacted by climate change and how they can adapt to it.
The results of the regional studies demonstrate that there is a wide range of vulnerability to climate change under current socio-economic conditions, averaging about 60 per cent across study sites, when this is defined by the number of farm households that lose income in net terms due to climate change (figure III.5). Results also show that under the generally more favourable future socio-economic conditions defined by the regional RAPs, vulnerability to climate change averages less than 50 per cent, demonstrating that positive socio-economic developments could increase farm incomes and, in some cases, help to reduce vulnerability to climate change and reduce poverty.
A comparison of the AgMIP regional studies for regions analysing impacts of climate change in Zimbabwe and Senegal attests to the importance of engaging stakeholders for reducing uncertainty in scenario results. The Senegal team used modelled-based projections of price and productivity trends. The Zimbabwean team used price and productivity trends estimated from interactions with stakeholders and local experts. The results for Senegal show a larger variability (e.g., the range of net economic impacts) and also a much larger (positive) impact under future socio-economic conditions compared to the Zimbabwe case (figure III.6). 
Preliminary analyses of adaptation strategies for these regions also show that there are substantial opportunities to offset the adverse impacts and enhance the beneficial effects of climate change (Rosenzweig and Hillel, 2015). In the case of Zimbabwe’s region of Nkayi, scenarios built in collaboration with stakeholders made it clear that asset ownership is an important aspect in understanding unequal effects of climate change and the effectiveness of adaptation strategies (box III.4). Scenario results show that farmers with cattle are more vulnerable—without adaptation—because the main adverse impact of climate change is not on crops but on livestock feed availability and livestock productivity. Even so, farms without cattle are much poorer; with climate change the negatively impacted farms without cattle will be in an even worse condition than before climate change and much poorer than the farms with cattle. Adaptations in farming, nonetheless, have substantial impacts on per capita incomes, significantly increasing the incomes of the poorest farmers. This clearly points to the importance of engaging stakeholders to reveal issues of poverty and inequalities that are relevant for the modelling analysis.
IV. Concluding remarks and challenges going forward
This chapter has reviewed the integrated approach to climate impact assessments. This approach brings together different modelling frameworks, which allows for a better understanding of the economic, social and environmental challenges that climate hazards are imposing, and a better analysis of policies to confront them. Although the approach is widely accepted, a suggestion is to move away from the narrow focus on long-term climate change and mitigation, to a broader analysis that includes adaptation, resilience, climate variability and extreme weather events, on the one hand, and from the standard accounting of the costs and benefits of typically a single policy, to a broader analysis of economy-wide feasibility of policies for climate resilience, on the other.
	The focus of the approach should also be sharpened to bring inequalities to the forefront of the assessments. To achieve this, the chapter suggests ways to deploy modelling frameworks that make it possible to assess impacts of climate hazards and policies on:
* climate sensitive natural resources upon which livelihoods rely, using biophysical models; 
* the distribution of income on the basis of ownership and employment of production factors (land, capital, labour), using economy-wide models;
* human capital and access to basic public services and resources (education, health, sanitation, infrastructure), using economy-wide models; and, 
* vulnerabilities that are defined by a configuration of socio-economic characteristics that put some households in disadvantage, which can be explored through a more intensive use of household surveys and microsimulation.
Assessment through these four analytical dimensions is enriched by further adding additional modelling tools that, data permitting, make it possible to evaluate impacts and adaptation strategies at the finer geographical resolutions. Also, analysts and researchers working with modelling tools should work with stakeholders as they provide feedback that is critical to design and reassessed scenarios.  This feedback may include information about factors that exacerbate stakeholders’ vulnerability and exposure to climate risks, including structural inequalities, as well as adaptation options that they believe may help them be more resilient. 
Going forward, countries, particularly developing countries, will benefit from enhancing their technical capacities to develop and use integrated climate impact assessments for policy decision making. This will require improving governance to ensure assessments are incorporated into a practice of evidence based policy making. Improving the statistics and information systems to facilitate modelling and improving the communication of results to encourage better informed policy dialogue with all stakeholders will help to advance the objectives of climate resilience and sustainable development. 
Scenario building that supports policy making and implementation requires procedural stability, permanent yet flexible institutional and governance structures that build trust, and experience to take advantage of new insights for effective and fair risk management (Volkery and Ribeiro, 2009; cited in O’Brien et al., 2012). This includes institutionalising the use of the integrated analytical framework within Government, using scenario results to inform policymakers and prompt policy implementation; coordinating and mobilizing technical expertise across line and sectoral ministries; and working with stakeholders and researchers at all levels. Some of these issues are discussed in more detail in chapter IV.
With adequate governance it will be more feasible, albeit still challenging, to strengthen statistical and modelling capacities, without which the required assessments cannot be developed, particularly in developing countries. Collaboration with the international statistical community will play a fundamental role in building new and assessing existing statistical capacity (see chapter V). A particular focus of attention is information at the local level—which is critical to deploy modelling tools at the finer geographical resolutions—where the gap is enormous. It will also be critical to expand access to other type of information and technologies (e.g., global climate projections, geographical information systems, warning systems, visualization of sea level, and so on), which are a prerequisite for assessment at the country level but are generally available mostly in developed countries.
In addition to the data availability problem, there are also gaps in the use of statistics and data for analytical and modelling purposes. An important legacy of the MDGs was their monitoring framework, which helped improve statistical capacity and data. However, there has been under-utilization of this statistical capacity and data. Lack of analysis at disaggregated levels has prevented addressing persistent inequalities and an inadequate generation of scenarios delineating linear progress towards development goals has not supported planning (United Nations, 2016). Modelling capacities are particularly weak in developing countries. Crop simulation models—which are used extensively in climate change studies—are not widely used in developing countries. White et al. (2011) reviewed 211 peer-reviewed papers that mainly examined the response to climate change of wheat, maize, soybean and rice (170 papers), with the United States (55 papers) and Europe (64 papers) as the dominant regions.
It is important that the international modelling community coordinates the generation of transdisciplinary, global climate assessments and make them more accessible to governments and researchers in developing countries. This, of course, requires developing and transferring new modelling tools and climate data as well as protocols that are publicly available and based on rigorously documented methodologies. These protocols are critical for replicating and inter-comparing results, improving methods over time, linking results to “knowledge products” that improve usability to policymakers and stakeholders, and increasing the credibility of assessments. There are some initiatives that are worth emulating. 
AgMIP is developing a set of coordinated global (and regional) assessments of climate impact on agriculture, utilizing and extending methods such as those discussed in this chapter. As a result of this effort, workshops are improving Coordinated Global and Regional Integrated Assessments (CGRA) of Climate Change and Food Security. This effort is expected to generate simulation protocols agreed by the participating scientists and the assessments are expected to have direct implications for international climate policy, regional adaptation and mitigation planning, and development aid (Antle and Valdivia, 2016).
Other research initiatives have also been effective in maintaining a dialog with those “on the ground” through a number of well designed, insightful, and reviewed documents arising from these collaborations. Examples include European Commission’s programmes and its formation of targeted research teams across the European Union, the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in South Africa, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and the National Climate Change Research Facility (NCCARF) in Australia, the Corps of Engineers and the Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments (RISAs) in the USA, and the United Kingdom Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP) and its successors in the UK (Noble et al., 2014). Unfortunately, this modality has not been replicated at scale in most developing countries. 
United Nations entities as well as other multilateral and bilateral agencies that are heavy users and sometimes producers of research could be major beneficiaries and supporters of coordination of the international modelling community, aiming at helping developing countries bridge their modelling gaps. At the same time, it is important that governments themselves liaise more with many dedicated researches that have become engaged in smaller, often community-based or urban activities, where results can be gathered in relatively short time frames and direct interactions between the researchers and the implementers are common. 
Mechanisms will also have to be developed to timely, fluently and effectively translating, reporting and communicating results (and their degree of uncertainty) from scenario-based adaptation assessments, within Government and elsewhere. These mechanisms can have a substantial impact on understanding and interpreting the results and the subsequent use of these for policy making aimed at building resilience. Finding adequate communication mechanisms is also important to influence behaviour in ways that help reduce the risk of making suboptimal adaptation decisions. It has been observed that, even though economic agents adapt continuously to climate conditions, they are not generally using available information (especially long-term climate projections); often defer choosing between ambiguous choices; make decisions that are time inconsistent (e.g., they attribute a lower weight to the long term); systematically favour the status quo and familiar choices; and value profits and losses differently (Chambwera et al., 2014).
Translating, reporting and communicating results through user-friendly visualisations are grounded on statistical techniques, which can only be mastered through capacity building efforts. At the same time, broad dissemination channels (e.g., TV, radio and internet broadcast, blogs, and high-level summits) will be necessary to create widespread awareness among the general public. Evidence from the Advancing Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation (ACCCA) project, the United Kingdom Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP), and IPCC (2012) suggests these broad communication channels do work. Interactive strategies, group discussions, workshops, and user-friendly and visually appealing documentation will be critical tools to communicate and work with stakeholders and researchers at the local level. These outreach mechanisms of communicating scenario results are platforms for learning and discussion and facilitating knowledge exchange and adaptation. The information can in turn be shared through wider networks and then influences action, enabling new experiments/practices to take place that can in turn strengthen systematic resilience (Ospina and Heeks, 2010). 

Box III.1 Integrated approach to climate change assessments
The number of tools used in climate change assessments is large and the necessity of integrating them, generally in “top-down fashion”, has been widely recognised. The cascade of analytical steps is represented in the flow chart below. Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) are used from the beginning to represent greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and concentration pathways for the world, under different levels of mitigation. RPCs are used in analyses with global climate models, also known as Global Circulation Models (GCMs). 
GCMs are numerical climate models that apply known physical, chemical and biological principles to simulate the interaction of the atmosphere, oceans, land surface, snow, ice and permafrost in determining the earth’s climate. They describe climate changes over relatively large spatial and temporal scales under the RCPs scenarios: for example, in temperature, a variable that is relatively consistent over large spatial scales, and in precipitation, a variable influenced by smaller scale topographical features and cloud formations (McClusky and Qaddami, 2011). GCMs simulate a common set of scenarios where GHG emissions evolve according to their key drivers (population, energy technology, land use, and so on) and describe broad storylines of alternative, stylized future climate paths under these scenarios. 
These scenarios provide information that is “downscaled” for deploying new scenarios, using global biophysical models. These new scenarios help understand how projections in temperature or precipitation, under given GHG emission and concentration assumptions, may affect a particular area or sector within an ecosystem, be it this land, energy, water, or others. The ultimate purpose is to assess the biophysical impacts of changes in climate to arrive at some sort of socio-economic evaluation. 
The socio-economic evaluation is carried out adding two additional components. Firstly, there needs to be a global economic model through which the biophysical impacts of climate change are channelled and simulated to quantify economic impacts. Global economic models that are well integrated with biophysical models are generally known as Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). These models represent the complex cause-effect relationship between biophysical processes that can be climate-driven and economic growth. Some integrated assessments also interface with different information systems (e.g. geographic information systems, including remote-sensing and global positioning systems), which provide powerful, process-visual, and spatially implicit decision-support systems (Mimura et al., 2014).
Secondly, so-called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) proposed by Kriegler et al. (2012) are being used to add socio-economic details. SSPs include three elements: storylines, which are descriptions of the state of the world; quantitative variables from the IAMs such as climate paths, population, gross domestic product (GDP), technology availability; and other variables, not included in the IAMs, such as ecosystem productivity and sensitivity or governance index (Burkett et al., 2014). The RCP scenarios presenting both GHGs emissions and concentration pathways generally correspond with the SSPs scenarios.
Altogether, global climate, biophysical and socio-economic scenarios are often downscaled to assess impacts, vulnerabilities and policy options at lower geographical levels. In this case, additional biophysical and economic models for a country, a region or a sector (or for all three levels) are deployed. Downscaling information from global models and scenarios could be through national models or directly through regional ones. In some cases, scenario results may even be scaled up if what happens at the sectoral level is expected to affect biophysical or socio-economic systems at the regional and national levels (Antle and Valdivia, 2016).
Box III.2.	Assessment of climate shocks using economy-wide and microsimulation models for Bolivia
UN-DESA is working with the Government of Bolivia to build capacity in the use of modelling tools. Together with the Economic Policy Unit (UDAPE) of the Ministry of Development Planning and other government entities, these tools are being used to assess policy scenarios.
      An economy-wide model developed under such collaborative effort is used here to analyse the impact of hypothetical climate shocks and policy responses. The analysis is not intended to evaluate any policy of the Bolivian Government.
      A baseline scenario delineating a continuation of the economic trajectory and policies of the 2010-2016 period until 2080 is the benchmark for comparison. Scenarios of climate shocks, with and without policy responses, are compared with that baseline scenario. The magnitude of these shocks represents the upper bound of a range of possible impacts determined from existing studies. 
      The shocks are as follows: 
* labour productivity gradually decreases in all sectors of the economy as of 2017 until falling by 10 per cent by 2080, as a result of rising temperatures; 
* the price of food rises gradually as of 2017 until it is 70 per cent higher by 2080, as a result of climate change; and,
* 50 per cent of public infrastructure is destroyed in 2020, as a result of an extreme weather event. 
      One of the policy responses under analysis is an increase in government health spending by 15 per cent, which targets rising labour productivity to offset the productivity shock. Alternatively, the infrastructure shock is combined with an increase in government investment until the lost infrastructure is recovered by 2024. These policies are assessed assuming that one of the following sources finances their implementation: foreign borrowing, domestic borrowing or direct taxation. This gives a total of six policy scenarios under analysis.
Macroeconomic impacts from climate shocks
In all scenarios the climate shocks reduce output and have impacts on factor income distribution (figures III.2.1 and III.2.2). The negative impacts of a decrease in labour productivity are particularly seen through effects in the labour market: wages and employment decrease. Consequently, household income, consumption, and savings also decrease. Reduced savings translate into reduced investment, with a negative impact on GDP. Due to the reduction in wages, the average wage relative to the average capital return decreases by 18 per cent in 2080. 
      The “infrastructure shock” abruptly cuts GDP growth. There is a contraction not only in government demand but also in private consumption and investment as the decrease in infrastructure implies slower growth for private incomes and savings with a negative feedback into the growth process. In 2080, the economy is close to its pre-shock situation, even without compensatory (short-run) policies and given the transitory nature of the shock. Of course, capital becomes relatively scarcer after the shock and this affects most sectors of the economy. As a result, there is also a decrease in the distribution of factor incomes: wage earners lose out more than owners of capital. 
      The “food price shock” is interesting because there are clear winners and losers, even though total GDP growth ultimately diminishes. Bolivia is a net exporter of agriculture and food products. Consequently, through an income effect, the food price scenarios have a positive impact on aggregate consumption. Economic activity in agriculture and food processing responds positively. There is an increase in (the value of) food exports that allows for an expansion of domestic absorption more rapidly than GDP expands. Some sectors lose, however, inevitably non-food tradable sectors (e.g., mining and other manufacturing) and non-tradable sectors (e.g., construction). These sectors witness a withdrawal of resources as their competitiveness is diminished by a real exchange rate appreciation (the value of exports grows more than that of imports as the food price rises). Other things being equal, this implies a decrease in real investment and there is as a consequence less capital accumulation in those sectors, all of which results in the overall reduction of total GDP. Even so, interestingly, because the growing sectors are relatively labour intensive, there is less unemployment than in the baseline scenario. In terms of income distribution, there is a reduction of the wage-to-land return ratio that is not observed for the other scenarios. On the other hand, the labour wage/capital rent ratio tends to improve, first rapidly, then less rapidly as it converges to baseline levels. Unskilled non-salaried workers are most benefited by the increase in the world price of food because of the large presence of unskilled small farmers and self-employed workers in food production. 
Macroeconomic impacts of policy responses 
Scaling up public investments in the policy scenarios initially helps to cope with the productivity and infrastructure shocks, but the final effect on GDP growth depends on the financing source. Overall, output recovers most when the public investments are financed with foreign borrowing (see figure III.2.3 for the scenarios associated with new investment in infrastructure). If the financing comes from domestic direct taxation, there is less disposable income, such that consumption is depressed as well as savings to some extent. In the case of domestic borrowing, there is an important reduction in domestic absorption that actually exacerbates the impacts of the shocks on the economy. Although public investment replaces private investment, the latter tends to be crowded out in detriment to GDP growth. These outcomes tend to exacerbate poverty and inequalities.
      When financing comes from foreign sources, the negative impact from increased domestic resource mobilization on private investment would be essentially absent; although, on the other hand, the inflow of foreign resources gives rise to a slower export growth and faster import growth, thus inducing an appreciation of the real exchange rate. Again, there are winners (non-tradable sectors) and losers (tradable sectors). Financing the infrastructure investments through increased foreign financing allows increasing household consumption and GDP at a higher growth rate. 
      There are additional considerations. Domestic borrowing or foreign borrowing may lead to debt sustainability issues, or it is unrealistic to believe that tax revenues can suddenly growth by a few points of GDP. Indeed, borrowing or tax revenue are over time a few points of GDP above the baseline scenario (not shown here). In practice, of course, policy makers have to assess scenarios where policies are financed using a mix of options, depending on their fiscal and debt constraints.
Effects of climate shocks on income and poverty
Results from the economy-wide model were imposed on the 2013 household survey carried out by the National Statistical Institute of Bolivia, in order to run microsimulations and arrive at a more adequate estimation of changes in poverty and income distribution under the different scenarios. Income poverty increases as labour wages are hit adversely as a result of the productivity and infrastructure shocks, both in absolute terms and in relative terms vis-à-vis capital (vis-à-vis other factors such as land the changes are smaller) (figure III.2.4). Because the infrastructure shock was introduced abruptly, poverty increases much more in 2020 compared with the productivity shock. The impacts on income distribution, as measured by the Gini coefficient (not shown here), were found to be very small because the shocks, as designed, affect all sectors of the economy. The results are different in the case of the food price shock. Because unskilled non-salaried workers are most benefited by the food price hike, there is a reduction of the poverty headcount ratio as well as a small reduction of income inequality (not shown here). In the policy scenarios, the adverse effects of the productivity and infrastructure shocks on poverty are somewhat ameliorated (not shown here).
Box III.3	A household survey analysis of the determinants of vulnerability and resilience in Bolivia
Household surveys are useful to identify particularly vulnerable households. This requires a concrete and practical definition of vulnerability. The general indicator of vulnerability developed by Andersen and Cardona (2013) is useful for illustration purposes. The most vulnerable households are those which simultaneously have low levels of income and low levels of diversification, because any adverse shock could threaten their entire income base. A household that has a per capita income below the national poverty line and a Diversification Index (DI) less than 0.5 is classified as highly vulnerable; households above these thresholds are classified as highly resilient (figure III.3.1).
      Since diversification is the opposite of income concentration, a simple and logical way of constructing the DI is simply 1 minus the widely used Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of Concentration:
where, N is the total number of income sources and pi represents the income proportion of the ith income source. The value of the index is 0 when there is complete specialization (100 per cent of total household income comes from one source only) and approaches 1 as the number of income sources increases and no single source dominates household incomes.
      Both measures of vulnerability, the diversification index and per capita household income, can be calculated for each household in a standard household survey and can be aggregated to any group or socio-economic characteristics of interest. This makes econometric analyses possible to establish the determinants of vulnerability and resilience. This, in turn, allows identifying the types of households that are most likely to be vulnerable to shocks.
      This type of analysis has been applied using the 2011 household survey carried out by the National Statistical Institute of Bolivia. Carefully analysing all the different income sources in each household, household income per capita and the diversification index for each household have been estimated. Based on these two variables, two dummy variables have been constructed to indicate whether a household belongs to the highly vulnerable group (incomes below the poverty level and DI<0.5) or the highly resilient group (incomes above the poverty level and DI>0.5). The factors and characteristics most strongly associated with vulnerability and resilience have been determined through probabilistic (Probit) regression. 
      The most important determinant of vulnerability and resilience in Bolivia is the presence of a working spouse in the household (table III.3.1). This will reduce the probability of being highly vulnerable by 12.2 percentage points and increase the probability of being highly resilient by 31.2 percentage points. Only about one third of Bolivian households use this strategy, as there is still a strong tradition for married women to dedicate their time to child rearing and domestic chores. According to the survey, 42 per cent of working age spouses are not economically active at all. Another 17 per cent do work at least part time, but without getting paid. In total, 59 per cent of working age spouses do not earn income. This is the single most important factor associated with high vulnerability in Bolivia.
      The age of the head of the household is the second most important determinant of both vulnerability and resilience. The older the head, the lower the probability of being vulnerable, and the higher the probability of being resilient. Adding 20 years will reduce the probability of being in the highly vulnerable category by 10 percentage points and it will increase the probability of being highly resilient by 20 percentage points. This is a natural life-cycle effect: Young families have not had time to build up assets that can provide supplementary income (such as rental income), and at the same time they often have young children to take care of. However, very young families are of particular concern. According to the survey, there are more than 30,000 families with children, where the head of household is no more than 20 years old, and 46 per cent of these households are highly vulnerable. More than 11,000 of these very young households already have 2 or more children. The probability of being highly vulnerable is 59 per cent for this group and the probability of being highly resilient is less than 2 per cent. This kind of situation can be prevented by better family planning education and support.
     The next most important determinants of vulnerability and resilience are remittances and a public sector job, which both reduce the probability of falling into vulnerability by about 6 or 7 percentage points. Other important determinants can be identified in Table III.3.1: for example, living in an urban area, where households are less able to diversify than rural households; number of persons in the household; pertaining to an indigenous population group; and so forth.
Box III.4	Impacts of climate change and adaptation strategies in Zimbabwe’s region of Nkayi
The Regional Integrated Assessment (RIA) framework of the Agricultural Model Inter-comparison and Improvement Project (AgMIP) was applied by a research team in Zimbabwe, aiming at generating information on adaptation strategies for crop-livestock systems in the region of Nkayi (Masikate et al. 2015). The research process was conceptualized as a long-term dialogue for co-learning, where researchers interacted with stakeholders to design and explore alternative sets of plausible future scenarios and climate change adaptation packages for integrated modelling (Homman-Kee et al, 2016a, 2016b). Different adaptation options in maize farming for particular farm types and the entire communities were assessed through integrated modelling. 
      Table III.4.1 summarizes research results that have been used in an economic analysis of climate change impacts for Nkayi’s farm population stratified into three groups: farms without cattle; farms with less than 8 heads of cattle (small herd); and farms with more than 8 heads of cattle (large herd). Without adaptation, vulnerability to loss from climate change ranges from 45 per cent of the farm households without cattle, to 61 and 71 per cent of households with small and large herds. The households with cattle are more vulnerable because the main adverse impact of climate change is found to be on livestock feed availability and livestock productivity. Losses range from 25 to 57 per cent of mean farm net returns before climate change, and thus represent a substantial loss for the vulnerable households. However, some farms gain from favourable bio-physical and economic conditions—with gains ranging from 28 to 34 per cent of mean returns before climate change. The net impacts aggregated across all farms are positive but small for farms without livestock, and much larger but negative for farms with large herds. Even though the losses are a larger per cent of farm income for the farms with cattle, the farms without cattle are much poorer. Thus, with climate change the negatively impacted farms without cattle will be in an even worse condition than before climate change and much poorer than the farms with cattle.
      Adopters generally make more farm net returns compared to non-adopters. Farms without cattle are very likely to adopt the adaptations being considered, with adoption rates about 96 per cent in the rapid adaptation scenario and over 75 per cent in the scenario of a transitional adaptation in which the benefits are realized more gradually over 10 years. These farms would gain relatively more than farms with cattle (as a per cent of their base system farm income), but do not necessarily gain more in absolute terms because of their much lower incomes. The relatively smaller impact of climate change and greater benefit from adaptation for farms without livestock is because the adaptations under analysis improve crop productivity more than livestock productivity. The adaptations have substantial impacts on per capita incomes, more than doubling the farm incomes of the poorest households.
      In this analysis resilience is defined as the capability of a system to minimize the magnitude of adverse impacts or enhance positive effects. Resilience analysis considered two adaptation scenarios: a transitional case in which adaptation takes 5 years for farmers to realise the full benefits of the practices (e.g., due to learning), and a rapid case in which farmers realise the full benefits immediately. The rapid adaptation case is interpreted as the minimum loss case, so its resilience is 100 per cent. The no-adaptation case and the transitional adaptation case are evaluated relative to the rapid adoption case. The analysis considers the benefits over a 10-year period, using a discount rate of 10 per cent.
      With these assumptions, the no-adaptation scenario gives the farms without cattle a resilience of 91 per cent, somewhat higher than the resilience of the systems with cattle (79 per cent). With the adaptation package, these resilience factors are improved substantially and the benefits would be much larger, especially for the small farms without livestock. This analysis illustrates the potential benefits of enhancing the adaptive capability of farmers, enabling them to substantially reduce vulnerability and enhance resilience when effective adaptation options are available and can be readily adopted. 
Chapter IV: Integrating policies for adaptation and reducing inequalities
Main messages
•	Addressing structural inequalities and reducing vulnerability to climate hazards require transformative policy solutions across all dimensions of sustainable development. Incremental adaptation policies are important to address immediate needs for more resilient livelihoods, but it should not come at the expense of fundamental transformative reforms. Transformative policies aim to address root causes of vulnerability by changing the fundamental attributes of systems to make them resilient, including structural inequalities that lead to development traps and vulnerability.
•	Sustainable development and resilience are multidimensional challenges that increase the need for substantive coordination and integration of policy interventions. Integrating and designing coherent policies can strengthen resilience to climate hazards for the most vulnerable, by addressing several crucial dimensions of their livelihoods, but also taking advantage of potential co-benefits, while avoiding unintended consequences and maladaptation.
•	The most intense and direct effects of climate events are experienced at the local level, with a disproportionate impact on the poorest and marginalized groups. The success of interventions to build resilience depends on the participation of all stakeholders, especially representing those groups. A broader participation can help policymakers to identify development objectives and assess how to achieve them through building synergies and addressing the underlying causes of vulnerability.  
•	Climate hazards and its effects are characterized by significant uncertainties, introducing new challenges for policymakers to design adequate adaptation strategies with inclusion. Policymakers must fully embed uncertainty into their long-term plans, using iterative and adaptive processes. This requires a more flexible policy process, capable of incorporating new information and emerging knowledge to scope, assess, implement, and monitor policy interventions.
“The 2030 Agenda elevated the importance of policy coherence. Integration implies vastly different policy frameworks, policies, institutions and capacities. Development cooperation partners need to take a holistic approach to their partnerships, pursuing policies in different sectors that are complementary rather than contradictory. … The 2030 Agenda is new to all of us. There is no paved way to follow. Every country needs to find the solution that fits its own national context. This leaves space for innovation in policies, institutions and practices”(Hongbo, 2015). 
I. Introduction
Existing climate impact assessments usually focus on the long term time horizons as far as 2100. The tension between near-term climate hazards, other priorities for socio-economic development, combined with the uncertainty of distant climate scenarios can impede policy actions for adaptation. Vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards are above all closely linked to existing underlying (structural) inequalities. Differences in access to public services, unequal voice in government and media, as well as differences in wealth and income, are structural conditions that determine exposure and vulnerability to climate change, as noted in chapter II. Public policy increasingly recognizes that climate hazards are felt disproportionately by those most exposed and vulnerable. These effects further worsen inequalities and pose major obstacles to coping with climate hazards and for adaptation to the climate challenges. 
There is also a clear role for public policies in addressing structural inequalities, in order to minimize the impact of climate hazards on people and in filling gaps in coping and adaptation capacities to increase resilience to these hazards. Adaptation requires a collective effort for which governments can convene stakeholders, mobilize national action, and initiate action when needed. Policies to reduce vulnerability cannot wait as long term solutions require immediate iterative action. Governments can also ensure that the solutions reached are equitable and respect both majorities and minorities. 
Low regret policies are the starting point for adaptation, but they must be complemented with flexible longer-term adaptation and development strategies to build resilience to climate hazards. Incremental approaches and adaptation policies are important to address immediate needs for more resilient livelihoods. Incremental policies should not come at the expense of fundamental transformative reform, however, and they may actually be in some instance a precondition for change. Restricting adaptation responses to incremental changes can eventually miss opportunities to tackle the issue of the fundamental attributes of the society to changing climate. Addressing the root causes of poor outcomes requires transformative policies that change the fundamental attributes of systems, particularly the existing governance systems and cultural conditions that perpetuate inequalities. Transformative policies can aim for shifts in production and consumption behaviors to encourage sustainable practices. Policies can also target reforms in political, social, cultural, and ecological decision-making. Table A.IV-1 in the appendix demonstrates a continuum of policy options to address immediate vulnerability deficits, incremental adaptation, and transformative changes by touching upon the different aspects of sustainable development. 
Future climate change and the hazards caused by greater weather variability are by nature uncertain, which poses a central challenge for designing adaptation strategies. For example, it is unknown whether average temperatures will increase by 2 degrees Celsius or more, since this will depend in part on the mitigation responses of humanity to this challenge and adaptation itself. An additional uncertainty comes with the large range of climate models for any given carbon emission scenario. For precipitation, for example, different climate models disagree on the amount of change and even on whether it will increase or decrease from the baseline (Watkiss, 2015). These challenges were discussed in chapter III. In a context of hazards caused by climate changes, the challenges for policymaking are daunting, not least of them is the need to match long term adaptation perspectives with short-term political and funding cycles .  There are principles that, when applied to the policy process, can prove helpful for adaptation, in particular for how they can benefit those most vulnerable. The underlying uncertainty of climate change, the locality of the effects, and the interconnected nature of various sectors point to a need for a policymaking system that is integrated and coherent, participatory, and flexible.  
There is the need to integrate (or mainstream) adaptation objectives into longer-term development processes, with careful consideration for the uncertainties inherent to forecasting the climate change scenarios and the climate hazards created by a changing climate. 
A participatory approach is needed to understand risks and vulnerability and the various priorities and interests of stakeholders, particularly at the local level. Better understanding of these risks and priorities through the engagement of local communities and stakeholders leads to better policy understanding and design. 
In the context of a changing climate and greater weather variability that will bring more climate hazards, policymakers must also fully embed uncertainty into the long-term plans, using iterative and adaptive processes. This requires a more flexible policy process, capable of incorporating lessons from each step of the process to improve knowledge and outcomes. 
A policy process based on these principles should help address underlying inequalities by identifying vulnerable populations, particular intersecting vulnerabilities, and relevant actions. However, as mentioned before, there are deeper underlying reasons why vulnerable groups are disproportionately at risk from climate hazards. Building greater resilience for long-term sustainable development requires addressing these underlying factors requires transformative approaches to adaptation and development. This will benefit from a more flexible, participatory and integrated policy process. 
The three principles – integration, participatory process, and flexibility - will respectively be described in more detail and illustrated using concrete examples in the three subsequent sections of this chapter. Firstly, the need for a coherent approach that considers co-benefits and unintended consequences of action and of inaction across sectors is discussed. Next the advantages of effective stakeholder participation for incorporating local knowledge and concrete actions for improved outcomes are examined. Lastly, the need for constant iteration and flexibility of policy processes to cope with uncertainties and emergence of new information is spelled out.
II. Increasing policy coherence and integration across sectors 
As discussed previously, both in previous chapters and in the introduction to this chapter, sustainable development and resilience are multidimensional challenges. This chapter, in particular, shows that this defies single definitions or solutions. The objectives to pursue relate to multiple sectors, increasing the need for substantive coordination and integration of policy interventions. Particularly in the context of hazards caused by climate change, rather than focusing on individual risks, resilience requires the policymaking process to manage change and uncertainty in a more integrated way (Arup, 2014). 
Integration and coherence of policies across sectors is also the most pertinent way to address root causes of vulnerability, which are often interrelated and cumulative. Poverty and development status, for example, are obvious determinants of the capacity of people to cope and adapt to shocks. But there is also an underlying connection between vulnerabilities and multiple inequities in access to assets, land, work, political processes, and others. All these inequities need to be dealt simultaneously, as they all play a role in determining exposure to climate-related shocks and the capacity to cope and adapt. Integrating and designing coherent policies strengthens resilience to climate hazards for the most vulnerable, by addressing several crucial dimensions of their livelihoods, but also by taking advantage of potential co-benefits, while avoiding unintended consequences and maladaptation.  
A. Integration to support a multi-sectoral approach
In many countries, there are plans for adaptation to climate change and for development in general, but they are often fragmented and overlook the multidimensionality of livelihoods and structural inequalities. In order to minimize current and future impacts of climate hazards on livelihoods, strategic coping and adaptation policies should be considered an integral part of the framework and process of sustainable development. This implies embracing and respecting a multi-sectoral approach. The challenge lays in how to effectively coordinate and integrate multi-sectoral policies under a single overarching vision that is consistent with long term objectives and that does not lose sight of relevant priorities at sectoral level. 
A case in point is the challenge of food security, which is one of the most critical sectors affected by climate change and requiring a multi-sectoral approach, given the number of interrelated dimensions that need to be addressed simultaneously in order to minimize current and future impacts of climate change on food systems and livelihoods in general. Agricultural practices, for instance, need to change to improve yields and ensure sufficient food production, but also to preserve ecosystems and natural resources in the long-run. The preservation of ecosystems, through new management responses of natural resources, will be determinant to ensure sustainable livelihoods and food security. Thus, policies to stimulate agricultural productivity should integrate ecosystem preservation goals, instead of being designed in parallel to environmental policies and being mostly driven by technological and economic objectives.
A community-based forest rehabilitation for slope stability project in the Bolivian Altiplano is a concrete example of a successful integration of new management of natural resources and adaptation objectives. The project was implemented over the course of 15 years using a community forestry approach both to generate income and to stabilize slopes at risk of landslides. The slopes had become exposed as a result of environmental degradation. The assessment of the project was done in close consultation with communities, and results in fact show that livelihoods were more diversified, watersheds improved, while risks from landslides decreased. This highlights the importance of management of ecosystems and livelihoods as an integrated strategy for climate change adaptation and development (Renaud, Sudmeier-Rieux and Estrella, 2013).
Adaptation strategies also need to be embedded in a more diversified livelihood, particularly for the most vulnerable. Stabilizing and increasing income levels of the most disadvantaged groups will help ensure their livelihoods are more resilient. Social protection systems for instance, including safety nets, can protect lower income groups against short-term economic and food price shocks, enhancing their coping capacity and perhaps their capacity to aspire to transformative change in the future. Integrating also instruments or policies that promote access to insurance and capital markets can complement those protection schemes and help local small landholders to cope with possible negative consequences posed by extreme weather events and to invest in new crops or any relevant input that can help the adaptation process to future climate hazards.
Policies specifically designed for the agricultural sector can be complemented by other interventions that improve rural-urban linkages, in order to promote alternative sources of income, enhance food security for both rural and urban households, while reducing poverty, especially in countries where the process of urbanization is accelerating (United Nations, 2013). In China, for instance, the existence of areas of high population density combined with lower transport costs has encouraged labour intensive manufacturing to use labour force from rural areas. Evidence from an FAO report shows that in agricultural based economies, non-farm sources of income represent about 20 – 30 per cent of total income for rural households. Remittances from household members who migrated to urban areas can be a significant portion of the non-farm income of households (FAO, 2012). Policies that facilitate the transfer of such remittances would then also come as very necessary.
One main challenge is however to ensure that multi-sectoral approaches lead to transformative adaptation strategies that can enhance resilience to climate hazards. For instance, there is issue of how to cope and adapt to the impact of higher temperatures on human health. In terms of extreme heat, heatwave national plans are being increasingly used, especially in countries where temperatures can reach unbearable levels. In India for example, officials are launching a program to protect people from extreme heat in two high-risk regions, after a devastating heat wave killed at least 2,500 people across the country in 2015. The cities involved in the program will spend months preparing for summer by educating children about heat risk, stocking hospitals with ice packs and extra water, and training medical workers to identify heat stress, dehydration and heat stroke. 
These plans are geared towards reducing health risks in an incremental way—which by itself brings about the challenge of strengthening health systems as a whole, but ideally they could be complemented  with a myriad of policies in other sectors, such as transportation, building design, and urban land use management  (WHO, 2009). These multi-sectoral policies would lead to a more transformative adaptation strategy. For instance, the so called “urban heat island” effects – a major source of heat aggressive for human health – can be reduced by substituting bitumen for concrete or for more heat-reflective substances, or by creating more green spaces (Silva, Phelan and Golden, 2010). Furthermore, urban policies to improve the roads, rules and signalling for bicyclists, pedestrians and other alternative road users improves their safety, and incentivizes the uptake of these means of transportation, which creates both health and climate benefits by decreasing air pollution, physical inactivity, and GHG emissions.
B. Integrated policies that promote co-benefits
Resilience enhancing policies can present benefits for development objectives, and vice-versa. The potential for such co-benefits has important implications for designing and implementing adaptation and development policies and need to be properly assessed. Policies with potential co-benefits bring cost-effectiveness advantages, which may encourage policymakers in implementing them but not in all cases they are easy to devise. Also, potential co-benefits may help integrate a specific policy into an existing policy framework. In this regard, an integrated approach can both take advantage and encourage policies that present benefits for resilience to climate hazards and sustainable development.
A good example in the context of food security is the introduction of social protection schemes. Social protection schemes, including safety nets, can protect the most vulnerable against short-term economic and food price shocks, enhancing their coping capacity. But at the same time, they can also contribute to long-term resilience, by strengthening the ability of smallholders to manage risks and adopt better adaptation strategies. Evidence has shown that climate change reduces investment incentives in agriculture and the ability to adopt better adaptation strategies, with negative indirect effects on food production. As observed in the Nile Basin of Ethiopia, where changes in temperatures and rainfall have been taking place in the past 20 years, farmers with financial constraints did not introduce recommended adaptation methods, while those who could afford to adapt undertook soil conservation, used different crop varieties, and irrigate their farms (Deressa, and others, 2009). Thus, predictable social security programmes that target the most vulnerable, particularly the small landholders, by providing a robust safety net, can stimulate the investment in more productive human capital and technologies. By ensuring a basic level of consumption, this type of safety nets enable small landholders to engage in higher-return production strategies, even though riskier from a subsistence point of view. Similarly, access to insurance and capital markets can also help local small landholders to cope with possible negative consequences posed by extreme weather events and to invest in new crops or any relevant input that can help the process of adaptation to climate hazards.
As discussed previously, uncertainties are high at the local level in particular. It is then difficult to predict the impact of climate hazards on the agricultural sector. Due to this uncertainty, adaptation options would benefit by being embedded in more diversified livelihoods, particularly for the most vulnerable. And a diversified farming system can also have co-benefits. Integrating horticulture and livestock for instance, can enhance nutritional outcomes, as it improves rural households’ access to food from different sources. A case in point is a diversified farming system at the household level in Viet Nam, integrating vegetation, aquaculture, and cages for animal Husbandry (VAC). This system has contributed to improvements in both income and nutritional outcomes (FAO, 2013). 
The health sector is also another domain that can benefit from a number of policies in other sectors. For instance, improving fuel and combustion efficiency for decreased GHG emissions requires actions in the energy sector, but has co-benefits in the health sector, by decreasing air pollution and decreasing a burdening demand for health services. Relatively simple and extremely efficient measures, such as the use of improved cook stoves in households, could avert the loss of many of the 2.9 million deaths occurred in 2013 due to indoor air pollution, while decreasing GHG and pollutant emissions (see box IV.1). Many initiatives are already in place, such as the ambitious pledge by the Global Alliance for Clean Cook Stoves (a public-private partnership hosted by the UN Foundation) to foster the adoption of clean cook stoves and fuels in 100 million households by 2020.
Box IV.1: Policy coherence: reducing air pollution for health and climate benefits
   Air pollution is by far the leading environmental risk factor for disease and the fifth highest risk factor for premature death worldwide.  Policies aiming at mitigating the atmospheric concentration of warming climate-altering pollutants will simultaneously respond to climate change mitigation goals and produce health and social benefits, especially for the most vulnerable. 
   Globally, more than 5.5 million people die each year from exposure to particulate matter (small solid particles containing sulphur and other toxic elements, mixed with liquid droplets). This matter is released into the air by the burning of solid fuels (wood, dung, crop wastes, charcoal, coal, etc.) for cooking, heating, illumination and waste management, and by power plants, industrial manufacturing, and vehicle exhaust. Household air pollution and ambient (or outdoor) air pollution are equal contributors to air pollution mortality, each having caused 2·9 million deaths in 2013. In that year, more than half of deaths (55 per cent) occurred in two of the world’s fastest growing economies, China and India. In a significant number of countries, most of which are in sub-Saharan Africa, more than 95 per cent of the population uses solid fuels for cooking (Forouzanfar, and others, 2015). 
   The burden of disease is greater among low income groups, due to the combined effect of living in areas with higher exposure to pollution and suffering from worse health conditions (Morello-Frosch, and others, 2011). Poorer households also use more biomass for cooking, the cheapest option (Smith, and others, 2014). Globally, women and children are particularly exposed to indoor air pollution due to the time spent in the household (WHO, 2014). 
   Air pollution is a classic case for which public policy is required in order to reduce environmental and health risks at the same time. Policies must aim at reducing carbon dioxide, methane, black carbon, and other health, and climate damaging air pollutants in people’s environment. This can happen through: i) improvement in energy efficiency, ii) increases of combustion efficiency (e.g. use of improved cook stoves), and iii) increased use of cleaner (non-combustion) energy sources, such as wind, solar, tidal, wave, and geothermal energy (Smith, and others, 2014).
C. Coherent policies to avoid maladaptation
Sectoral adaptation policies are designed to address unidimensional issues, such as a specific source of vulnerability. However, when these policies are not integrated and coordinated without taking into consideration other sectors, maladaptation may arise due to inconsistency with other dimensions of vulnerability. The same challenge may arise between short term solutions, which may be inconsistent with other long term adaptation needs. This is what defines maladaptation and failing to anticipate the consequences of interventions, poor planning, or an excessive focus on short-term objectives can result in greater vulnerability in the future, negative effects on other communities or sectors, or less options in the future. An integrated approach, instead, presents the advantage of taking into consideration different priorities and several sources of information that are crucial in the policymaking process in order to avoid maladaptation.
The example of Morogoro, Tanzania is often used to illustrate a maladaptation strategy, despite the fact that local actors have adapted to climate hazards challenges in many ways. As discussed previously, livelihood diversification is considered an efficient adaptation strategy, by incorporating non-farm income activities. Many farmers in Morogoro have tapped more into natural resources for subsistence and alternative income – for instance by increasing access to mining and developing new artisanal activities. These strategies have helped in responding to short-term needs, but in the long term they present a number of new challenges due to natural resources degradation, in particular deforestation and land cover change, which has negative consequences on land and water conditions. This is expected to limit adaptive capacities in the long term, due to the degradation of environmental conditions.
At the same time, the efficiency in the use of natural resources can also lead to maladaptation. Governments tend to create incentives for farmers to conserve water use with access to more efficient irrigations options. However, irrigation that is more efficient can lead farmers to use more water by expanding the size of the irrigated crops. In some cases, promoting greater efficiency results in greater total water use (FAO, 2015, chap. 3). Another typical example of maladaptation, which takes place more often in richer countries, is when policies to protect the population from heat waves and avoid excess demand on urgent health services results in greater use of private air conditioning and consequently greater demand for energy (O’Brien, and others, 2012). This type of adaptation initiatives simply shifts the pressure from one sector to another, representing a maladaptation. The overall vulnerability of the system is not reduced; instead, one source of vulnerability is replaced by another.  
An integrated approach can help design coherent policies and avoid some of these unintended consequences. In coastal areas, there is often the challenge of avoiding the destruction of sand dunes due to the construction of tourism facilities close to the water. The degradation of sand dunes not only alters the costal ecosystem, but in the long run it also increases the facilities’ exposure to storms and water rise (Magnan, 2014). This represents a typical trade-off between economic development and environmental challenges. Ideally, an integrated approach would attenuate the trade-off, by limiting the habitat degradation and consequently the collateral effect on assets’ exposure to climate-related hazards. An integrated approach may not completely avoid the trade-off, but it can take into account the negative effects and put in place compensation mechanisms, such as the protection of marine ecosystems to allow them to maintain their natural resilience and adaptive capacities, and then ensuring their buffer function against waves (Magnan, 2014).  
D. Overcoming constraints to integration  
An integrated approach is not an easy task, however, due to the complex nature of the policymaking process and diverging stakeholders’ priorities. Even though an integrated policy process can benefit greatly from the recognition of diverse interests, circumstances, social-cultural contexts, and expectations, in practice integration remains an immense challenge (IPCC, 2014). 
There are concrete difficulties to integrate policies and agendas effectively: 
* the complexity of the problems and of the options; 
* the uncertainties about policy impacts; 
* the existence of institutions with specific mandates; 
* difficulties created by short-term funding cycles, and; 
* how to incorporate phasing and timing issues in planning and budgeting concerns. 
At the institutional level, there are often limited financial and human resources, especially at the local level. The absence of key adaptation leaders and advocates and limited local data and tools to monitor and assessing adaptation effectiveness are additional constraints.  As a result, the focus is typically on simpler approaches of analysis and on choosing policies that avoid causing unintended harm. There is also a pervasive underestimation of the complexity of adaptation as a social process, creating unrealistic expectations about achieving intended adaptation outcomes (Mimura, and others, 2014; United Nations, 2015). Inadequate assessments that fail to integrate adaptation options and their outcomes or lack of them therefore of are part of the problem.
Adaptation initiatives should for instance take into consideration local social characteristics and cultural values. The need to improve the livelihoods of women is undeniably a necessary condition for inclusive and sustainable development, but the question is often through which process this is more viable . In India, for example, despite the rapid growth in recent years, a combination of factors led to the decline in the participation of women in the country’s labour force and greater vulnerability. There are multiple factors explaining this decline, but in particular, there are social constraints deeply rooted in local culture, such as the lack of what is culturally deemed “suitable jobs for women” (as defined by local communities). In many traditional areas, women’s work outside the home is acceptable only under certain conditions. In India, however, these suitable job opportunities for women in villages and small towns have declined dramatically (Chatterjee, Murgai and Rama, 2015, 2016). Even when laws are in place to ensure equal rights in labour markets for women and men, cultural barriers prevent women from exercising their right (Barry, 2016). For communities that are exposed to climate and economic hazards, this situation acts to sustain existing vulnerabilities. Policies for economic empowerment and growth must be integrated and coherent with cultural and social policies to ensure that the desired outcome of policies is achieved (Masson, and others, 2016).
In addition, the process of integration should also take into consideration different sectoral or stakeholders’ priorities, and sometimes align adaptation strategies with sectoral activities. Disregarding sectoral approaches in favour of a cross-sectoral ideal is sometimes overly simplistic. A recent study of the European experience found that “comprehensive policy integration cannot be achieved through a single multi-sectoral strategy” (Nordbeck and Steurer, 2015). At best, multi-sectoral governance arrangements can communicate a vision and respective priorities. Each stakeholder has its own priorities that require political dialogue and negotiation. According to the authors, “better policies usually emerge from conflicts between specialists advocating competing solutions, not from a vague consensus” (ibid., p. 14). Because of this, the coordinating agency has an important role to play in engaging, listening, and responding to political processes, while encouraging actors to explore integration that has synergies with their sectoral perspective (United Nations, 2015). 
In sum, policy integration, if it is to be effective, must balance a holistic and coherent vision with the existing sectoral and local contexts. Policymaking has to take into account specific sectoral contexts and priorities, both political and cultural. And the integration process has also to take into consideration practical implementation at the sectoral level and available financing sources for each sector, while providing sufficient financial and institutional support to committees and other bodies involved in coordinating multi-sectoral programs. These aspects of policy integration need to be pondered through ex-ante assessments.
III. Involving all stakeholders to identify risks and implement solutions 
Incorporating different voices with equal importance and respect in the same policy process is no easy: these voices are often very disparate or even opposing, and are shaped by different educational and cultural backgrounds. They are, as a consequence, often bypassed or curtailed in policy making. Despite the difficulty, involving stakeholders remains important, especially since inequalities are more acute and felt more sharply at the local level. This section argues that involving stakeholders, beyond being necessary, must respect three conditions: i) participation must be equitable and meaningful (to reduce inequalities), ii) local knowledge plays a critical role (to make better identification of problems), and iii) relies on valuable social networks (to have better implementation of projects).
Though the impacts of climate hazards are felt more strongly at the local level, adaptation must be a collective effort, in order to have efficient, long-term, equitable solutions to the local problems. Governments are called to step up and intervene, using their unique capacity to convene stakeholders from all sectors (private, civil society, scientific and academic), to mobilize national action, and to act first where other sectors would otherwise not (or would take too long or would feature just an elite of interests). Governments can also ensure that the solutions reached are equitable and respect both majorities and minorities. 
However, effective adaptation needs political negotiations, as a solution for bridging diverse interests and limitations and a key aspect of those negotiations is who gets to be involved in it. Regrettably, the most vulnerable, who are disproportionately more affected by climate and weather and should thus have more voice, are often left out of political processes or inadequately represented. Inequality in political participation is at the source of vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards, as noted in chapter II. Policymaking should then strive to be as inclusive of all stakeholders as possible, not least because there are also advantages to broader participation, namely in terms of building synergies and avoiding trade-offs. It is also a fairer process, capable of addressing better the underlying causes of vulnerability while considering the links with other development objectives. In line with this, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development includes a provision on guaranteeing citizens’ rights to information, participation and justice on environmental issues (see box IV.2). 
There are also disadvantages to unbalanced or lopsided policymaking. Certain problems might be left unidentified and unattended, with potential dire consequences in the future, since those who could identify them and advocate for their resolution are not present. Even with correct identification of problems, the solutions chosen might have unintended consequences on groups that are not present in the negotiations. The range of solutions analysed might also be smaller and less imaginative due to potential lack of diversity of views. Lastly, the solutions might turn out to be (or be perceived as) unrepresentative of the community they apply to and ultimately end up not being adopted. Thus, the involvement of all stakeholders is an integral part in improving the outcomes at each stage of the policymaking process and the policy cycle. Chapter III, for example, shows the importance of engaging stakeholders in the design of assessments of vulnerabilities, impacts and policy responses.
Box IV.2: Access to information, participation and justice in environmental matters: key instruments in ensuring equality in adaptation and resilience-building strategies
   The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, adopted in 1992, laid the foundations for national and international efforts towards sustainable development. The tenth among its 27 principles states: 
   “Environmental issues are best handled with participation of all concerned citizens, at the relevant level. At the national level, each individual shall have appropriate access to information concerning the environment that is held by public authorities, including information on hazardous materials and activities in their communities, and the opportunity to participate in decision-making processes. States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness and participation by making information widely available. Effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, shall be provided.”
   The three components of Principle 10 – access to information, participation in decision-making processes, and access to justice in environmental matters, also referred to as “access rights” – are key instruments. They ensure both that the environmental problems affecting disadvantaged groups and vulnerable communities are adequately addressed and that policy decisions, either directed at environmental issues or affecting the environment, take into consideration the needs of these groups. As such, they are also key instruments in ensuring that climate change adaptation and resilience-building strategies (as well as mitigation measures) promote equality.
   Access rights are enshrined in legislation in many countries, developed and developing. However, this is not yet the norm, and even in countries that do have legislation, challenges remain in implementation. International agreements and cooperation have been key in this respect. In Europe, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (Aarhus Convention) (adopted in 1998; entered into force in 2001) has engaged countries in ensuring access rights become effective. In Latin America and the Caribbean, a regional instrument is currently being negotiated with the support of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to ensure the full implementation of access rights and promote international cooperation in the matter. Moreover, in 2010, governments adopted the Guidelines for the Development of National Legislation on Access to Information, Public Participation and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (Bali Guidelines) at the 11th Special Session of UNEP’s Governing Council/ Global Ministerial Environmental Forum.
Climate adaptation is an objective most likely in competition with other priorities. The policymaking process stands to benefit greatly from being fully participatory and make early and clear recognition of diverse interests, circumstances, social-cultural contexts, and expectations.
A. Ensuring equitable and meaningful participation of stakeholders 
Problems are increasingly complex, defying any simple definition or solution. At the same time, as highlighted in the previous section, policy objectives (including climate objectives) are increasingly being defined in the context of multiple sectors (energy, health, agriculture, transportation, among others) and their realization (or lack of) is substantially felt at the local level. Consequently, several sectors and levels of governance are increasingly being called to act together and simultaneously, specifically local and national governments (see previous section on integration and the need for multisector coherence). 
The interaction between these two levels governments is ever more crucial and an important component of well-designed adaptation strategies and implementation. National actors have a particular role in creating the policy space (legal frameworks), providing information, and facilitating financial support. In this regard, they can have a large impact in promoting economic development at the local level, to strengthen local communities’ capacities and resilience. National governments also have a role in identifying and protecting vulnerable groups (IPCC, 2014). On the other hand, because local structures are less fragmented compared to national level structures, it is easier to coordinate and implement policies at the local level. Local agencies also have important roles to play in scaling up adaptation strategies, and in understanding local needs and risks. 
However, the legitimacy of local participation depends on including those who are influential, but also those who are most affected. Understanding these structural inequalities of social and political power is very important, in order to give voice and agency to those who are otherwise invisible to the process. Many factors—economic status, political voice, religion, culture, tradition, illiteracy, disability—have the potential to limit the participation of some individuals or groups from the process, fostering inequality in political voice and influence over the political process. For example, those with greater experience in decision-making processes and greater social and political capital may dominate the decision process. In the case of hurricane Katrina, it can be argued for instance that the Industrial Canal that runs along the west of the Lower 9th Ward, which failed and flooded the city, was placed in that specific location due to the limited local political power of the area’s inhabitants (mostly poor African-Americans). In contrast, the districts inhabited primarily by white wealthy households had better protective infrastructure, even if their elevation was also low. Moreover, poorer and minority residents had less access to the local political processes that were involved in the recovery process (see chapter II for a complete discussion). Even when the appropriate groups are included, interests and priorities may be irreconcilable and outcomes may result from micro-politics and differences in power relations (Few, Brown and Tompkins, 2007). 
Thus, without meaningful participation of all stakeholders, there is the risk that inequalities increase due to the ability of certain groups to exert a disproportionate influence. In this regard, major public actors and agencies have first to place trust in the capabilities of local key stakeholders to deliberate and propose effective and equitable solutions. Achieving this in practice requires the identification and inclusion of appropriate stakeholders from the beginning. In addition, engagement must go beyond minimal information sharing and consultations. Stakeholders must have the opportunity to argue for and decide on alternative options. 
Involving local communities in the management of resources such as any existing climate adaptation funds or other programs could provide this opportunity and be an avenue to combat corruption in their allocation and implementation since climate adaptation projects must often engage with economic activities that are particularly prone to corruption, such as forestry and water resources management (Petherick, 2014). Namely, through the implementation of participatory budgeting programs, whereby ordinary citizens get involved in budget meetings with local government officials and get to vote about how (usually, part of) the budget will be spent. Entire communities become better informed to monitor policy implementation, and accountability is made more diffuse and ongoing. In Brazil (where participatory budgeting started in 1989), municipalities with participatory budgeting have been shown to use their public finances significantly more effectively than those without participatory budgeting. Though there might be concerns among experts to keep decision-making power away from the apparently uninitiated on complex matters, locals can surprise with different forms of expertise (Petherick, 2014). At any rate, locals will be the ones determining the success of any given project.
B. Taking advantage of local knowledge 
Because the most intense and direct effects of climate events are experienced at the local level, scoping (or identifying) objectives and risks can benefit tremendously from knowledge accumulated by local communities. There is an obvious role for this knowledge in tailoring interventions to local context and conditions; for example, local knowledge can inform technical assessments of adaptation options and vice-versa (see chapter III). Furthermore, it can help reduce inequalities, as local experience and knowledge can provide particular insights into the causes and solutions of vulnerability and exposure.  For the citizens of the city of Gorakphur, India, tapping into local knowledge already brought significant benefits in terms of climate resilience for a community constantly challenged by floods, heat waves, storms, and other climate-related shocks (see box IV.3).
Box IV.3: Building resilience for local communities in the city of Gorakhpur, India
   In the city of Gorakhpur, in the North of India, hydro-meteorological disasters have been a part of life and the population has had to cope with constant floods, heat waves, storms, and other shocks. Starting from a bottom-up approach to identifying climate vulnerabilities, the city embarked on a resilience-building project that integrates climate vulnerability assessments and micro planning and implementation. The experience presents lessons on a resilience plan that has been designed, implemented, and monitored using a community-led bottom-up approach.
   The project defined resilience as a desired characteristic of a system (economic, political, infrastructure, ecological, social and institutional) that includes multiple activities, interactions and relationships. The focus of the interventions was on local communities that were well placed to participate in the process. Engagement was motivated by four main principles:
* The engagement of local communities and individuals is key to formulate a realistic and effective resilience plan;
* The resilience plan should be based on practical experiences gained through pilot programs;
* A facilitator (“champion”) is required to lead the process;
* The process needs to be flexible and evolve since building resilience is a dynamic process.
   The project found that the capacities in the ward, which was the focus of the project, was very low, incapable of providing basic services and sustain the quality of residents’ life. After defining the baseline conditions, the project assessed vulnerabilities by measuring how the community perceives the level and effectiveness of development interventions. The community also participated in identifying the climate-related risks and their underlying causes. 
   The community also helped on understanding local climate thresholds from historical events. These were compared with downscaled climate projections to estimate how often these thresholds will be reached in the future.  Progress on resilience was monitored using indicators created to track the performance of the system, actors, and institutions. This facilitated one of the most important aspects of this model: the need for iterations to identify changes and implement adjustments. This is particularly important as new information on climate projects and continuously evolving interactions between policies, socio-economic status, exposure, and urban physical systems. 
   This project illustrates the usefulness and applicability of a bottom-up. It offers a template for how to identify the key elements and nuances that are important for local implementation of resilience interventions by focusing on local communities in planning, implementation, and monitoring. This example also offers a clear path for integration of disaster risk, climate change adaptation, and sustainable development agendas in a way that reduces inequalities and builds climate-resilient livelihoods.
Understanding the local impact and context also helps to avoid actions that may lead to adverse climate outcomes, more vulnerability or decreased welfare (maladaptation) or incomplete solutions. In Sri Lanka, for example, the introduction of high-yielding, hybrid varieties of rice seeds had an initial beneficial effect on yields, but undermined the ability of farmers to adapt to changing conditions. The support for the new seeds eroded indigenous knowledge of the almost 2,000 traditional varieties that existed and undermined local seed banks. To the detriment of small famers in Sri Lanka, the new fertilizer-depended seeds are less able to cope with the increasing water salinity in the region caused by higher temperatures, the rise of the sea level, and the failure of irrigation systems (Ensor and Berger, 2009, chap. 5). 
To avoid such outcomes, studies have shown that adaptation choice and implementation are facilitated when there is constructive and transparent engagement with the communities at risk, particularly in island environments (Nurse, and others, 2014). A study of the Fijian tourism sector concluded that  “approaches that explicitly integrate stakeholders into each step of the process from vulnerability assessment right through to consideration of alternative measures can provide a sound basis for assisting destinations with the implementation of appropriate adaptation interventions” (Moreno and Becken, 2009; as seen in Nurse, and others, 2014, p. 1643).  The study also concludes that, since adaptation options are often subjective, stakeholder participation can help tackle better the priorities and expectations that the people have regarding the sector targeted for adaptation. 
C. Taking advantage of local social capital
The implementation stage of policies also stands to benefit when scientific groups and public agents interact more closely with local communities, since in communities with high levels of social capital, these are likely to be more effective in circulating, for example, health and related messages (Frumkin and McMichael, 2008). In addition, from this interaction, inequalities in the communities can be reduced at a much faster pace. This interaction is also proving critical to improve climate impact assessments, particularly to reduce uncertainty in scenario results (see chapter III).
In the context of food security, an example of fruitful interaction of this kind is the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of the United Republic of Tanzania (SAGCOT). SAGCOT integrates several stakeholders – private sector, government, and civil society – in a common platform in order to achieve the triple objective of agricultural productivity, food security, and protection of local livelihoods, while protecting the ecosystem (United Nations, 2013). The participation of several stakeholders, including at the local level has helped promote an efficient use of natural resources, and of the ecosystem as a whole, considered an important aspect for the sustainability of the whole agriculture and food system. 
Lastly, local measures do not depend solely on what a local government does, as much as they also depend on what it encourages and supports – namely, the use of local social capital. In the Colombian city of Manizales, for instance, national and regional authorities worked together with local communities and leaders to discourage settlement on unstable slopes that threatened livelihoods and lives. A public awareness campaign was undertaken, the risks of living in dangerous land were explained, and a relocation scheme was put in place. Beside this, local women were trained to create and maintain slope stabilisation measures in their respective locations. Most notably, these women’s training programme was supported not only by the municipal government, but also local academic institutions, local technical specialists, and local NGOs. This full range of actors was also called upon to review any new urban plans, in the form of a local committee (Arup, 2014).
IV. An iterative and flexible policy process to cope with uncertainties  
The need for addressing underlying inequalities that determine vulnerabilities is a long-term process that requires transformative policies, but this is usually at odds with a perspective that aims to reduce immediate vulnerabilities without addressing underlying causes. Effective policy action for climate-resilient sustainable development under uncertain scenarios requires policy processes that are flexible and adaptable and that can identify the structural inequalities that perpetuate vulnerability. Policymakers increasingly recognize this challenge and the need to focus on immediate and near-future decisions that have longer-term impacts, ideally facilitating transformation, while maintaining flexibility to adjust to changing conditions and information. The effect of uncertainty on adaptation policy action can be reduced by reframing the challenge in terms of the implications for near-term decisions while maintaining flexibility in adaptation plans and strategies. 
The magnitude of the effects of climate change is constantly  revised with new climate projections, impact assessments, environment statistics and information from other sources included that provided by local stakeholders. Climate technologies are steadily improving, particularly in what regards assessments, environment statistics and information and communication technologies (see chapters III and V). Despite continuous improvements, climate and weather predictions are still fraught with uncertainty and there is still only a limited understanding of how climate affects weather events, and how climate hazards threaten local communities (Committee on Extreme Weather Events and Climate Change Attribution, and others, 2016). At the same time, long-term trends in inequality, population growth, urbanization, economic globalization, technological change and others will interact in profound ways with climate hazards in ways that are difficult to foresee (see chapter I). Moreover, future climate trends depend on national and international actions being taken in the next few years and decades. A recent report on the melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet, for example, found that sea levels will possibly rise by as much as three feet by the end of the century, with sever implications for the world’s coastal cities (Gillis, 2016). This new estimate of the sea level rise speed is roughly twice the expected increase in the plausible worst-case scenario just three years ago indicated by the IPCC (Church, and others, 2013).  
The implications of uncertainty to policymaking are profound. The uncertainty of forecasting long-term climate trends and their effect on weather patterns is compounded by the need to be geographically precise since the effects of climate hazards are felt at the local level. Policymakers need information not only on global and regional climate trends, but also on their expected effect on local weather and on local communities. The uncertainty of climate trends and constantly changing information are a challenge to policymaking processes that must be responsive and relevant to the needs and competing development priorities. Thus, policymakers must contend with the inherent conflict between short-term actions and the need of making them consistent with longer-term development strategies. 
Rather than seeing adaptation actions as individual actions, it is important to see them as part of an evolving pathway where decisions are repeatedly revisited (Reisinger, and others, 2014)—based on assessments that are also constantly revised. Policymaking processes must continuously monitor, assess, and adapt to new information and changing priorities (Davoudi, Brooks and Mehmood, 2013). In practice, policymakers are faced with the challenge of incorporating uncertainty into daily action, using iterative and adaptive processes. For effective policy making it is particularly important to understand the value of emerging information and the risks of lock-in and path dependence. This has placed a strong focus on identifying ways for policymakers to benefit from flexibility, risk diversification and to adopt a portfolio approach of complementary policy options. 
The usefulness of being flexible to new information and adaptation options in light of new information is illustrated by a study of the impact of three adaptation options used by farmers in Ethiopia’s Nile Basin—changing crops, water conservation, and soil conservation. Veronesi and Di Falco (2012) find that, when each of the options is taken in isolation, they have no effect on improving net revenues for farmers. However, when adaptation options are combined, the gains for farmers are large and significant. For example, the authors find that changing crops combined with water conservation strategies delivers the largest gains of any of the other adaptation options. The study concludes that adaptation to climate change based upon a portfolio of strategies is superior to single-option strategies. The study also sheds light on the need to remove structural barriers that some groups have in accessing the full range of strategies, either because of poor socio-economic status and access to financial resources, or due to a lack of knowledge that comes from low levels of education or lack of information.  A flexible decision making process allows for experimentation and learning in the search for best adaptation options.
A. The policy making process
A decision making process comprises a series of activities, starting from policy design, implementation and monitoring the impacts. Sometimes referred to as “iterative risk management”, the process can be divided into four distinct stages, illustrated in figure IV.1. The four quadrants in the figure represent each of the four steps of the policy cycle: scoping of policies and objectives, analysis and assessments of options and objectives, implementation of policies, and monitoring and review of impacts. At each stage, progress can be measured in terms of the quantity and quality of effects along each of the four axes: policy design, policy action, policy impact, and policy understanding. Policy design represents qualitative improvements in the design of policies that come from greater understanding during the scoping process. Policy action captures a certain degree of ambition of desired effect, perhaps size of the project, or the number of people to be helped, etc. Policy impact is typically measured with pre-defined metrics of policies and projects, such as the number of people affected or the value of the improvements. Policy understanding is meant to capture the knowledge that comes from monitoring and evaluating the policies. 
B. An iterative policy process to better cope with climate hazards
Learning and reviewing are important to track progress and improve outcomes. Lessons from practical experiences and from pilot programs need to be continually identified and incorporated into adaptation plans. In the context of hazards caused by climate change and the need for resilient sustainable development, flexibility is a key characteristic of the process if it is to be useful in situations with persistent uncertainties, long timeframes, emerging new information, and a multidimensional and multi-sectoral set of factors. Crucially, policy interventions need to be iterative and flexible, allowing for changes informed by the knowledge gained. 
Flexibility requires the ability to incorporate lessons from each step of the policymaking process to improve knowledge and outcomes as new information is gathered, goals and priorities change, and new lessons are learned. Achieving this requires a focus on the ability of the policy process to deliver on its multiple objectives, particularly its flexibility and adaptability to new information or changing conditions (Arup, 2014). It helps to approach adaptation not as a specific problem being addressed, but rather as a continuous process of improvement that is integral to the existing policy framework (Watkiss, 2015). 
The decision making process presented in figure IV.1 presents a static picture, but underlying the structure are dynamic forces that are changing circumstances, priorities, forecasts, and constraints. If, for example, intended outcomes are not achieved as circumstances change, or if unintended consequences are identified, the process must be able to adjust the scope, the method, and the goals to be achieved. This iteration is strengthened by the participation of stakeholders in scoping and designing policy interventions, defining success measures and goals, assessing options by gathering and interpreting decision-relevant information before and after the interventions, and revisiting the scope and assumptions based on that experience (Jones, and others, 2014).  
Building from the policy cycle illustrated in figure IV.1, the circuit between policy design, assessments, implementation, monitoring and evaluation is shown in figure IV.2. An iterative policy cycle should be in constant and rapid evolution to adjust to new information and lessons. Iteration must be aware of their context, involve all stakeholders, leverage expert and local knowledge, and indicate a pathway between knowledge generation, decision-making, and action.
At each stage, there is also a role to play in leveraging other resources and benefitting from the participation of stakeholders. For example, in designing and scoping policy options, the process is served by involving stakeholders from many organizations, communities, and government agencies that can present their priorities and concerns (see section on participation, below). When assessing policy options, policymakers may benefit from interactions from academia and experts in quantitative modelling, as well as from local knowledge and experiences (see chapter III). When implementing policies, there is a need to mobilize resources from many sources, which will have an effect on the outcomes. Monitoring the policy outcomes is also related to existing data and analytical capacity, and the quality of the science-policy interface to communicate results into actionable policy recommendations. As the process benefits from more information and from greater participation, a virtuous cycle should lead to successive improvements in outcomes as well as improvements in each stage of the process (moving away from the origin in each of the axes shows in figure IV.2).
1. Sustainable Water Management in Lima
The Sustainable Water Management in the City of the Future project, or SWITCH, conducted research and implemented pilot projects to demonstrate the importance of learning from past experiences and from stakeholder dialogue and knowledge exchange. The objective of SWITCH was to develop new solutions for increasing the efficiency of urban water systems and their resilience to a range of future climate change scenarios. The project’s approach was to strengthen the connections between experts and stakeholders with decision makers to facilitate knowledge sharing. The project’s major outcome was the development of the “SWITCH approach,” defined by the following four key features:
* Creation of a strategic planning process that views the city’s water cycle as an integrated system, encouraging integrated and coherent solutions for water management;
* Building on pilot experiences that are designed for up-scaling;
* Creation of learning alliance platforms that involve all relevant stakeholders during the process of research, design and implementation of activities; and
* Development of a training toolkit in partnership with the learning alliance.
In Lima, the SWITCH project aimed to find ways to make green areas sustainable in an area where annual rain is scarce by finding innovative ways to reuse wastewater. The SWITCH project built from the lessons of previous efforts to reuse treated wastewater, including on finding ways to safely use the water for urban agriculture and city greening. One major barrier to the reuse of treater water is the lack of a legislative and regulatory framework and proper institutional setting. 
The SWITCH project was able to identify solutions to these barriers by involving national and local authorities ranging from the water authority and national ministries, and local governments and NGOs. The learning alliances also ranged from national policy issues to local lessons derived from the pilot project that showed the viability of using treated wastewater to irrigate a green area to meet the needs of the local population. The project was able to demonstrate the effective reuse of water, which led to national policy guidelines on the safe re-use of wastewater, increased public awareness, and new financial mechanisms to promote small-scale wastewater treatment initiatives.
The SWITCH approach has allowed the project to learn for local knowledge and experience and to leverage this knowledge in the identification, development, and implementation of solutions. The project also provides a template for new projects to improve governance and financial management structures, to identify new uses for water, and to incorporate natural systems in water treatment cycles, among others.
2. The Chicago Climate Action Plan
Chicago’s Climate Action Plan is another example of embracing the uncertainty of climate change and its risks by building flexibility into decision-making processes. Based on existing future scenarios, the plan aims for the future conditions rather than trying to strengthen and build resilience of the status quo (City of Chicago, 2016). More importantly, the plan embraces the inherent uncertainty in forecasting tools. The plan uses projections and scenarios of climate change and the likely effects on the city to propose specific actions under five main categories: energy efficient buildings, clean and renewable energy sources, improved transportation options, reduced waste and industrial pollution, and adaptation. In the case of adaptation, the plan calls for nine specific goals, ranging from managing heat, improve cooling capacities, protect air quality, engage stakeholders, and plan for future scenarios. 
To prepare for the possibility of hotter summers and more intense heat waves, for example, the city has worked with other organizations to identify populations at risk and to update emergency response plans. The plan also calls for attracting new ideas and expects that new knowledge from research into how to eliminate “urban heat islands” will lead to new initiatives. The city also used satellite imagery to identify hot spots and to target policy interventions. The city also identified the link between heat, smog, and respiratory illnesses. The Climate Action Plan calls for lower emissions from power plans and transportation that cause smog. 
Chicago’s Climate Action Plan is expected to evolve as new information emerges. Progress is continually monitored against the goals and the results can inform changes to goals, targets and indicators. The plan recognizes that it represents a snapshot in time. It is also aware that strategies may become obsolete and that new technologies may be brought to bear on expected and future challenges. Having flexibility as an integral part of the climate action plan helps policymakers avoid path dependence and lowers the cost of policy changes and adjustments in response to unexpected events and new information. From the outset the plan recognizes that the current steps outlined for organizations and individuals will need to be modified as new technologies and threats are identified. For this purpose, the city created a Green Steering Committee was to continue the process of understanding current and future threats and to inform future policy actions. 
3. The Thames Estuary protection plan in London
The plan to protect the Thames Estuary in London offers a more direct example of iterative and flexible adaptation policy to meet the uncertain long-term risks from climate change. The plan was developed by Britain’s Environment Agency as a way to deal with sea level rise and the flooding threat that it poses to London. Since engineering projects that protect the city require lead times for planning and construction measured in dozens of years, the acceleration of sea level rise presents a difficult policy challenge. The plan addresses this with an iterative approach that builds upon the existing system incrementally, selectively raising defences and taking other measures to raise the protection standards of the current system (see figure IV.3). If sea level rise accelerates, the plan calls for measures that are more substantial in the longer term, including the construction of a new barrier or a coastal barrage. The plan will be adjusted based on careful monitoring of the drivers of risk to prevent the need for emergency measures (Wong, and others, 2014 Box 5-1). Already, the newly revised estimates of the speed of melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet highlighted above has implications for the options under the plan.  
4. Iterative processes 
Flexibility and iterative learning are not only relevant to policymaking processes. They are also part of the solutions that should be encouraged by adaptation strategies to strengthen the capacity of individuals and communities to adapt. Policies that distort relative prices for fertilizers and seeds, for example, can have the unintended consequence of promoting a single agricultural activity that may not be well suited as the climate changes, or that may not offer sufficient income diversification to reduce livelihood risks. Rather, the role of public policies in promoting flexibility and iterative learning by individuals, farmers in this example, can include reducing and removing barriers to economic activity and providing more information to help in production and marketing decisions. Improving access to accurate weather report, and longer term climate trends in a way that is easily understood and relevant to farmers can serve as substantial support to the capacity of individuals to make appropriate decisions. Chapter III in this publication discusses how technical assessments are being designed to inform individual farmers and how they benefit from that information.    
In the context of climate change and uncertainty, improving food security entails flexible and adaptive cropping systems. First, as temperatures increase and growing seasons change, one evident adaptation option would be changing planting periods – early sowing for instance – especially for cereals and oilseeds (Deressa, and others, 2009). According to a simulation prepared for the Fifth Assessment Report (Porter, and others, 2014), based on several studies and data sources, changes in planting periods can increase yields by a median benefit of 3 to 17 per cent. These benefits can be maximized when machinery and other techniques, such as seeding transplanting, are used concomitantly. The effectiveness of this adaptation option will depend on specific local climatic conditions and changes. Decisions on planting schedules can sometimes be more effective if the farming decisions integrate available climate forecasts.  
Another possible response to potential changes in ecosystems could be changing the location of agricultural, livestock, and fishery activities. High altitude areas are likely becoming more suitable for agriculture, as declines in frost frequency will allow for longer growing seasons. Conversely, in tropical areas the length of the growing season will be reduced by higher temperatures, limiting the suitability of current crops (Porter, and others, 2014). Changing work schedules, types of livestock and crops (Coles and Scott, 2009), require high monetary and new management practices, but can be efficient options to adapt to changing ecosystems.
C. Good development using low regret policy options 
Low- or no-regrets interventions and actions are those that can be justified from an economic, social, and environmental perspective even if the climate hazard does not occur. As figure IV.3 illustrates, some problems require long-term horizons of analysis and planning, but decisions and actions in the presence of uncertainties must still be made in the present. At the same time, policy action must also identify transformative solutions that can change the underlying structural inequalities that perpetuate vulnerabilities of certain groups. Uncertainty presents particular problems in the assessment of options given that different climate scenarios imply different policy options. Making decisions under uncertain scenarios also increases the risk of path dependence and that adaptation policy will under- or over-invest depending on the realization of climate hazards. Without a flexible plan, there is a tendency to focus on middle ground, or average solutions that, as time progresses, prove to be either insufficient to address extreme shocks or inefficient if the shock does not materialize.
Because of this, policymakers must balance immediate responses that emerge from any current adaptation or resilience deficits, with longer-term strategies to build adaptive capacity in harmony with sustainable development (see table A-IV.1 in the appendix). Incorporating uncertainties into the process for designing and implementing interventions requires proper timing and phasing by separating immediate actions from those that can be deferred or that may require additional information (Watkiss, 2015; Wong, and others, 2014). Immediate needs should avoid maladaptation and unintended consequences by prioritizing low- or no-regret interventions and by relying on existing processes and tools. 
In the health sector, there are a vast number of examples of low regret actions, such as distributing mosquito nets, improving child nutrition, developing hygiene education campaigns, and improving water and sanitation facilities, among others. Early warning systems are another example, as they allow authorities the flexibility to act pre-emptively and adjust civil security plans to the expected weather, thereby reducing the number of lives at risk and/or resources used. Heat wave early warning systems are being increasingly implemented, mostly in high-income economies, but early warning systems are being developed as well for vector-borne and food-borne infections such as malaria and dengue in low- and middle-income countries.
V. Concluding note
In building climate change resilient livelihoods, it is critical that policy addresses the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty and increase the vulnerability and exposure of people and communities to climate hazards. Building climate resilience provides policy makers with an opportunity to address the structural inequalities that perpetuate poverty, marginalization and social exclusion. This would start a virtuous cycle of lower vulnerabilities and exposure, better socio-economic opportunities and outcomes, and greater climate resilience of livelihoods. 
Public policies have an important role to play in the provision of public goods for adaptation and in creating the incentives and regulations to facilitate climate change adaptation. But policy decision making processes are confronted with the difficult challenge of pursuing multiple objectives simultaneously and the need to implement incremental policies for immediate needs with transformative policies that address the underlying factors of poverty, marginalization and vulnerability. 
In building climate resilience there is need to improve substantive policy integration and coherence with a focus on livelihoods, including broader participation of all stakeholders to identify development objectives, build synergies, and address the underlying causes of vulnerability. A transformative agenda requires a longer term strategic vision of development, an integrated approach across the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development, and effective inclusion of stakeholders to support policy planning and implementation.
The most vulnerable countries are also the least likely to have sufficient financial, human, and institutional resources and knowledge to effectively meet the challenge of adaptation. Chapter V will explore how international cooperation can support national and local efforts.

Chapter V:	Enhanced cooperation for climate-resilient development
I. Introduction
International cooperation has an important role to play in supporting and harnessing countries’ capacities to build climate-resilience development. As discussed in Ch. I, countries, especially poor developing countries and vulnerable population groups are disproportionately affected by higher frequency and intensity of climate hazards in the past decades, weakening their capacity to adapt to a changing climate and making it more difficult to achieve other development goals, especially those related to poverty reduction, food security, good nutrition and improved health (UN/DESA 2011). Differential impacts from climate hazards are widening the gaps between more and less resilient communities, a new source of inequality that bring further sources of stress to already high levels of inequality both between and within countries (see Chapter I for detailed impacts). 
The global annual average cost of climatic disasters, including floods, storms, droughts and heat waves, rose from US$ 196 billion during 1985-1994 to US$ 270 billion in 2005-2014, with over eighty per cent being absorbed by developing countries.  The total cost of climate hazards for developing countries is much higher when including the loss associated with slow on-set climate events, which have particularly devastating effects for climate sensitive livelihoods (agriculture, fisheries, forests and others). 
The human and economic costs associated with a changing climate are challenges to the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the international commitments agreed to in the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the Paris Agreement.
The imperative of limiting global warming to less than 2° C and the task of effectively reducing the impact of climate hazards on vulnerable populations require a profound transformation of international cooperation to meet the goal of reducing GHG emissions and to support countries’ efforts for adaptation. For the specific purpose of climate change adaptation, unprecedented levels of cooperation are needed to support policymakers in affected countries. This cooperation must facilitate the complex task of assessing needs and options, and to implement and monitor programs and interventions that are incremental and transformative, as needed (see Chapter IV). To accomplish this, cooperation must be strengthened in at least three areas: stable and large sources of finance; improved capacities to produce and use large and complex sources of information and data; and greater access and facilities for the transfer of adaptation technology and improved R&D and innovation capacities.
The historical agreements undertaken by the international community in 2015 represents a unique opportunity to solidify effective global cooperation and coordination to support global, regional and national efforts towards sustainable development. A revitalized global partnership for climate-resilient development is critical to build resilience and reduce inequalities heightened by climate change. As Rhinard and Sundelius (2010) states, “the capacity to cooperate across borders is an important condition for resilience. Whether we speak of cities, regions, or nations, today’s complex crises … can easily outstrip the coping capacities of a single social system. The capacity to draw in necessary resources from outside a particular political-legal jurisdiction, and to incorporate and deploy these, is an essential source of resilience,” (p.197). 
This chapter discusses two areas where strengthened international cooperation is urgently needed to increase the financial resources available for adaptation and to improve the information systems needed to guide climate resilience policies. 
II. Financing Local Climate Adaptation at a Global Scale
At the Paris climate conference (COP21) in December 2015, a historic partnership was achieved: 195 countries adopted the first universal, binding global climate agreement to put the world on track to mitigate global warming below 2°C with an agreed ambition to halt warming at 1.5°C (UNFCCC 2015). The agreement will enter into force at least by 2020, and the challenge of implementation has already begun. Curbing warming to 1.5-2°C above pre-industrial levels will require a profound shift in industrialization pathways, and the pursuit of this shift affords new opportunity to address previously entrenched socio-economic inequalities while building a more sustainable economy. 
The challenge is formidable and will only be possible through a global partnership that includes all scales of government, in addition to the private sector and civil society. Prior to the COP 21 negotiations, 160 member states submitted INDCs that laid out plans for reducing greenhouse gas emissions (Climate Action Tracker 2016). However, the UNEP Emissions Gap report (2015) estimates that full implementation of the INDCs would cut up to 11 GtCO2e from projected emissions in 2030, which is only half of the total required to maintain global emissions level at 42 GtCO2e in 2030 consistent with having a >66 percent chance of staying below the 2°C target in 2100 (Olhoff and Christensen 2015). Accordingly, the Paris Agreement formally recognizes a significant gap between the current level of emission reduction pledges in the INDCs and the 2°C pathway. 
In order to help encourage bolder action towards a low-carbon emissions economy, the Paris Agreement also commits at least 100 billion dollars per year to climate change mitigation and adaptation activities in developing countries. 100 billions dollars is modest in the global scheme of things: government measures to support fossil fuels are conservatively valued at USD 160-200 billion dollars per year (OECD); and new investment in renewable energy alone was valued at 270 billion dollars in 2014 (Martinot 2005).  Raising 100 billion dollars in climate finance per annum is safely within the realm of possibility. But will it be enough?
According to the 5th Assessment Report by the IPCC, adaptation costs will range from US$70 billion and US$100 billion per year by 2050 within the developing countries alone.  An updated review by UNEP indicates that these numbers are very likely to be an underestimate. Yet the US$100 billion pledge is for all types of climate finance – mitigation finance, adaptation finance, and loss & damage. Put simply, climate finance streams will need to far exceed the Paris Agreement’s target if climate change needs are to be met.
Current estimates of climate finance flows are aggregated and reported on by the UNFCCC’s Standing Committee on Finance (SCF). According to their most recent report the outlay of funds for climate change mitigation dominates the climate finance portfolio (UNFCCC 2014). Some estimates suggest that mitigation to adaptation funds are spread 16:1 (Climate Policy Initiative 2014). Given that adaptation needs are well established, and that investment in adaptation will benefit a wide range of stakeholders, why is there relatively little interest in implementing adaptation measures? 
The first part of this section presents a brief summary of the state and prospects of climate finance, arguing that adaptation needs are currently underserved. Second, the discussion turns to an analytical assessment of the barriers for adaptation finance. By unpacking the black box of adaptation project barriers, the analysis reveals that some areas of adaptation are better funded than others. The third section focuses on closing the gap, and it zeros in on the idea that different types of adaptation activities require different types of support. Case studies support the argument that there is a continued and strengthened role for the public sector in all areas of adaptation program implementation. However, this section also forwards three policy scenarios, or leverage points, for ramping up private sector assistance in adaptation. Finally, an analysis of the lessons learned from these cases offer some principles as to how partnerships and policy interventions may be used to promote effective, locally appropriate and scalable adaptation measures
A. The Many Ways to Count to 100 Billion
In 2009, developed countries committed to mobilize 100 billion USD per year for financing climate action in developing countries by 2020 under the Copenhagen Accords at COP 15 (UNFCCC 2009). Since then, a lack of commonly agreed upon methodologies and reporting frameworks for climate finance commitments has stymied project planning processes and undermined trust between developed and developing countries. In the lead up to the climate negotiations in Paris for COP 21, developed and developing countries sought greater clarity on the sources and quantity of flows for climate change mitigation and adaptation, in addition to the creation of policies for the recovery of loss and damage from climate change impacts.
The SCF provides an operational definition of climate finance as “all finance that specifically targets low-carbon or climate-resilient development” (UNFCCC 2014). In 2014, the SCF published a first estimate of USD 40-175 billion each year in financial flows from developed to developing countries in 2010-12. In the subsequent year, the OECD and Climate Policy Initiative updated SCF estimates, calculating that climate finance reached USD 52 billion in 2013 and USD 62 billion in 2014, at an annual average of USD 57 billion (OECD and CPI 2015).
There are considerable variations in the estimates on climate finance flows. Large-order variation usually reflects differences in aggregation method. For example, the “Landscape of Climate Finance,” estimated that global climate finance in all countries ranged from USD 340 to USD 650 billion in 2014 (Climate Policy Initiative 2014).  This larger estimate includes all global climate finance, including public and private resources devoted to addressing climate change in developed countries. In addition, the global aggregate acknowledges that developing countries are not just financial recipients. According to the CPI data, as analysed by OECD, more than 11% of the total represents south-south assistance and cooperation (CPI 2014, OECD/CPI 2015). The smaller figures reported by the SCF and OECD/CPI are limited to flows from developed to developing countries (i.e. south-south cooperation is not included), which can be reported to the UNFCCC. Only climate finance flows from developed to developing countries qualify as part of the 100 billion dollar pledge, but the greater estimate is also useful in order to characterize how climate-compatible the global economy is becoming over time.
Both methods of aggregating climate finance flows are far from perfect, a fact that is openly recognized and currently being addressed by the UNFCCC and other relevant institutions. While the Paris Agreement promises at least 100 billion dollars in climate finance as a floor, the salient issue for developing countries is likely not the volume but the quality and predictability of the financial flows. There is no central accounting mechanism for climate finance flows, rendering it particularly difficult to quantify activity beyond the multilateral development banks and other public institutions.  
1. Official Development Assistance and Climate Finance
Ambiguities over the definition of climate finance are symptomatic of political tension and ambivalence within the climate negotiations themselves. While there are universal calls to “mainstream” climate considerations into the greater development agenda and within regular financial activity, developing countries also feel strongly that climate finance should be offered in addition to official development assistance (ODA). In order to scale-up ambition prior to 2020, the Paris Agreement: 
“strongly urges developed country Parties to scale up their level of financial support, with a concrete roadmap to achieve the goal of jointly providing USD 100 billion annually by 2020 for mitigation and adaptation while significantly increasing adaptation finance from current levels and to further provide appropriate technology and capacity-building support (UNFCCC, 2016, para 115).”
It is significant that the operational language of the Paris Agreement focuses on the purpose of the 100 billion USD promise, positively stating what types of activities qualify for the count. Yet the agreement does not clarify the relationship between climate finance and regular ODA budgets; there remains a simultaneous and conflicting pressure to make all development projects into “climate-compatible projects” while also clearly delineating what “counts” towards the 100 billion USD promise. This unresolved ambivalence within the climate negotiations compound the risk of double-counting or under-counting flows offered for official development assistance and/or climate finance. 
In terms of climate mainstreaming, resources for climate-related finance are reaching record highs each year, in large part due to investments in renewables and energy efficient technologies from the private sector. Minor drops in investment in the renewable sector since 2012 (from 224 billion for RE in 2012 to 193 billion in 2013) can actually be explained by decreasing costs in solar panels and other forms of clean technology. Again, achievements in mainstreaming climate-compatible technology into the global economy make the current 100 USD billion dollar metric misleading in some instances. Negotiations continue as to how climate finance accounting can be clarified and rendered more operationally informative for all. 
2. Current financing trends for adaptation
Even within the constraints of current accounting possibilities, the difference between resources for mitigation and adaptation is indisputable. According to the SCF report, adaptation finance was just 22 billion in 2012, accounting for a 16:1 ratio of the global climate finance pie (UNFCCC 2015). Updated figures indicate that this trend has worsened slightly: total global climate finance flows reached 391 billion USD, but 93% of this was utilized for mitigation (predominantly for renewable energy, at 81% of the mitigation total) with only 25 billion of the total slated for adaptation efforts (OECD and CPI 2015). It is noteworthy that this poor showing for adaptation finance refers to estimates of global climate finance flows where the private sector is dominant (CPI 2014). 
Yet if one only counts aggregate flows from developed-to-developing country resources, i.e the funds that count towards the 100 billions USD, then the public sector accounts for a much larger role and adaptation finance constitutes 17% of total pledges (CPI 2014). The Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and Adaptation Fund (AF) approved an average USD 190 million per year between 2010 and 2012 (UNFCC 2014). 
While the financing gap is still highly significant, the public sector is more amenable to slating climate finance flows towards adaptation than the private. Dedicated adaptation funds data are compared with general climate funds on the Climate Funds Update Website, a joint initiative of the Heinrich Böll Stiftung (HBF) and the Overseas Development Institute (ODI). CFU estimates that 81% of Multinational development bank funding goes to mitigation. So too, it reports that OECD members give 56% of their overall climate contributions to mitigation projects and 19% to projects which combine mitigation and adaptation efforts (Climate Funds Update 2016). 
In response to pressure from developing countries to narrow the gap between mitigation and adaptation resources, the Green Climate Fund, established as the principle fund for the financing of COP agreements, committed to direct 50% of its funds to adaptation, with half of that amount going to Least Developed Countries, Small-Island developing States and African states. Five years after its launch, the Green Climate Fund has so far given away $168 million to 8 projects, worth $624 million in total. In line with its mandate, the majority of these 8 projects include an adaptation component (Green Climate Fund 2015). Though these figures are not yet enough to significantly narrow the gap, it is hoped that the full operationalization of the GCF will redress some of the imbalance.
Other formal acknowledgements of the adaptation gap exist at the highest level of international climate policy. The Paris Agreement requests the Adaptation Committee and the LDC Expert Group, alongside the SCF and other relevant institutions to make recommendations to the COP on the “necessary steps to facilitate the “mobilization of support for adaptation in developing countries” and to review the “adequacy and effectiveness of adaptation and support” (UNFCCC 2015). In addition, the six large multilateral development banks (MDBs) and the International Development Finance Club (IDFC) adopted “Common Principles for Climate Change Adaptation Finance Tracking” in the lead up to COP 21 in a coordinated effort to set harmonized definitions of adaptation finance and higher transparency and accountability with regard to adaptation efforts (World Bank 2015). In support, the OECD is undergoing efforts to fine tune its Rio marker definitions to reflect the criteria established by the Common Principles, indicating some convergence and standardization which will certainly benefit both donors and developing countries in their adaptation efforts.
In addition, longstanding efforts have been made to respond to the special needs of Least Developed Countries. As early as the 7th COP in Marrekesh, the UNFCCC decided to establish and maintain a database National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) for Least Developed Countries, with funds from the Least Developed Country Fund (LDCF) to finance the preparation of the programmes and the implementation of the plans proposed. The LDCF is currently financed at US$415 million, and it estimates that an additional US$550 million has been raised in co-financing for the 47 projects that have been approved for funding (Climate Funds Update 2016).
B. Explaining the Adaptation Gap: Assessment and Barrier Analysis
The Adaptation Financing Gap is defined as the difference between the costs of meeting an adaptation target and the funds available to do so. Adaptation targets themselves are subjective: the act of “adapting” implies that there is a baseline of needs that can be safeguarded within a changing climate. It is also assumed that at a certain level of climate change, no amount of expenditure will be sufficient for human life. This fact partially explains the prioritization of mitigation activities, given that mitigation is the first and most fundamental action required in an effective climate response to climate change.
Given that global mean temperature is already .85°C above pre-industrial levels, some degree of adaptation expenditure is required in order to safeguard livelihoods and human life, particularly in poor countries where infrastructure and health services are not always reliable.  The 5th Assessment Report by the IPCC says that existing estimates on adaptation costs range from US$70 billion and US$100 billion per year by 2050 within developing countries alone.  An updated review by UNEP indicates that these numbers are very likely to be an underestimate. The difficulty of estimating adaptation costs is that the true sum of financing needs is dependent on greenhouse gas emissions levels: costs associated with a 2°C pathway versus a 4°C by mid-century nearly double, and higher rates of climate change across the modeled scenarios indicate exponential cost differentials (Adaptation Gap Report, 2015). Naming the financing gap is, by definition, identifying a moving target.
In recognition that political processes have not managed to keep pace with the severity and impacts of climate science, developing countries and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) have been advancing the adaptation agenda (alongside the mitigation agenda) since 2006. As climate impacts worsened, developing countries and SIDs effectively negotiated for the “Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss & Damage” at the COP 19 Warsaw negotiations in 2013. Thus, the spectrum of climate finance includes money spent on climate mitigation activities, funds allocated towards adapting to, and promoting resilience for, climate impacts, and a relatively new tranche of funding for payouts associated with climate catastrophes which hurt those least culpable the most, such as the SIDs and the Least Developed Countries that have minimal historic emissions levels.
Adaptation needs mirror broader trends in global inequality, wherein those least well-off have the highest need for anticipatory climate adaptation action and finance. A recent assessment of municipal spending within ten megacities on climate adaptation indicates that current financing trends will exacerbate inequalities. The megacity assessment calculated the spending per capita and the percentage of the municipal GDP (GDPc) allocated for adaptation, finding that developing country cities spend half the proportion of GDPc and significantly less per capita than their developed country counterparts. The study suggests that adaptation financing is driven by wealth rather than vulnerability, and that major population centers in developing and emerging economies are underserved (Georgeson, Maslin et al. 2016). 
Efforts from development banks and other sources of public funds to redress the adaptation gap are a step in the right direction, though there remains much more to be done in order to respond to the rise of heat waves, extreme weather events, and expanded disease vectors that directly threaten the humanitarian strides achieved in the era of the Millennium Development Goals. In order to maintain and increase momentum for achieving the sustainable development goals, adapting to climate change must become a priority for those who cannot currently translate their needs to economic demand for climate resilience.  What incentives and structural components influence the current climate finance trends, and how might they be reversed? What accounts for the disproportion between mitigation and adaptation investment? 
1. Mitigation investments, and their returns, are (relatively) quantifiable
Mitigation investments are relatively easy to evaluate for effectiveness: the cost per ton of abated greenhouse gas emissions is a metric of investment effectiveness. The international carbon market established under the Kyoto Protocol has created a method for translating greenhouse gas mitigation efforts into fungible carbon offset credits which can be traded and sold on varying internationally regulated and voluntary markets. The Paris Agreement explicitly nominates a future role for market instruments in the 2020 climate regime, indicating a likely long-term upward trend in utilizing market mechanisms to integrate climate action into the global economy (UNFCCC 2015).
Beyond the production of carbon markets, mitigating climate change is a feasible business proposition on its own. As previously mentioned, 81% of all private sector flows for carbon finance in 2014 derived from renewable energy investments (CPI 2014). So too, technical innovations to increase the efficiency of and diversify the supply of energy make sound business sense in any climate scenario. In order to invest, private investors need "long, loud, and legal" policy to reduce their investment risk (Hamilton 2009). The Paris Agreement provides a clear business indication to the private sector that investments in a green economy ahead of hard regulation will pay off (Clifford Krauss and Bradsher 2015). Furthermore, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which sets the framework for financing for development for the next fifteen years, calls for the "rationalization of fossil fuel subsidies," (UN 2015). The ease of translating climate mitigation efforts to a private investor's balance sheet is a salient reason for the exponentially higher rates of funding for climate change mitigation than for adaptation.
2. Barriers to Adaptation Finance
Explanations for the adaptation financing gap are wide-ranging, but most analyses tend to fall under four characteristics of adaptation project design.
a) Adaptation projects are public, local, goods
Adaptation investments often benefit a local group, without actually producing an economic profit. For example, the Adaptation Fund is financing "Ecosystem Based Adaptation to Climate Change in Seychelles" which enhances the region's ability to store adequate water in dry seasons. Climate change has resulted in more net annual precipitation than historically expected, but the rainfall is intermittent and the Seychelles lacks storage capacity to retain the water. The project employs "ecosystem-based adaptation" which is essentially a concerted effort to restore wetlands, support natural coastal processes, and to maintain the watershed systems so that the Seychelles is able to achieve its maximum water storage capacity even with intermittent inflows. The United Nations Development Program is implementing this particular project with an incremental grant that will total USD 6,455,750, and the projected benefits for the poor and vulnerable justify the use of public funds for a public good (UNDP 2011).
b) Quantifying adaptation impacts is complex
Economic gains are often present in an adaptation project, but quantifying and attributing these gains in terms of a payout to an individual organization can be highly complex. For example, the WHO reports that China has the highest rate of cerebro-cardiovascular disease and respiratory illness in the world and that labor losses and associated health care costs are above US$2,500 million annually. Heat waves increase the incidence of these types of illnesses, exacerbating an already unequal burden of disease on the Chinese. A further aspect of intra-national inequality is present in this case: vulnerable populations such as seniors and infants are particularly at risk for serious injury or death in a heatwave, at a rate of 2-3 times the normal amount. These physically vulnerable populations are also the least equipped to advocate for themselves (WHO 2010).
Following record-breaking summer temperatures in China in 1988, 1990, 1994, 1998, 1999, 2002 to 2008, the WHO, the Institute for Environmental Health and Related Product Safety, CDC China, WHO, and UNDP decided to implement an early warning system to predict heatwaves and guide a coordinated response to educate and prepare vulnerable populations. The need for enhanced information and improved preparation in responding to heatwaves is beyond dispute, while quantifying or attributing benefits from the project to a specific implementation organization or individual is all but impossible. In this particular case the GEF Special Climate Change Fund (GEF SCCF) allocated $550,000 dollars for the implementation of this project from 2010-2014 (GEF SCCF 2010).
c) An operational definition of adaptation does not exist
There is no internationally-agreed process for identifying an adaptation project, rendering it impossible to catalogue potential adaptation actions and estimate the investment cost in those activities: investment in adaptation remains identified and priced on a case-by-case basis (BA 2015). The IPCC defines adaptation as ‘Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities’ (IPCC, 2007). The all-encompassing nature of this definition corresponds with the fact that adaptation project outcomes are highly varied. As is the case with financing development projects more generally, the goals are specific to the local needs at the point of implementation. Any outcome (economic, environmental, social) that increases people’s options and resources for adapting to crises can potentially qualify as a metric for project success. As such, wide berth for interpretation makes it more difficult to compare adaptation outcomes across a portfolio of projects. The lack of a common definition for adaptation project and the wide range of positive outcomes that can be attributed to the project render the creation of investment portfolios at scale highly challenging.
d) It is difficult to separate adaptation investment from other types of investment 
As previously discussed, separating adaptation finance from development assistance is complex.  Any development project can and should integrate climate-adaptation components in order to achieve the IPCC’s goal of implementing “no regrets policies.” But adaptation activities, if effectively integrated within all sectors of development, become all the more difficult to track and trace. Efforts to mitigate climate change through Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD) provide an illustrative example. These projects often include rehabilitating riparian zones, increasing forest diversity, incorporating fruit and nut bearing trees into a forested area for sustainable crop cycles, and other types of enhanced forest management that both increase the forest’s ability to sustainably serve a region as a carbon sink while also providing a natural buffer against heatwaves and floods. Yet parsing out the adaptation versus mitigation component is a subjective exercise (Abadie, Galarraga et al. 2012).
Similarly, investments in infrastructure may include an energy efficiency component that could be considered an adaptation investment. So too, improvements to water storage and management systems will almost always have an arguable benefit for climate change adaptation as well (Christiansen, Olhoff et al. 2011). The amount of adaptation investment in all of these situations is based on a subjective calculation and, as a secondary objective, may even be excluded from the project developer’s initial calculations. 
3. Implications for adaptation
The barriers to adaptation finance are daunting, but they are not insurmountable and they do not affect all sectors of adaptation activities equally. The Climate Policy Initiatives assessment of adaptation financing indicates that of the 26 billion dollars allocated to adaptation in 2014, 53% of all spending went towards water and wastewater management. This discrepancy in funding interest is worth investigating: why is water management more appealing to donors/investors than other adaptation activities? While this  discrepancy is understudied, there is initial indication that water-related management often contains a technical component that can be commercially viable for entrepreneurs and corporate interests. Furthermore, activities within the water sector are easily identifiable as “climate change adaptation” activities, whereas projects that enhance climate change resilience in land-use and the energy sector may indeed be financed but are likely counted as mitigation activities.
More troubling, however, is the lack of finance allocated to disaster risk management, a sector that received just 7% of the adaptation budget in 2014. Public funding and government intervention are critically required to ensure that crucial areas of adaptation and disaster-risk prevention are also covered.
C. Overcoming Barriers: Policy Scenarios for Scaling-up Adaptation Finance 
Climate resilient investments often have steep upfront costs, long investment timelines and low returns, making them prime candidates for public funds, such as coastal protection efforts and other forms of disaster risk management. While some adaptation measures align well with business interests, i.e. the introduction and dissemination of adaptation technologies such as drought-resistant seeds or solar-powered cooling systems for the home, much of the adaptation agenda requires a boost from the public sector. As such, the first policy scenario for closing the adaptation gap is simple: more resources from the public sector are required. 
Yet no matter how active the public sector, participation from all levels of the private sector is required to meet the scale of the adaptation challenge: from private financial institutions to the small-scale entrepreneur. Where markets fail to capture the true costs of adaptation, most notably in least developed countries where human need often fails to translate to economic demand, government can guide and shape incentives towards the public good. Three major types of policy interventions can help redesign the landscape of adaptation financing prospects in order to make it more hospitable to private interests.
1. International and developed country regulation 
The regulatory lever refers to international and donor-level initiatives (also, individual donor country regulation) that ensure a channel of finance for adaptation. The international agreement at COP 21 in Paris indicates that a coherent and coordinated international climate regime will exist far beyond 2020. As such, the potential for international policy leadership for improving adaptation financial flows is high. Indeed, the mandate for the GCF to allocate 50% of its funds towards adaptation is a clear example of regulatory action to close the adaptation gap. 
In addition to directly financing adaptation efforts, government regulation can also play a deciding role in leveraging private finance for adaptation measures. The European Union’s Water Framework Directive includes legally binding requirements for adaptation-relevant investments for private sector actors engaged in the investment space (UNEP 2015).  
Regulation can also create markets from the ground up, as was the case with the Kyoto Protocol’s flexible market mechanisms for greenhouse gas emissions. Paris Agreement promises an enhanced role for utilizing market mechanisms to pay for environmental services. The next generation of market-tools for sustainable development could make adaptation deliverables a focus (Persson 2011).
2. International and developed country support for enabling institutions
International and national government intervention plays a pivotal role in transforming adaptation investment barriers into private sector opportunities (Dzebo and Pauw 2015). For example, investments in infrastructure and early warning systems must precede the delivery of some adaptation measures such as improved crop distribution, enhanced delivery of medical services within a heat wave, and rapid response to extreme weather events. It would be impossible for the private sector to implement crop insurance systems without weather monitoring stations in operation, yet the act of setting up such stations historically falls under the public sector’s purview. 
International and national development banks are capable of reducing risk on adaptation activities and leveraging large amounts of private sector financing. In recent years, development banks have facilitated increased levels of participation from the private sector for financing their adaptation portfolios (CPI 2015). 
3. Targeted domestic policy incentives 
Developing countries can catalyze private investment for specific adaptation interventions, i.e. reduce import tariffs on adaptation-friendly technologies and equipment, such as irrigation systems. In addition to incentives, governments can regulate private sector participation in sustainable environmental practices that support adaptation. Regulation need not be punitive over the longterm, particularly if it includes feedback mechanisms that ultimately protect a sustainable resource base. National authorities are favorably positioned to implement “benefit-transfer” and “nexus-approach” solutions, terms that speak to a policy’s ability to distribute gains throughout a community and to consider multiple priority areas simultaneously (such as water, food security, energy, health). 
D. A Framework for Financing Partnerships for Adaptation
Given that many adaptation efforts support the public good, such as the creation of levies, or the installation of weather monitoring systems, there is a strong case for continued support from the public sector. Increased funds from public domestic and international efforts are required to fill the gap in areas where the private sector will never adequately invest, in particular, in projects aimed at the most marginalized areas and population groups.  Adaptation efforts are only successful when they achieve what Robert Chambers calls, “putting the last first,” i.e. when they integrate the needs of the disenfranchised into the policy’s central goals. While the private sector, in some cases (such as philanthropy) will aim for redistributive outcomes, in most cases a universal adaptation agenda will require public funding. 
All the same, the private sector does have an increased role to play. In order to support private sector participation, public institutions can create enabling environments to transform some of the challenges of adaptation finance into economic possibilities for the private sector. What do such “enabling environments” entail? As noted before, vigorous participation from national and international public agencies is a prerequisite for success. In addition, leveraging incentives for private sector participation may help catalyse and redirect private sector support. 
By parsing out the landscape of finance for adaptation, this section finds that the adaptation gap is not homogenous – some areas of adaptation are more amenable to private-public partnerships than others. This insight is particularly useful for policymakers because it can help focus the limited adaptation funds on the areas of highest need, while other types of adaptation (improved seed dissemination; improved irrigation technologies) can reach scale vis-à-vis the policy levers previously discussed. 
Finally, when coupled with strong participation from the public sector, adaptation efforts can enable a decrease in inequality and support the sustainable development goals. This section identifies technology as a particularly promising avenue for private sector involvement, while other areas of adaptation (such as securing coastal regions) are less adaptable to a corporation’s bottom line.
III. Data and statistics for climate resilience
Upon adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the international community has turned attention to identifying the indicators that will support the follow up and review of the 17 goals and 169 targets contained therein. Meeting the new demands for data brought about by sustainable development is a daunting challenge. It requires greater harmonization and integration among a wide range of data programmes across the economic, social and environmental domains as well as improved analytical capacities to understand the intersections across multiple disciplines. Within this larger framework this section discusses the statitistics and indicators needed by countries to identify population groups vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and to support analysis and policies to build climate change resilience. 
International cooperartion for the development of data and statistics for the 2030 Agenda builds from the successful experience of cooperation in the last 15 years. Implementation of the Millennium Development Goals agenda brought international attention and resources to improve the methodologies and the information systems that supported MDG monitoring and policy implementation. The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015 confirms significant improvements in country coverage of core human development indicators, but it also recognizes large gaps remaining in the quality and timely availability of data, including data disaggregated by geographical region, ethnicity, disability and other attributes which are critical to the understanding of inequalities and vulnerability. 
Large gaps in basic statistics remain. A World Bank study found that almost half of the 155 countries examined lacked adequate data for monitoring poverty. Especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where poverty is most severe, 61 per cent of countries lacked data for monitoring poverty trends. Vital statistics disaggregated by geographical region, ethnicity, disability and other characteristics are also lacking. Overall, in spite of progress made in the last 15 years, systematic statistics are lacking on the size, geographical distribution and characteristics of vulnerable populations in developing regions. Such statistics, produced on a regular and coordinated basis, are essential to monitoring populations at risk and informing integrated climate impact assessments. 
A. Data on climate change vulnerability in developing countries
Public perceptions of climate change are largely conditioned by extreme events and resulting disasters, whether or not these can be individually linked to climate change. In the case of weather events, for example, linkage is difficult to establish but there is currently considerable progress being made on attribution research (Cornwall, 2016, Solow, 2015). The international definition of disaster for statistical purposes has been established by the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, in cooperation with the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED, Louvain, Belgium).  A “common accord” classification of disasters for operational purposes was published by CRED and the Munich Reinsurance Company (Munich RE) in 2009. For the World Disaster Report 2015 (IFRC, 2015), CRED compiled and analysed extensive data from its EM-DAT/International Disasters Database covering 2005-2014 to prepare tables on disasters by number, continent, phenomenon, numbers of people reported killed and affected, estimated damage and level of human development of countries of occurrence (Table I.1 chapter I).
The rural populations of the poorer developing countries in low-elevation coastal areas and deltas, including small island develping States and people in drylands, mountains and other remote areas, seem generally the populations most vulnerable to climate change, more specifically the small-scale agricultural, pastoral, fishing and forest households and workers which predominate in these populations, who mainly depend on their own production for basic food security, water supply and housing. These populations have been studied by FAO (2010a, 2015, 2016, no date) and IFPRI (2009a and b), but limited data have been compiled. More generally, and even though “three out of four poor people in developing countries live in rural areas …. over the last two decades the quantity and quality of agricultural statistics have undergone a serious decline. Many countries, especially in the developing world, lack the capacity to produce and report even the minimum set of agricultural statistics required to monitor national trends” (FAO, World Bank and UN Statistical Commission 2012, page XI).
In addition, “Rapid urbanization and the growth of megacities … have led the emergence of highly vulnerable urban communities, particularly through informal settlements and inadequate land management ….Vulnerable populations also include refugees, internally displaced people, and those living in marginal areas” (IPCC, 2012, pp. 7-8).
While much progress has been made in the production of basic statistics to capture the impact of extreme climate hazards, as reported in Chapter I, the statistics available on the basic characteristics of vulnerable population groups remain rough estimates.  There is no systematic data available on the size of the majority of the populations groups most vulnerable to climate hazard, including their demographic characteristics and their livelihoods. Better understanding of the impact of climate hazards and effective policies to reduce people’s vulnerability to them, urgently requires robust information systems based on systematic information derived from standardized data collection processes (CRED, 2015).
B. Improving statistics and indicators to address climate change vulnerability
In every area of data analysis on populations vulnerable to climate change, critical gaps in data sources and methods have been cited by researchers as impeding compilation of reliable data series consistent over time and comparable across areas of research. While ongoing research and analysis covers a wide range of topics and develops many data sources, the results provide as yet only an incomplete patchwork of information and indicators on vulnerable populations and with very limited geographical detail, frequency or continuity.
1. Development of statistics and indicators for monitoring, analysis and policy on climate change impact on vulnerable poor populations in developing regions
The development of reliable and continuous statistics and indicators on climate change impact is at an early stage and requires considerable additional research and practical testing, and development of capacities through advanced training and experience in basic data sources and methods of compilation across a number of fields. International organizations with responsibilities in the fields concerned can play a key role through development of guidelines, recommendations and, through partnerships, training materials on methods, and coordinated technical cooperation. Systematic official statistics, for all countries, are needed in at least the following areas:
(a) Population and demography, including income, occupation and poverty, education, health (United Nations Statistics Division, International Labour Organization, World Bank, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Health Organization, United  Nations Children’s Fund); 
(b) Economic activity in agriculture, fishing and forestry (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, United Nations Statistics Division, International Labour Organization);
(c) Cartography and geographic information systems (United Nations Statistics Division and Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, United Nations Environment Programme); 
(d) Meteorology (World Meteorological Organization); 
(e) Geology and land use, hydrology, ecology (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations);
(f) Disasters (International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and national emergency management offices).
2. Harmonization and integration of data sources, concepts and methods
The need to harmonize and integrate the variety of data sources around common concepts and methodologies has been well recorgnized. Recommendations to improve statistical methods have been endorsed by the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 on the need to to establish international standards and recommendations in the following areas: 
(a) Harmonize definitions and classifications relating to vulnerable ecozones and regions and their vulnerabilities in and among countries. 
(b) Ensure the capacity to “layer” detailed data on population and population characteristics such as occupation, urban-rural and poverty in small administrative areas in countries with country geographical ecozones and regions. In his study of coastal populations, Woodruffe (2010) states: “The population data are not a sufficient resolution for detailed hazard analysis. Such vulnerability analyses should be focused on detailed local topography and integration with other variables such as flood level, land use, and other relevant factors. The population does not adequately represent urbanization and growing rural-urban imbalance with growth of enormous cities in the mega deltas.” Specifically with respect to the “poorest and hungry”, IFPRI states, “Without context-specific it is difficult to design programs that fit their needs. It is thus important to broaden the collection of and access to accurate data on [them].” On a limited scale, case studies in Ecuador and Malawi on the vulnerability of mountain peoples to food insecurity, “based on real data from household data to verify the results obtained from the model, and to illustrate what could be achieved if georeferenced household were available and analysed for all countries” (FAO and the Mountain Partnership Secretariat, 2015);
(c) Establish comprehensive national capacities to compile time series on vulnerable populations in countries, from national and international sources. The Seoul Declaration (United Nations First High Level Forum on Global Geospatial Management (GGIM)) recognizes “the need for full interoperability of multi-dimensional geospatial information and integration with other data sources at national, region, and global level, in order to provide an effective information base for the resolution of global and local issues” (2011). 
Interfacing data sources, especially official national statistics with global geospatial information, is a critical need in order to produce integrated data series which must rely on quite different collection methods. An example of the difficulties can be seen in United States water statistics. Currently comprehensive and detailed national statistics on water are only compiled every five years, and for one year, as they must be prepared from hundreds of independent sources with their own mandates and responsibilities, using a multiplicity of concepts, methods and micro-data sources (Fishman, 2016). The Seoul Declaration on Global Geospatial Information Managements recognizes “the need for full interoperability of multi-dimensional geospatial information and integration with other data sources at national, region, and global level, in order to provide an effective information base for the resolution of global and local issues. …” (United Nations First High Level Forum on GGIM, 2011).
3. Data sources, open access and the new data analytics
Basic data in countries, developed according to national circumstances and priorities, provide the foundation for indicator compilation. Populations groups particularly vulnerable to climate hazards, as identified in this Survey (people in low-elevation coastal zones and flood plains and deltas, drylands zones, and mountain and remote areas) are largely rural and rely to a large extent on their own subsistence production for food security, energy, water and sanitation, and shelter. Climate change impacts derived from rising sea levels and extreme temperature events are compounded by pressures stemming from population growth, fast urbanization, water shortages, and pollution. 
Basic planning to anticipate and adapt to climate change impacts requires basic indicators on populations in vulnerable zones, which meet international criteria of standardized sources and methods, frequency and continuity, and are easy to understand. Much of the information available so far comes from academic work and specialized researchers and have been prepared using various and often inconsistent concepts, methods and classifications, covering only a few, and differing years. While this research provides a basic foundation for continuing work on concepts and methods, and for benchmark approximations, for official monitoring and policy purposes they must become part of official national and international programmes, compiled and issued on a regular basis by or in association with official specialized services. This requires harmonization and integration among a wide range of data programmes, including official statistics of population and its main characteristics and its distribution by ecozones, urban-rural, and extensive data on water and oceans, and weather. These statistics, with indicators to be technically specified in the context of the SDG indicators programme and produced on a regular, internally consistent and coordinated basis, are essential to routinely monitor populations at risk and support policy initiatives to address exposure, impact and adaptation at national, sub-national and local levels.
It is indeed the case that complex statistical sources and methods, notably population censuses and surveys, are widely used in all countries to measure population, its social and economic characteristics and its growth, and for regional and international comparisons and analyses. However, these cannot easily or generally be integrated with the wide variety of sources and methods for linking geospatial measurement and environment conditions. This is due, among many reasons, to incompatible definitions and classifications among, for example, sub-national administrative boundaries and ecozones, geospatial identification of large cities and other urban and rural areas, and varying and irregular time periods covered. Intensive collaboration among data producers across a range of disciplines, including water management, ecology, agronomy, forestry, meteorology and demography, is essential to establish officially recognized and compatible guidelines and recommendations.
4. Geospatial information to build climate resilience
Geospatial information is a powerful tool for showing the inter-connection among land, oceans, atmosphere and human activities; it support the development of plausible climate change scenarios and their impact on specific geographical locations. To the extent that geospatial information mainly originates out of satellite observations it requires strong mechanisms of international cooperation and capacity development to make it available to developing countries, especially those in spatial situation (LDCs, LLDCs, SIDS) who are most vulnerable to the impact of climate hazards. 
Through the use of geospatial information, for example, it is possible to assess the adverse impact of climate change due to sea level rise along the coasts of Small Island Developing States (SIDS). Geospatial information includes profiles of the land, natural hazard, exposure of livelihoods, and location of vulnerable populations (United Nations – Economic and Social Council 2015a). Remote monitoring of the earth by satellite can provide crucial data on deforestation, crop patterns that may indicate potential food shortages, and early warning to climate hazards (UN/ECLAC – EU 2011). 
The Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (see ggim.un.org) is the intergovernmental mechanism for setting the direction for the production and use of geospatial information within national and global policy frameworks. International cooperation on satellite imagery, in particular, has already supported capacity development efforts in different countries. For example, regional cooperation for sharing satellite data and survey measures of poverty levels, together with local placement rules for protected green areas in Thailand had a positive impact on reforestation, consumption and poverty reduction. The intervention also increased local revenue from ecotourism (Greenstone and Kelsey Jack 2015). Likewise, the study by Scaria and Vijayan (2012) underscores the importance of international cooperation on spatial information technology for India’s rural development, delivering reliable base line information on natural resources at the regional and micro levels, while supporting an integrated analysis of natural resources inventory and management as well as a strategic plan for sustainable rural development.
Yet, although geospatial information is used in some developing countries, additional international cooperation is needed to expand timely access to information; to build the computation and storage capacity in developing countries and to strengthen technical capacity to use this technology effectively in supporting policy decisions for climate resilient development. 
There are a number of public-private partnership initiatives to build from, including the African Climate Policy Center and the International Research Institute for Climate and Society at Columbia University who are linking climate satellite information with demographics to build vulnerability maps that layer physical and social sources of vulnerability. Other successful partnerships show the potential for strengthen collaboration among international organizations, large data providers and national governments, as illustrated in Box V.I for the case of improved monitoring of forests in tropical countries. Information and expertise, however, is still disseminated in multiple centers with not much coordination and harmonization of concepts and data collection processes.
An illustration of effective multilateral cooperation to support national capacity development efforts and resilience building is the monitoring of forests in tropical countries.  The monitoring of forest cover and forest functions provide crucial information to protect and manage forests in a sustainable manner; this is particularly important for tropical countries and populations whose livelihoods depend from forests. National forest monitoring systems estimate forest coverage, forest cover change and carbon stock change. 
Romijn et al. (2015) assessed the status and changes in national forest monitoring and reporting capacities in 99 tropical countries using the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) 2015 data, complemented with FRA 2010 and FRA 2005 data. “Forest area change monitoring and remote sensing capacities” improved considerably between 2005 and 2015. For 54 of the 99 countries, the total tropical forest area that was monitored with good forest area change monitoring and remote sensing capacities increased from 69 percent in 2005 to 83 percent in 2015, which correspond to 1435 million ha and 1699 million ha respectively. This positive effect has been the result of effective use of internationally-free and open source high resolution satellite (remote sensing) data such as Landsat and availability of other techniques for assessing historical forest cover change and improving countries’ national forest monitoring.  
Moreover, the total tropical forest area that was monitored with good “forest inventory capacities” increased for 40 countries, from 38 percent in 2005 to 66 percent in 2015, which corresponds to 785 million ha and 1350 million ha respectively. “Carbon pool reporting capacities” did not have as much improvement, which indicates the need for greater support on producing accurate emission factors and improved greenhouse gases reporting. The study also revealed that there was a positive adjustment in the net change in forest area where countries with lower capacities in the past had the tendency to overestimate areas of forest loss. The results underlined the effectiveness of capacity building programmes such as those led by FAO and the multilateral initiative REDD+, which financially rewards developing countries for verified efforts to reduce emissions and enhance removals of greenhouse gases through a variety of forest management options. 
5. Strengthened collaboration across disciplines and across borders  
Institutional experience, capacity and responsibility for the statistics to monitor and analyse climate change, exposed populations and impact are widely dispersed across governments and international organizations and their collaborating institutions, and among and within governments, often with little communication among the different specialties. In the developing regions, only a few governments have adequate capacities for the needed data collection and analysis, and these often still lack strong mechanisms for essential national and international collaboration in many instances. Among the least developed countries, land-locked developing countries, small-island developing States and other countries in special situations, such as conflicts, few have such capacities. 
These challenges are being taken up by the United Nations Statistical Commission and Statistics Division, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Convention to Combat Climate Change Secretariat, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme, the World Bank, the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, by programmes supported by these international organizations such as Paris21, by bi-lateral technical assistance and data development programmes, and non-governmental organizations such as opedatawatch.org. However, policies to build resilience across the wide range of vulnerable population groups requires unprecedented levels of new data development, integration and analysis to meet the challenges of development, population growth, urbanization and climate change.
Along similar lines, in the case of disaster statistics, considerable progress has been made in the recording of information on persons affected or killed by catastrophic events, including progress related to the infrastructure underlying the production of such statistics. Rapid progress has also been made in the climate and environmental sciences, although issues such as air and water pollution, ocean temperatures and acidification, loss of pollination, epidemics, and extinction of terrestrial and marine species are not yet well documented.
The level of complexity involved in the production of consistent statistics for assessing the impact of climate hazards is much higher than that associated with efforts to strengthen human development statistics for the Millennium Development Goals. Production of statistics on the impact of climate hazards requires the development of consistent concepts and classifications as a component of official national and international programmes for the establishment of officially recognized and compatible guidelines. Understanding the interlinkages between vulnerability and climate hazards requires intensive collaboration, harmonization and integration among a wide range of data programmes and across a range of disciplines, including official statistics of population, its main characteristics and its distribution by eco-zones.
At this point in time, not only are institutional experience, capacity and responsibility with respect to statistics for monitoring and analysing climate change, exposed populations, impacts and policy responses widely diffused across Governments and international organizations, but there is often very little communication among the different specialties within governments. 
These challenges have been recognized in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and are being taken up by international organizations, led by the Statistical Commission. Efforts in this direction will require unprecedented levels of cooperation at the global and national levels. Strengthened international cooperation is needed for new data development and to support capacity-building on the effective use of data, including within the context of integrated climate impact assessments.
